Chapter 17 The West: Exploiting an Empire


 Lean Bear’s Changing West In 1863, federal Indian agents took a delegation of Cheyenne, Arapaho, Comanche, Kiowa, and Plains Apache to visit the eastern United States, hoping to impress them with the power of the white man. The visitors were, in fact, impressed. In New York City, they stared at the tall buildings and crowded streets, so different from the wide-open plains with which they were accustomed. They visited the museum of the great showman Phineas T. Barnum, who in turn put them on display. In Washington, they met with President Abraham Lincoln. Lean Bear, a Cheyenne chief, assured Lincoln that Indians wanted peace but worried about the numbers of white people who were pouring into their country. Lincoln swore friendship, said the Indians would be better off if they began to farm, and promised he would do his best to keep the peace. But, he said, smiling at Lean Bear, “You know it is not always possible for any father to have his children do precisely as he wishes them to do.” Lean Bear, who had children of his own, understood what Lincoln had had to say in Washington, at least in a way. Just a year later, back on his own lands, he watched as federal troops, Lincoln’s “children,” approached his camp. Wearing a peace medal that Lincoln had given him, Lean Bear rode slowly toward the troops to once again offer his friendship. When he was twenty yards

 away, they opened fire, then rode closer and fired again and again into his fallen body. s Lean Bear had feared, in the last three decades of the nineteenth century, a flood of settlers ventured into the vast lands across the Mississippi River. Prospectors searched for “pay dirt,” railroads crisscrossed the continent, eastern and foreign capitalists invested in cattle and land bonanzas, and farmers took up the promise of free western lands. In 1867, Horace Greeley, editor of the New York Tribune, told New York City’s unemployed: “If you strike off into the broad, free West, and make yourself a farm from Uncle Sam’s generous domain, you will crowd nobody, starve nobody, and neither you nor your children need evermore beg for something to do.” With the end of the Civil War, white Americans again claimed a special destiny to expand across the continent. In the process, they crushed the culture of the Native Americans and ignored the contributions of people of other races, such as the Chinese miners and laborers and the Mexican herdsmen. As millions moved west, the states of Colorado, Washington, Montana, the Dakotas, Idaho, Wyoming, and Utah were carved out of the lands across the Mississippi. At the turn of the century, only Arizona, New Mexico, and Oklahoma remained as territories. The West became a great colonial empire, harnessed to eastern capital and tied increasingly to national and international markets. Its raw materials, sent east by wagon, train, and ship, helped fuel eastern factories. Western economies relied heavily on the federal government, which subsidized their railroads, distributed their land, and spent millions of dollars for the upkeep of soldiers and Indians. By the 1890s, the lands beyond the Mississippi had undergone substantial change. In place of buffalo and unfenced vistas,

A


 Kicking Bear recorded the Battle of the Little Bighorn in this pictograph.

 there were cities and towns, health resorts, homesteads, sheep ranches, and, in the arid regions, the beginnings of the irrigated agriculture that would reshape the West in the twentieth century. Ghost towns, abandoned farms, and the scars in the earth left by miners and farmers spoke to the less favorable side of settlement. As the new century dawned, the West had become a place of conquest and exploitation, as well as a mythic land of cowboys and quick fortunes.

Beyond the Frontier
 What were the challenges of settling the country west of the Mississippi? The line of white settlement had reached the edge of the Missouri timber country by 1840. Beyond lay an enormous land of rolling prairies, parched deserts, and rugged, majestic mountains. Emerging from the timber country, travelers first encountered the Great Plains—treeless, nearly flat, an endless

 “sea of grassy hillocks” extending from the Mississippi River to the Rocky Mountains. To the west of the Great Plains were the High Plains, rough, semiarid, rising gently to the foothills of the Rocky Mountains. Running from Alaska to central New Mexico, the Rockies presented a formidable barrier. There were valuable beaver in the streams and gold near Pikes Peak. But most travelers hurried through the northern passes, emerging in the desolate basin of present-day southern Idaho and Utah. Native Americans lived there—the Ute, Paiute, Bannock, and Shoshone tribes—surviving in the harsh environment by digging for roots and gathering seeds and berries. In the west, the lofty Coast Ranges—the Cascades and Sierra Nevada—held back rainfall; beyond were the temperate lands of the Pacific coast. Early explorers such as Zebulon Pike thought the country beyond the Mississippi was uninhabitable, fit only, Pike said, for “wandering and uncivilized aborigines.” Mapmakers agreed; between 1825 and 1860, American maps showed this land as “The Great American Desert.” As a result, settlement paused on



 CHAPTER 17

THE WEST: EXPLOITING AN EMPIRE

 CANADA

Columbia R.


 TEXAS de an

 Present-day state boundaries

 OKLA.

 OHIO

W.
 VA.

R.


 TENN.

 ARK.

St
.L
 aw r

 DS

N.J.
 DEL.

 VA.

N
N.C.
S.C.


GA. ALA. CO

 LA.

 NTI

 MD.

 CONN.

KY. IA N

 MO.

AT L A

Gr


 20" isohyet (rainfall line)

 PA.

 io Oh

MISS.
Ri o 
 Land region boundaries

Lake Michigan


COAS T

PACIFIC OCEAN

R.I.


AP PA LA CH

N.
 MEX.

 KANS.

 MASS.

 MICH.

 IND.

ILL. PLAINS

I
HI NTE GH R LA IOR ND S

Pikes
Peak


S


 COLO.

 ron

.


R.


N.H.
 VT.

N.Y.


Lake
Erie


 IOWA

IN PLA

 ARIZ.

R


 WIS.

 NEBR.

S
AIN PL

 lo Co

 do ra

 pi

INTERIOR INS PLA

 UTAH

H
 HIG

 PLATEAU

Lake
Ontario


 ME.

Hu


IE AIR PR

 AT

DA VA NE RA

 NEV.

 CALIF.

E


R
 SIE

GREAT BASIN

AINS UNT MO

 WESTERN

 iss ip

R


 WYO.

PACIFIC MOUNTAINS

S. DAK.

G


 IDAHO

Superior
 ke

Lak
 e M is s

 ORE.

La


.


A


A
 ST

C


 AI

 MINN.

R


 PL

N. DAK.

.
 ri R sou Mis

HI GH LA N

 MONT.

C
 KY

R AN
GES CAS CAD ER AN GE

 RO

 en ce

 WASH.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

L


 FLA.

Gulf of Mexico


 MEXICO

 100th Meridian





 300 miles

 300 kilometers

PHYSIOGRAPHIC MAP OF THE UNITED STATES
In the Great Plains and Rocky Mountains, the topography, altitudes, crops, and climate—especially the lack of rain west of the rainfall line shown here—led to changes in a mode of settlement that had been essentially uniform from the Atlantic coast through Kentucky, Ohio, and Missouri. The rectangular land surveys and quarter-section lots that were traditional before could not accommodate Great Plains conditions. 
 the edge of the Plains, and most early settlers headed directly for California and Oregon. Few rivers cut through the plains; those that did raged in the winter and trickled in the summer. Rainfall usually did not reach fifteen inches a year, not enough to support extensive agriculture. There was little lumber for homes and fences, and the tools of eastern settlement—the cast-iron plow, the boat, and the ax—were virtually useless on the tough and treeless plains soil. “East of the Mississippi,” historian Walter Prescott Webb noted, “civilization stood on three legs—land, water, and timber; west of the Mississippi not one but two of these legs were withdrawn— water and timber—and civilization was left on one leg—land.” Hot winds seared the plains in summer, and northers, blizzards, and hailstorms froze them in winter. Wildlife roamed in profusion. The American bison, better known as the buffalo, grazed in enormous herds from Mexico to Canada. In 1865, perhaps fifteen million buffalo lived on the plains, so many they seemed like “leaves in a forest” to an early observer. A single herd sighted in 1871 had four million head.

Crushing the Native Americans
 How did white Americans crush the culture of the Native Americans as they moved west? When Greeley urged New Yorkers to move West and “crowd nobody,” he—like almost all white Americans—ignored the fact that large numbers of people already lived there. At the close of the Civil War, Native Americans inhabited nearly half the United States. By 1880, they had been driven onto smaller and smaller reservations and were no longer an independent people. A decade later, even their culture had crumbled under the impact of white domination. In 1865, nearly a quarter million Native Americans lived in the western half of the country. Tribes such as the Winnebago, Menominee, Cherokee, and Chippewa were resettled there, forced out of their eastern lands by advancing white settlement. Other tribes were native to the region. In the Southwest there were the Pueblo groups, including the Hopi, Zuni, and Rio Grande Pueblos.

Crushing the Native Americans


 Peaceful farmers and herders, they had built up complex traditions around a settled way of life. The Pueblo groups were cultivators of corn. They lived on the subdesert plateau of present-day western New Mexico and eastern Arizona. Harassed by powerful neighboring tribes, they built communal houses of adobe brick on high mesas or in cracks in the cliffs. More nomadic were the Camp Dwellers, the Jicarilla Apache and Navajo who roamed eastern New Mexico and western Texas. Blending elements of the Plains and Plateau environments, they lived in tepees or mud huts, grew some crops to supplement their hunting, and moved readily from place to place. The Navajo herded sheep and produced beautiful ornamental silver, baskets, and blankets. Fierce fighters, Apache horsemen were feared by whites and fellow Indians across the southwestern plains. Farther west were the tribes that inhabited present-day California. Divided into many small bands, they eked out a difficult existence living on roots, grubs, berries, acorns, and small game. In the Pacific Northwest, where fish and forest animals made life easier, the Klamath, Chinook, Yurok, and Shasta tribes developed a rich civilization. They built plank houses and canoes, worked extensively in wood, and evolved a complex social and political organization. Settled and determined, they resisted the invasion of the whites. By the 1870s, most of these tribes had been destroyed or beaten into submission. The powerful Ute, crushed in 1855, ceded most of their Utah lands to the United States and settled on a small reservation near Great Salt Lake. The Navajo and Apache fought back fiercely, but between 1865 and 1873 they too were confined to reservations. The Native Americans of California succumbed to the contagious diseases carried by whites during the Gold Rush of 1849. Miners burned their villages, and by 1880, fewer than twenty thousand Indians lived in California.

Life of the Plains Indians
 In the mid-nineteenth century, nearly two-thirds of the Native Americans lived on the Great Plains. The Plains tribes included the Sioux of present-day Minnesota and the Dakotas; the Blackfoot of Idaho and Montana; the Cheyenne, Crow, and Arapaho of the central plains; the Pawnee of western Nebraska; and the Kiowa, Apache, and Comanche of present-day Texas and New Mexico. Nomadic and warlike, the Plains Indians depended on the buffalo and horse. The modern horse, first brought by Spanish explorers in the 1500s, spread north from Mexico onto the plains, and by the 1700s the Plains Indians’ way of life had changed. The Plains tribes gave up farming almost entirely and hunted the buffalo, ranging widely over the rolling plains. The men became superb warriors and horsemen, among the best light cavalry in the world. Equipped with stout wooden bows three feet or less in length, Plains Indians were fierce warriors. Hiding their bodies behind their racing ponies, they drove deadly arrows clear through buffalo. Against white troops or settlers, the skillful



 Comanche rode three hundred yards and shot twenty arrows in the time it took a soldier to load his firearm once. The introduction of the new Colt six-shooters during the 1850s gave government troops a rapid-fire weapon but did not entirely offset the Indians’ advantage. Migratory in culture, the Plains Indians formed tribes of several thousand people but lived in smaller bands of three to five hundred. The Comanche, who numbered perhaps seven thousand, had thirteen bands with such names as Burnt Meat, Making Bags While Moving, and Those Who Move Often. Each band was governed by a chief and a council of elder men, and Indians of the same tribe transferred freely from band to band. Bands acted independently, making it difficult for the U.S. government to deal with the fragmented tribes. The Comanche dominated most of the Plains through their exploitation of the horse, their use of violence, and the timely cooperation among their bands. Over the course of two centuries, they crushed the feared Apache, harassed the Spanish and Mexicans, and tormented American immigrants who wanted to establish trading posts in Taos and Santa Fe. Although official maps showed Spanish ownership of the southern and western Plains, the Comanche actually controlled it, their domain known as the Comancheria, or the Comanche empire. Their last important chief, Quanah Parker, the son of a Comanche brave and a captive Anglo-Texan, died in 1911. Whether Comanche or other tribes, all native Americans on the Plains followed and lived off the buffalo. Buffalo provided food, clothing, and shelter; the Indians, unlike later white hunters, used every part of the animal. The meat was dried or “jerked” in the hot plains air. The skins made tepees, blankets, and robes. Buffalo bones became knives; tendons were made into bowstrings; horns and hooves were boiled into glue. Buffalo “chips”—dried manure—were burned as fuel. All in all, the buffalo was “a galloping department store.” Warfare among tribes usually took the form of brief raids and skirmishes. Plains Indians fought few prolonged wars and rarely coveted territory. Most conflicts involved only a few warriors intent on stealing horses or “counting coup”—touching an enemy body with the hand or a special stick. Tribes developed a fierce and trained warrior class, recognized for achievements in battle. Speaking different languages, Native Americans of various tribes were nevertheless able to communicate with one another through a highly developed sign language. The Plains tribes divided labor tasks according to gender. Men hunted, traded, supervised ceremonial activities, and cleared ground for planting. They usually held the positions of authority, such as chief or medicine man. Women were responsible for child rearing and artistic activity. They also performed the camp work, grew vegetables, prepared buffalo meat and hides, and gathered berries and roots. In most tribes, women played an important role in political, economic, and religious activities. Among the Navajo and Zuni, kinship descended from the mother’s side, and Navajo women were in charge of most of the family’s property. In tribes such as the Sioux, there was little difference in status. Men were respected for hunting and war, women for their artistic skills with quill and paint.

 CHAPTER 17

THE WEST: EXPLOITING AN EMPIRE

“As Long as Waters Run”: Searching for
 an Indian Policy

 the North Platte and Arkansas Rivers for “as long as waters run and the grass shall grow.” The concentration policy lasted only a few years. Accustomed to hunting widely for buffalo, many Native Americans refused to stay within their assigned areas. White settlers poured into Indian lands, then called on the government to protect them. Indians were pushed out of Kansas and Nebraska in the 1850s, even as white reformers fought to hold those territories open for free blacks. In 1859, gold miners moved into the Pikes Peak country, touching off warfare with the Cheyenne and Arapaho. In 1864, tired of the fighting, the two tribes asked for peace. Certain that the war was over, Chief Black Kettle led his seven hundred followers to camp on Sand Creek in southeastern Colorado. Early on the morning of November 29, 1864, a group of Colorado militia led by Colonel John M. Chivington attacked the sleeping group. “Kill and scalp all, big and little,” Chivington told his men. “Nits make lice.” Black Kettle tried to stop the ambush,

 Before the Civil War, Americans used the land west of the Mississippi as “one big reservation.” The government named the area “Indian Country,” moved eastern tribes there with firm treaty guarantees, and in 1834 passed the Indian Intercourse Act, which prohibited any white person from entering Indian country without a license. The situation changed in the 1850s. Wagon trains wound their way to California and Oregon, miners pushed into western goldfields, and there was talk of a transcontinental railroad. To clear the way for settlement, the federal government in 1851 abandoned “One Big Reservation” in favor of a new policy of concentration. For the first time, it assigned definite boundaries to each tribe. The Sioux, for example, were given the Dakota country north of the Platte River, the Crow a large area near the Powder River, and the Cheyenne and Arapaho the Colorado foothills between

View the Map


Native Americans, 1850–1896


Chief
 Joseph's Route Bear Paw Mountain

Blackfeet


WASH.
Chinook 
Sioux
Chippewa


 MONT.

Shasta


 IDAHO

 ORE.

Little Big Horn
Cheyenne


Crow
Bozem
 a

 n

Bannock,
Shoshoni


 il

Yurok
Shasta


 CALIF.

PACIFIC OCEAN

MINN.
Sioux S. DAK. 
BLACK HILLS

Fetterman
 massacre Arapaho, Cheyenne Shoshoni WYO.

Tra


Klamath


N. DAK.

Sioux


Po
 wd er R .

Nez
Percé


Chippewa
WIS.
Menominee Winnebago 
Wounded Knee
IOWA
Sioux Great NEBR. Platte Salt R. Lake Ute Pawnee NEV. Arapaho Sand Creek UTAH (Chivington) COLO. TERR. massacre Ark ansas 1864 MO. R. Paiute KANS. Navajo Ute Jicarilla Pawnee Apache Kiowa INDIAN Arapaho, TERR. Hopi ARK. Cheyenne Zuñi ARIZ. Red River War TERR. 1874–1875 Pueblo Apache Red R Apache, N. MEX. . Comanche, TERR. Kiowa Skeleton Canyon LA. (Geronimo surrenders) TEXAS 
 ILL.

Miss
 issippi R.



Rio G
 ra

 nd e

 Indian reservations,



Major Indian
 battles





 300 miles

 300 kilometers

NATIVE AMERICANS IN THE WEST: MAJOR BATTLES AND RESERVATIONS
“They made us many promises, more than I remember, but they never kept but one; they promised to take our land, and they took it.” So said Red Cloud of the Oglala Sioux, summarizing Native American–white relations in the 1870s. 
Crushing the Native Americans


 Read the Document Chief Red Cloud’s Speech

 Red Cloud was chief of the Oglala Teton Sioux. He was an important leader who opposed white incursions into Native American lives and territory, although he openly advocated peace whenever possible and did not support the more violent actions of Crazy Horse and his followers.

 raising first an American flag and then a white flag. Neither worked. The Native American men, women, and children were clubbed, stabbed, and scalped. The Chivington massacre set off angry protests in Colorado and the East. Congress appointed an investigating committee, and the government concluded a treaty with the Cheyenne and Arapaho, condemning “the gross and wanton outrages.” Still, the two tribes were forced to surrender their Sand Creek reservation in exchange for lands elsewhere. The Kiowa and Comanche were also ousted from areas they had been granted “forever” only a few years before. As the Sioux chief Spotted Tail said, “Why does not the Great Father put his red children on wheels so that he can move them as he will?”



 Before long, the powerful Sioux were on the warpath in the great Sioux War of 1865–1867. Once again, an invasion of gold miners touched off the war, which flared even more intensely when the federal government announced plans to connect the various mining towns by building the Bozeman Trail through the heart of the Sioux hunting grounds in Montana. Red Cloud, the Sioux chief, determined to stop the trail. In December 1866, pursued by an army column under Captain William J. Fetterman, he lured the incautious Fetterman deep into the wilderness, ambushed him, and wiped out all eighty-two soldiers in his command. The Fetterman massacre, coming so soon after the Chivington massacre, sparked a public debate over the nation’s Indian policy. Like the policy itself, the debate reflected differing white views of the Native Americans. In the East, some reform, humanitarian, and church groups wanted a humane peace policy, directed toward educating and “civilizing” the tribes. Many white people, in the East and West, questioned this approach, convinced that Native Americans were savages unfit for civilization. Westerners, of course, had some reason to fear Indian attacks, and the fears often fed on wild rumors of scalped settlers and besieged forts. As a result, Westerners in general favored firm control over the Native Americans, including swift punishment of any who rebelled. In 1867, the peace advocates won the debate. Halting construction on the Bozeman Trail, Congress created a Peace Commission of four civilians and three generals to end the Sioux War and eliminate permanently the causes of Indian wars. Setting out for the West, the Peace Commissioners agreed that only one policy offered a permanent solution: a policy of “small reservations” to isolate the Native Americans on distant lands, teach them to farm, and gradually “civilize” them. The commissioners chose two areas to hold all the Plains Indians. Fifty-four thousand Native Americans on the northern plains would be moved north of the Black Hills in Dakota Territory, far from prospective white settlement. On the southern plains, eighty-six thousand Native Americans would be moved into present-day Oklahoma, a region also considered difficult to farm and unattractive to whites. In both areas, tribes would be assigned specific reservations where government agents could supervise them. The Kiowa, Comanche, Cheyenne, and Arapaho agreed to the plan in 1867, the Sioux in 1868. The policy was extended beyond the plains, and the Ute, Shoshone, Bannock, Navajo, and Apache tribes also accepted small reservations. “We have now selected and provided reservations for all, off the great road,” an army commander wrote. “All who cling to their old hunting-grounds are hostile and will remain so till killed off.”

Final Battles on the Plains
 Few Native Americans settled peacefully into life on the new reservations. The reservation system not only changed their age-old customs; it chained them in a situation of poverty and isolation. Soon, young warriors and minor chiefs denounced the treaties and drifted back to the open countryside. In late 1868, warfare broke out again, and it took more than a decade of violence



 CHAPTER 17

THE WEST: EXPLOITING AN EMPIRE

 a nationwide demand for revenge. Within a few months, the Sioux were surrounded and beaten, three thousand of them surrendering in October 1876. Sitting Bull and a few followers who had fled to Canada gave up in 1881. The Sioux War ended the major Indian warfare in the West, but occasional outbreaks occurred for several years thereafter. In 1877, the Nez Percé tribe of Oregon, a people who had warmly welcomed Lewis and Clark in 1805, rebelled against government policy. Hoping to reach Canada, Chief Joseph led the tribe on a courageous flight lasting 75 days and covering 1,321 miles. They defeated the pursuing army at every turn but then ran out of food, horses, and ammunition. Surrendering, they were sent to barren lands in the Indian Country of Oklahoma, and there, most of them died from disease. In 1890, the Teton Sioux of South Dakota, bitter and starving, became restless. Many of them turned to the Ghost Dances , a This wood engraving from 1891 depicts a group of Sioux dancers performing, most likely, one of their last set of dances and rites that grew ghost dances before the arrest of the warrior chief Sitting Bull. from a vision of a Paiute messiah named Wovoka. Performance of the dances, Wovoka said, would bring back Native American lands to beat the Indians into submission. The Kiowa and Comanche and would cause the whites to disappear. All Native Americans rampaged through the Texas Panhandle, looting and killing, until would reunite, the earth would be covered with dust, and a new the U.S. Army—including the feared “buffalo soldiers,” African Earth would come upon the old. The vanished buffalo would American cavalrymen on the western frontier—crushed them return in great herds. in the Red River War of 1874–1875 and ended warfare in the The army intervened to stop the dancing, touching off vioSouthwest. (See the Feature Essay, “Blacks in Blue: The Buffalo lence that killed Sitting Bull and a number of other warriors. Soldiers in the West,” pp. 398–399.) Frightened Native Americans fled southwest to join other Ghost On the northern plains, fighting resulted from the Black Dancers under the aging chief Big Foot. Moving quickly, troops Hills Gold Rush of 1875. As prospectors tramped across Native of the Seventh Cavalry, Custer’s old regiment, caught up with Big American hunting grounds, the Sioux gathered to stop them. Foot’s band and took them to the army camp on Wounded Knee They were led by Rain-in-the-Face, the great war chief Crazy Creek in South Dakota. A Native American, it is thought, fired Horse, and the famous medicine man Sitting Bull. The army the first shot, returned by the army’s new machine guns. Firing a sent several columns of troops after the Indians, but one, under shell a second, they shredded tepees and people. In the infamous flamboyant Lieutenant Colonel George Armstrong Custer, Wounded Knee Massacre, about two hundred men, women, pushed recklessly ahead, eager to claim the victory. On the and children were killed in the snow. morning of June 25, 1876, thinking he had a small band of Native Americans surrounded in their village on the banks of the Little Bighorn River in Montana, Custer divided his column The End of Tribal Life and took 265 men toward it. Instead of finding a small band, The final step in Indian policy came in the 1870s and 1880s. he discovered he had stumbled on the main Sioux camp with Some reformers had long argued against segregating the Native 2,500 warriors. It was the largest Native American army ever Americans on reservations, urging instead that the nation assimiassembled in the United States. late them individually into white culture. These “assimilationists” By midafternoon it was over; Custer and his men were wanted to use education, land policy, and federal law to eradicate dead. Custer was largely responsible for the loss, but “Custer’s tribal society. Last Stand,” set in blazing headlines across the country, set off Watch the Video

Sioux Ghost Dance


Crushing the Native Americans




 To keep the Indians’ land from falling into the hands of speculators, the federal government Read the Document Accounts of the Wounded Knee Massacre held it in trust for twenty-five years. Finally, American citizenship was granted to Native Americans who accepted their land, lived apart from the tribe, and “adopted the habits of civilized life.” Through the Dawes Act, 47 million acres of land were distributed to Native Americans and their families. There were another 90 million acres in the reservations, and these lands, often the most fertile, were sold to white settlers. Speculators evaded the twenty-five-year rule, leasing rather than purchasing the land from the Native Americans. Many Native Americans knew little about farming. Their tools were rudimentary, and in the culture of the Plains Indians, men had not ordinarily participated in farming. In 1934, the government returned to the idea of tribal land ownership, but by then 138 million acres of Indian land had shrunk to 48 million acres, half of which was barren. The final blow to tribal life came not in the Dawes Act but in the virtual extermination of the buffalo, the Plains Indians’ chief resource In late 1890 troops of the Seventh Cavalry killed more than 200 Native American men, women, and the basis for their unique way of life. The and children at a reservation located along Wounded Knee Creek in South Dakota. A number of longstanding issues on the reservation contributed to the tension prior to the massacre. killing began in the 1860s as the transcontinental railroads pushed west, and it stepped Congress began to adopt the policy in 1871 when it ended the up as settlers found they could harm the Indians by harming the practice of treaty making with Native American tribes. Since tribes buffalo. “Kill every buffalo you can,” an army officer said. “Every were no longer separate nations, they lost many of their political buffalo dead is an Indian gone.” Then, in 1871, a Pennsylvania and judicial functions, and the power of the chiefs was weakened. tannery discovered that buffalo hides made valuable leather. In 1882, Congress created a Court of Indian Offenses to try Native Professional hunters such as William F. “Buffalo Bill” Cody Americans who broke government rules, and soon thereafter it swarmed across the plains, killing millions of the beasts. made them answerable in regular courts for certain crimes. Between 1872 and 1874, professional hunters slaughtered While Congress worked to break down the tribes, educators three million buffalo a year. In a frontier form of a factory system, trained young Native Americans to adjust to white culture. In 1879, riflemen, skinners, and transport wagons pushed through the vast fifty Pawnee, Kiowa, and Cheyenne youths were brought east to the herds, which shrank steadily behind them. new Carlisle Indian School in Carlisle, Pennsylvania. Other Native By 1883, the buffalo were almost gone. When the government American schools soon opened, including the Haskell Institute in set out to produce the famous “buffalo nickel,” the designer had to Kansas and numerous day schools on the western reservations. go to the Bronx Zoo in New York City to find a buffalo. The schools taught students to fix machines and farm; they forced By 1900, there were only 250,000 Native Americans in the young Indians to trim their long hair and made them speak English, country. (There were 600,000 within the limits of the present-day banned the wearing of tribal paint or clothes, and forbade tribal United States in 1800, and more than 5 million in 1492, when ceremonies and dances. “Kill the Indian and save the man,” said Columbus first set foot in the New World.) Most of the Indians Richard H. Pratt, the army officer who founded the Carlisle School. lived on reservations. Many lived in poverty. Alcoholism and Land ownership was the final and most important link in the unemployment were growing problems, and Native Americans, new policy. Native Americans who owned land, it was thought, no longer able to live off the buffalo, became wards of the state. would become responsible, self-reliant citizens. Deciding to give They lost their cultural distinctiveness. Once possessors of each Native American a farm, Congress in 1887 passed the Dawes the entire continent, they had been crowded into smaller and Severalty Act, the most important legal development in Indian– smaller areas, overwhelmed by the demand to become settled, white relations in more than three centuries. literate, and English-speaking. “Except for the internment of Aiming to end tribal life, the Dawes Act divided tribal lands the West Coast Japanese during World War II,” said historian into small plots for distribution among members of the tribe. Each Roger L. Nichols, “Indian removal is the only example of largefamily head received 160 acres, single adults 80 acres, and children scale government-enforced migration in American history. 40 acres. Once the land was distributed, any surplus was sold to For the Japanese, the move was temporary; for the Indians white settlers, with the profits going to Native American schools. it was not.”

 Complete the Assignment Blacks in Blue: The Buffalo Soldiers in the West on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


Blacks in Blue
The Buffalo Soldiers in the West


 Although they were not, in fact, treated as well as the white soldiers in their regiments, many African American cavalrymen such as those pictured here were probably drawn into service by hard-sell recruitment posters such as the one shown on the facing page.

O


 n Saturday afternoons, youngsters used to sit in darkened movie theaters and cheer the victories of the U.S. Cavalry over the Indians. Typically, the Indians were about to capture a wagon train when army bugles suddenly sounded. Then the blue-coated cavalry charged over the hill. Few in the theaters cheered for the Indians; fewer still noticed the absence of black faces among the charging cavalry. But in fact, more than two thousand African American cavalrymen served on the western frontier between 1867 and 1890. Known as the buffalo soldiers, they made up one-fifth of the U.S. Cavalry.

 Black troops were first used on a large scale during the Civil War. Organized in segregated units, with white officers, they fought with distinction. Nearly 180,000 blacks served in the Union army; 34,000 of them died. When the war ended in 1865, Congress for the first time authorized black troops to serve in the regular peacetime army. In addition to infantry, it created two cavalry regiments—the Ninth and Tenth, which became known as the famous buffalo soldiers. Like other black regiments, the Ninth and Tenth Cavalry had white officers who took special examinations before they could serve. The chaplains were

 assigned not only to preach but to teach reading, writing, and arithmetic. The food was poor; racism was widespread. The army stocked the first black units with worn-out horses, a serious matter to men whose lives depended on the speed and stamina of their mounts. “Since our first mount in 1867 this regiment has received nothing but broken down horses and repaired equipment,” an officer said in 1870. Many white officers refused to serve with black troops. George Armstrong Custer, the handsome “boy general,” turned down a position in the Ninth and joined the new Seventh Cavalry, headed for disaster at Little

Bighorn. The Army and Navy Journal
 carried ads that told a similar story: A FIRST LIEUTENANT OF INFANTRY (white) Stationed at a very desirable post in the Department of the South desires a transfer with an officer of the same grade on equal terms if in a white regiment but if in a colored regiment a reasonable bonus would be expected. There was no shortage of black troops for the officers to lead. Blacks enlisted because the army offered some advancement in a closed society. It also paid $13 a month, plus room and board. In 1867, the Ninth and Tenth Cavalry were posted to the West, where they remained for two decades. Under Colonel Benjamin H. Grierson, a Civil War hero, the Tenth went to Fort Riley, Kansas; the regiment arrived in the midst of a great Indian war. The Kiowa, Comanche, Cheyenne, Arapaho, and Sioux were on the warpath. Troopers of the Tenth defended farms, stages, trains, and work crews building railroad tracks to the West. Cornered by a band of Cheyenne, they beat back the attack and won a new name. They had been known as the “brunettes” or “Africans,” but the Cheyenne now called them the buffalo soldiers, a

 name that soon applied to all African American soldiers in the West. From 1868 to 1874, the Tenth served on the Kansas frontier. The dull winter days were filled with drills and scouting parties outside the post. In spring and summer, the good weather brought forth new forays. Indian bands raided farms and ranches and stampeded cattle herds on the way north from Texas. They struck and then melted back into the reservations. The Ninth Cavalry also had a difficult job. Commanded by Colonel Edward Hatch, who had served with Grierson in the Civil War, it was stationed in West Texas and along the Rio Grande. The summers were so hot that men collapsed with sunstroke, the winters so cold that water froze in canteens. Native Americans from outside the area frequently raided it. From the north, Kiowa and Comanche warriors rode down the Great Comanche War Trail; Kickapoo crossed the Rio Grande from Mexico. Gangs of Mexican bandits and restless Civil War veterans roamed and plundered at will. From 1874 to 1875, the Ninth fought in the great Red River War, in which the Kiowa and Comanche, fed up with conditions on the reservations, revolted against Grant’s peace policy. Marching, fighting, then marching again, the soldiers harried and wore out the Indians, who finally surrendered in the spring of 1875. Herded into a new and desolate reservation, the Mescalero Apache of New Mexico took to the warpath in 1877 and again in 1879. Each time, it took a year of grueling warfare to

 effect their surrender. In 1886, black cavalrymen surrounded and captured the famous Apache chief Geronimo. In that and other campaigns, several buffalo soldiers won the Congressional Medal of Honor. Black troops hunted Big Foot and his band before the slaughter at Wounded Knee in 1890 (see p. 396), and they served in many of the West’s most famous Indian battles. While one-third of all army recruits deserted between 1865 and 1890, the Ninth and Tenth Cavalry had few desertions. In 1880, the Tenth had the fewest desertions of any regiment in the country. It was ironic that in the West, black men fought red men to benefit white men. Once the Indian wars ended, the buffalo soldiers worked to keep illegal settlers out of Indian or government land—much of which was later opened to settlement. Both regiments saw action in the Spanish-American War, the Ninth at San Juan Hill, the Tenth in the fighting around Santiago. Unlike white veterans of the same campaigns, the old buffalo soldiers were forgotten in retirement, although some of them had the satisfaction of settling on the western lands they had done so much to pacify.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why did many African American men join the military during this era? 2. Why did so few of these “buffalo soldiers” desert at a time when so many other U.S. soldiers did? 




 CHAPTER 17

THE WEST: EXPLOITING AN EMPIRE

View the Closer Look


Railroad and Buffalo


 In 1872, the Northern Pacific Railroad began to build a route that would violate Sioux territory. The government sent an army to protect the surveyors.

 Even as the Native Americans lost their identity, they entered the romantic folklore of the West. Dime novels, snapped up by readers young and old, told tales of Indian fighting on the plains. “Buffalo Bill” Cody turned it all into a profitable business. Beginning in 1883, his Wild West Show ran for more than three decades, playing to millions of viewers in the United States, Canada, and Europe. It featured Plains Indians chasing buffalo, performing a war dance, and attacking a settler’s cabin. In 1885, Sitting Bull himself, victor over Custer at the battle of Little Bighorn, performed in the show.

Settlement of the West
 Why did Americans and others move to the West? Between 1870 and 1900, white—and some African, Hispanic, and Asian—Americans settled the enormous total of 430 million acres west of the Mississippi; they took over more land than had been occupied by Americans in all the years before 1870. People moved West for many reasons. Some sought adventure; others wanted to escape the drab routine of factory or city life.

 Many moved to California for their health. The Mormons settled Utah to escape religious persecution. Others followed the mining camps, the advancing railroads, and the farming and cattle frontier. Whatever the specific reason, most people moved West to better their lot. On the whole, their timing was good, for as the nation’s population grew, so did demand for the livestock and the agricultural, mineral, and lumber products of the expanding West. Contrary to older historical views, the West did not act as a major “safety valve,” an outlet for social and economic tensions. The poor and unemployed did not have the means to move there and establish farms. “Moreover,” as Douglass C. North, an economic historian, said, “most people moved West in good times . . . in periods of rising prices, of expanding demand, when the prospects for making money from this new land looked brightest; and this aspect characterized the whole pattern of settlement.”

Men and Women on the Overland Trail
 The first movement west aimed not for the nearby plains but for California and Oregon on the continent’s far shore. It started

Settlement of the West


 in the Gold Rush of 1849 to California, and in the next three decades perhaps as many as half a million individuals made the long journey over the Overland Trail leading west. Some walked; others rode horses alone or in small groups. About half joined great caravans, numbering 150 wagons or more, that inched across the two thousand miles between the Missouri River and the Pacific coast. More often than not, men made the decision to make the crossing, but, except for the stampedes to the mines, migration usually turned out to be a family affair. Wives were consulted, though in some cases they had little real choice. They could either go along or live alone at home. While many women regretted leaving family and friends, they agreed to the trip, sometimes as eagerly as the men. “I would not be left behind,” said Luzena Wilson, whose husband ached to join the Gold Rush to California. “I thought where he could go I could, and where I went I could take my two little toddling babies.” Like the Wilsons, the majority of people traveled in family groups, including inlaws, grandchildren, aunts, and uncles. As one historian said, “The quest for something new would take place in the context of the very familiar.” Individuals and wagon trains set out from various points along the Missouri River. Leaving in the spring and traveling through the summer, they hoped to reach their destination before the first snowfall. During April, travelers gradually assembled in spring camp just across the Missouri River, waiting for the new grass to ripen into forage. They packed and repacked the wagons and elected the trains’ leaders, who would set the line of march, look for water and campsites, and impose discipline. Some trains adopted detailed rules, fearing a lapse into savagery in the wild lands across the Missouri. “Every man to carry with him a Bible and other religious books, as we hope not to degenerate into a state of barbarism,” one agreement said. Setting out in early May, travelers divided the enormous route into manageable portions. The first leg of the journey followed the Platte River west to Fort Kearney in central Nebraska Territory, a distance of about three hundred miles. The land was even, with good supplies of wood, grass, and water. From a distance, the whitetopped wagons seemed driven by a common force, but, in fact, internal discipline broke down almost immediately. Arguments erupted over the pace of the march, the choice of campsites, the number of guards to post, whether to rest or push on. Elected leaders quit; new ones were chosen. Every train was filled with individualists, and as the son of one train captain said, “If you think it’s any snap to run a wagon train of sixty-six wagons with every man in the train having a different idea of what is the best thing to do, all I can say is that some day you ought to try it.” Men, women, and children had different tasks on the trail. Men concerned themselves almost entirely with hunting buffalo and antelope, guard duty, and transportation. They rose at 4 a.m. to hitch the wagons, and after breakfast began the day’s march. At noon, they stopped and set the teams to graze. After the midday meal, the march continued until sunset. Then, while the men relaxed, the women fixed dinner and the next day’s lunch, and the children kindled the fires, brought water to camp, and searched for wood or other fuel. Walking fifteen miles a day, in searing heat and mountain cold, travelers were exhausted by late afternoon.



 For women, the trail was lonely, and they worked to exhaustion. Before long, some adjusted their clothing to the harsh conditions, adopting the new bloomer pants, shortening their skirts, or wearing regular “wash dresses”—so called because they had shorter hemlines that did not drag on the wet ground on washday. Other women continued to wear their long dresses, thinking bloomers “indecent.” Both men and women carried firearms in case of Indian attacks, but most emigrants saw few Indians en route. What they often did see was trash, miles of it, for the wagon trains were an early example of the impact of migration and settlement on the western environment. On the Oregon and other trails, travelers sidestepped mounds of garbage, tin cans, furniture, cooking stoves, kegs, tools, and clothing, all discarded by people who had passed through before. Along a 40-mile trail in the Nevada desert, a migrant tallied two thousand abandoned wagons. On some trails, animals and people stirred up so much dust that drivers wore goggles to protect their eyes. The first stage of the journey was deceptively easy, and travelers usually reached Fort Kearney by late May. The second leg led another 300 miles up the Platte River to Fort Laramie on the eastern edge of Wyoming Territory. The heat of June had dried the grass, and there was no wood. Anxious to beat the early snowfalls, travelers rested a day or two at the fort, then hurried on to South Pass, 280 miles to the west, the best route through the forbidding Rockies. Beyond South Pass, some emigrants turned south to the Mormon settlements on the Great Salt Lake, but most headed 340 miles north to Fort Hall on the Snake River in Idaho. It took another three months to cover the remaining 800 miles. California-bound travelers followed the Humboldt River through the summer heat of Nevada. Under the best of conditions the trip took six months, sixteen hours a day, dawn to dusk, of hard, grueling labor. Walking halfway across the continent was no easy task, and it provided a neverto-be-forgotten experience for those who did it. The wagon trains, carrying the dreams of thousands of individuals, reproduced society in small focus: individualistic, hopeful, mobile, divided by age and gender roles, apprehensive, yet willing to strike out for the distant and new.

Land for the Taking
 As railroads pushed west in the 1870s and 1880s, locomotive trains replaced wagon trains, but the shift was gradual, and until the end of the century, emigrants often combined both modes of travel. Into the 1890s, travelers could be seen making their way across the West by any available means. Early railroad transportation was expensive, and the average farm family could not afford to buy tickets and ship supplies. Many Europeans traveled by rail to designated outfitting places and then proceeded west with wagons and oxen. Traffic flowed in all directions, belying the image of a simple “westward” movement. Many people did go west, of course, but others, such as migrants from Mexico, became westerners by moving north, and Asian Americans moved eastward from the Pacific coast. Whatever their route, they all ended up in the meeting ground of cultures that formed the modern West. Why did they come? “The motive that induced us to part with the pleasant associations and the dear friends of our childhood days,” explained Phoebe Judson, an early emigrant, “was to obtain from the government of the United States a grant of land that ‘Uncle



 CHAPTER 17

THE WEST: EXPLOITING AN EMPIRE

Read the Document


Homestead Act of 1862


 Between 1862 and 1890, the government gave away 48 million acres under the Homestead Act of 1862. A law of great significance, it gave 160 acres of land to anyone who would pay 10% registration fee and pledge to live on the land, cultivating it for five years.

 Sam’ had promised to give to the head of each family who settled in this new country.” A popular camp song reflected the same motive: Come along, come along—don’t be alarmed, Uncle Sam is rich enough to give us all a farm. Uncle Sam owned about one billion acres of land in the 1860s, much of it mountain and desert land unsuited for agriculture. By 1900, the various land laws had distributed half of it. Between 1862 and 1890, the government gave away 48 million acres under the Homestead Act of 1862, sold about 100 million acres to private citizens and corporations, granted 128 million acres to railroad companies to tempt them to build across the unsettled West, and sold huge tracts to the states. The Homestead Act of 1862, a law of great significance, gave 160 acres of land to anyone who would pay a $10 registration fee and pledge to live on it and cultivate it for five years. The offer set off a mass migration of land-hungry Europeans, dazzled by a country that gave its land away. Americans also seized on the act’s provisions, and between 1862 and 1900, nearly 600,000 families claimed free homesteads under it. Yet the Homestead Act did not work as Congress had hoped. Few farmers and laborers had the cash to move to the frontier, buy farm equipment, and wait out the year or two before the farm became self-supporting. Tailored to the timber and water conditions of the East, the act did not work as well in the semiarid West. In the fertile valleys of the Mississippi, 160 acres provided a generous farm. A farmer on the Great Plains needed either a larger farm for dry farming or a smaller one for irrigation. The Timber Culture Act of 1873 attempted to adjust the Homestead Act to western conditions. It allowed homesteaders to claim an additional 160 acres if they planted trees on a quarter of it within four years. A moderately successful act, it distributed 10 million acres of land, encouraged needed forestation, and enabled homesteaders to expand their farms to a workable size. Cattle ranchers lobbied for another law, the Desert Land Act of 1877,

 which allowed individuals to obtain 640 acres in the arid states for $1.25 an acre, provided they irrigated part of it within three years. The act invited fraud. More than 2.6 million acres of land were distributed, much of it fraudulently. The Timber and Stone Act of 1878 applied only to lands “unfit for cultivation” and valuable chiefly for timber or stone. It permitted anyone in California, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington to buy up to 160 acres of forest land for $2.50 an acre. Like ranchers, lumber companies used employees to file false claims. By 1900, 3.6 million acres of rich forest land had been claimed under the measure. Speculators made ingenious use of the land laws. Sending agents in advance of settlement, they moved along choice river bottoms or irrigable areas, accumulating large holdings to be held for high prices. In the arid West, where control of water meant control of the surrounding land, shrewd ranchers plotted their holdings accordingly. In Colorado, one cattleman, John F. Iliff, owned only 105 small parcels of land, but by placing them around the few water holes, he effectively dominated an empire stretching over 6,000 square miles. Water, in fact, became a dominant western issue, since aside from the Pacific Northwest, northern California, parts of the Rocky Mountain West, and the eastern half of the Great Plains, much of the trans-Mississippi West was arid, receiving less than twenty inches of rainfall annually. People speculated in water as if it were gold and planned great irrigation systems in Utah, eastern Colorado, and California’s Central Valley to “make the desert bloom.” A sign in Modesto, California, read “Water, Wealth, Contentment, Health.” Irrigators received a major boost in 1902 when the National Reclamation Act (Newlands Act) set aside most of the proceeds from the sale of public lands in sixteen western states to finance irrigation projects in the arid states. Over the next decades, dams, canals, and irrigation systems channeled water into dry areas, creating a “hydraulic” society that was rich in crops and cities (such as Los Angeles and Phoenix), but ever thirstier and in danger of outrunning the precious water on which it all depended. As beneficiaries of the government’s policy of land grants for railway construction, the railroad companies were the West’s largest landowners. Eager to have immigrants settle on the land they owned near the railroad right-of-way, and eager to boost their freight and passenger business, the companies sent agents to the East and Europe. Attractive brochures touted life in the West. Railroad lines set up land departments and bureaus of immigration. The land departments priced the land, arranged credit terms, and even gave free farming courses to immigrants. The bureaus of immigration employed agents in Europe, met immigrants at eastern seaports, and ran special cars for land seekers heading west. Half a billion acres of western land were given or sold to speculators and corporations. At the same time, only 600,000 homestead patents were issued, covering 80 million acres. Thus, only one acre in every nine initially went to individual pioneers, the intended beneficiaries of the nation’s largesse. Two-thirds of all homestead claimants before 1890 failed in their efforts to farm their new land.

Territorial Government
 As new areas of the West opened, they were organized as territories under the control of Congress and the president. The territorial system started with the famous Northwest Ordinance of 1787, which

The Bonanza West


 established the rules by which territories became states. Washington ran the territories like “a passive group of colonial mandates.” The president appointed the governor and judges in each territory; Congress detailed their duties, set their budgets, and oversaw their activities. Territorial officials had almost absolute power over the territories. Until they obtained statehood, then, the territories depended on the federal government for their existence. The national political parties, especially the Republicans, funneled government funds into the territorial economies, and in areas such as Wyoming and the Dakotas, where resources were scarce, economic growth depended on this money. Many early settlers held patronage jobs or hoped for them, traded with governmentsupported Native Americans, sold supplies to army troops, and speculated in government lands. In a large portion of the trans-Mississippi West, a generation grew up under territorial rule. Inevitably, these citizens developed distinct ideas about politics, government, and the economy.

The Spanish-Speaking Southwest
 In the nineteenth century, almost all Spanish-speaking people in the United States lived in California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, and Colorado. Their numbers were small—California had only 8,086 Mexican residents in 1900—but the influence of their culture and institutions was large. In some respects, the southwestern frontier was more Spanish American than Anglo-American. Pushing northward from Mexico, the Spanish gradually established the present-day economic structure of the Southwest. They brought with them techniques of mining, stock raising, and irrigated farming. After winning independence in the 1820s, the Mexicans brought new laws and ranching methods as well as chaps and the burro. Both Spanish and Mexicans created the legal framework for distributing land and water, a precious resource in the Southwest. They gave large grants of land to communities for grazing, to individuals as rewards for service, and to the various Native American pueblos. In Southern California, the Californios, descendants of the original colonizers, began after the 1860s to lose their once vast landholdings to drought and mortgages. Some turned to crime and became feared bandidos; others, such as José María Amador, lived in poverty and remembered better days: When I was but a little boy I drained the chocolate pot, But now I am a poor man and am condemned to slop. In 1875, Romualdo Pacheco, an aristocratic native son, served as governor of California and then went on to Congress. But as the Californios died out, Mexican Americans continued the Spanish–Mexican influence. In 1880, one-fourth of the residents of Los Angeles County were Spanish speaking. In New Mexico, Spanish-speaking citizens remained the majority ethnic group until the 1940s, and the Spanish Mexican culture dominated the territory. Contests over land grants became New Mexico’s largest industry; lawyers who dealt in them amassed huge holdings. After 1888, Las Gorras Blancas (“The White Caps”), a secret organization of Spanish Americans, attacked the movement of Anglo ranchers into the Las Vegas community land grant.



 Armed and hooded, they cut down fences and scattered the stock of those they viewed as intruders. Throughout the Southwest, the Spanish Mexican heritage gave a distinctive shape to society. Men headed the families and dominated economic life. Women had substantial economic rights (though few political ones), and they enjoyed a status their English American counterparts did not have. Wives kept full control of property acquired before their marriage; they also held half title to all property in a marriage, which later caused many southwestern states to pass community property laws. In addition, the Spanish Mexican heritage fostered a modified economic caste system, a strong Roman Catholic influence, and the primary use of the Spanish language. Continuous immigration from Mexico kept language and cultural ties strong. Spanish names and customs spread, even among Anglos. David Starr Jordan, arriving from Indiana to become the first president of Stanford University in California, bestowed Spanish names on streets, houses, and a Stanford dormitory. Spanish was the region’s first or second language. Confronted by Sheriff Pat Garrett in a darkened room, New Mexico’s famous outlaw Billy the Kid died asking, “Quién es? Quién es?” (“Who is it? Who is it?”).

The Bonanza West
 Why was the West a bonanza of dreams and getrich-quick schemes? Between 1850 and 1900, wave after wave of newcomers swept across the trans-Mississippi West. There were riches for the taking, hidden in gold-washed streams, spread lushly over grass-covered prairies, or available in the gullible minds of greedy newcomers. The nineteenthcentury West took shape in the search for mining, cattle, and land bonanzas that drew eager settlers from the East and around the world. As with all bonanzas, the consequences in the West were uneven growth, boom-and-bust economic cycles, and wasted resources. Society seemed constantly in the making. People moved here and there, following river bottoms, gold strikes, railroad tracks, and other opportunities. “Instant cities” arose. San Francisco, Salt Lake City, and Denver were the most spectacular examples, but every cow town and mining camp witnessed similar phenomena of growth. Boston needed more than two centuries to attract one-third of a million people; San Francisco did the same in a little more than twenty years. Many Westerners had left home to get rich quickly, and they adopted institutions that reflected that goal. The West was an idea as well as a region, and the idea molded them as much as they molded it.

The Mining Bonanza
 Mining was the first important magnet to attract people to the West. Many hoped to “strike it rich” in gold and silver, but at least half the newcomers had no intention of working in the mines. Instead, they provided food, clothing, and services to the thousands of miners. Leland Stanford and Collis P. Huntington, who later built the Central Pacific Railroad, set up a general store in Sacramento where they sold shovels and supplies. Stephen J. Field, later a prominent justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, followed the Gold Rush to California to practice law.



 CHAPTER 17

THE WEST: EXPLOITING AN EMPIRE

 Thousands of miners climbed the Sierra Nevada that summer. On the rough slopes of Davidson Mountain, they created Virginia City, the prototype of the tumultuous western mining town. The biggest strike was yet to come. In 1873, John W. Mackay and three partners formed a company to dig deep into the mountain, and at 1,167 feet they hit the Big Bonanza, a seam of gold and silver more than 54 feet wide. It was the richest discovery in the history of mining. Between 1859 and 1879, the Comstock Lode produced gold and silver worth $306 million. Most of it went to financiers and corporations. Mackay himself became the richest person in the world, earning (according to a European newspaper) $25 a minute, $5 a minute more than Czar Alexander II of Russia. In the 1860s and 1870s, important strikes were made in Washington, Idaho, Nevada, Colorado, Montana, Arizona, and Dakota. Extremely mobile, miners flocked from strike to strike, and new camps and mining towns sprang up overnight. “The miners of Idaho were like quicksilver,” said Hubert Howe Bancroft, an early historian. “A mass of them dropped This photograph from the mid-1800s shows gold miners on the American River in California in any locality, broke up into individual globules, and pausing for a lunch break. Although significantly outnumbered by men, women on the mining ran off after any atom of gold in their vicinity. They frontier took a variety of jobs, including working claims. stayed nowhere longer than the gold attracted them.” The final fling came in the Black Hills rush of 1874 to 1876. The army had tried to keep miners out of the area, the The California Gold Rush of 1849 began the mining boom and heart of the Sioux hunting grounds, and even sent a scientific party set the pattern for subsequent strikes in other regions. Individual under Colonel George Armstrong Custer to disprove the rumors prospectors made the first strikes, discovering pockets of gold along of gold and stop the miners’ invasion. Instead, Custer found gold streams flowing westward from the Sierra Nevada. To get the gold, all over the hills, and the rush was on. Miners, gamblers, desperathey used a simple process called placer mining, which required does, and prostitutes flocked to Deadwood, the most lawless of all little skill, technology, or capital. A placer miner needed only a the mining camps. There, Martha Jane Canary—a crack shot who, shovel, a washing pan, and a good claim. As the placers gave out, as Calamity Jane, won fame as a scout and teamster—fell in love a great deal of gold remained, but it was locked in quartz or buried with “Wild Bill” Hickok. Hickok himself—a western legend who deep in the earth. Mining became an expensive business, far beyond had tamed Kansas cow towns, killed an unknown number of men, the reach of the average miner. and toured in Buffalo Bill’s Wild West Show—died in Deadwood, Large corporations moved in to dig the deep shafts and shot in the back of the head. Hickok was thirty-nine years old. finance costly equipment. Quartz mining required heavy rock Towns such as Deadwood, in the Dakota Territory; Virginia crushers, mercury vats to dissolve the gold, and large retorts to City, Nevada; Leadville, Colorado; and Tombstone, Arizona, demrecapture it. Eastern and European financiers assumed control, onstrated a new development process in the frontier experience. labor became unionized, and mining towns took on some of the The farming frontier had developed naturally in a rural setting. characteristics of the industrial city. Individual prospectors meanOn the mining frontier, the germ of a city—the camp—appeared while dashed on to the next find. Unlike other frontiers, the minalmost simultaneously with the first “strike.” Periodicals, the latest ing frontier moved from west to east, as the original California fashions, theaters, schools, literary clubs, and lending libraries came miners—the “yonder-siders,” they were called—hurried eastward quickly to the camps, providing civilized refinements not available in search of the big strike. on other frontiers. Urbanization also created the need for municipal In 1859, fresh strikes were made near Pikes Peak in Colorado government, sanitation, and law enforcement. and in the Carson River Valley of Nevada. News of both discovMining camps were governed by a simple democracy. Soon eries set off wild migrations—one hundred thousand miners were after a strike, the miners in the area met to organize a mining in Pikes Peak country by June 1859. The gold there quickly played “district” and adopted rules governing behavior in it. Rules reguout, but the Nevada find uncovered a thick bluish black ore that lated the size and boundaries of claims, established procedures for was almost pure silver and gold. A quick-witted drifter named settling disputes, and set penalties for crimes. Petty criminals were Henry T. P. Comstock talked his way into partnership in the claim, banished from the district; serious offenders were hanged. In the and word of the Comstock Lode—with ore worth $3,876 a case of a major dispute, the whole camp gathered, chose legal counton—flashed over the mountains. sel for both sides, and heard the evidence. If all else failed, miners Read the Document

John Lester, “Hydraulic Mining”


The Bonanza West


CANADA WASH. TERR.
Co 
 lumbia R.

.


DAKOTA TERRITORY
Deadwood 
MO UN

WYOMING BLACK TERR. HILLS

 TA

Virginia
City


 VA

UTAH TERR.

S


E
 AN

Salt
Lake
City


 NEVADA

 NEBRASKA

 IN

 SIERR

San
Francisco


 KY

Sn
 ak eR

MONTANA TERRITORY

 ROC

IDAHO TERR.

 OREGON

Central
City
Denver


Leadville


 DA

COLO. TERR.

R.


 Sutter’s Mill

Miss uri R.
 o

Couer
 d’Alene

 do Silverton

 KANSAS

Col


 a or

 CALIFORNIA

PACIFIC OCEAN

Santa Fe


ARIZONA TERR.

N. MEX. TERR.

INDIAN TERR.

Silver
City


Tombstone


Ri
 o

 TEXAS

 and Gr e

MEXICO
Major mining towns 


 licensing fee. As intended, it drove out Mexicans and other foreigners. Riots against Chinese laborers occurred in the 1870s and 1880s in Los Angeles, San Francisco, Seattle, Reno, and Denver. Responding to pressure, Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, which suspended immigration of Chinese laborers for ten years. The number of Chinese in the United States fell drastically. By the 1890s, the early mining bonanza was over. All told, the western mines contributed billions of dollars to the economy. They had helped finance the Civil War and provided needed capital for industrialization. The vast boost in silver production from the Comstock Lode changed the relative value of gold and silver, the base of American currency. Bitter disputes over the currency affected politics and led to the famous “battle of the standards” in the presidential election of 1896 (see Chapter 20). The mining frontier populated portions of the West and sped its process of political organization. Nevada, Idaho, and Montana were granted early statehood because of mining. Merchants, editors, lawyers, and ministers moved with the advancing frontier, establishing permanent settlements. Women in the mining camps helped to foster family life and raised the moral tone by campaigning against drinking, gambling, and prostitution. But not all the effects of the mining boom were positive. The industry also left behind painful scars in the form of invaded Indian reservations, pitted hills, and lonely ghost towns.

Boundaries
 of 1870 Gold mining regions Silver mining regions





 300 miles

 150 300 kilometers

MINING REGIONS OF THE WEST

 Gold and silver mines dotted the West, drawing settlers and encouraging political organization in many areas.

 formed secret vigilance committees to hang a few offenders as a lesson to the rest. Early visitors to the mining country were struck by the way miners, solitary and competitive, joined together, founded a camp, and created a society. In 1870, men outnumbered women in the mining districts by more than two to one; there were few children. Prostitutes followed the camps around the West, and a “respectable” woman was an object of curiosity. Four arrived in Nevada City in 1853, and one observed, “The men stand and gaze at us with mouth and eyes wide open, every time we go out.” Some women worked claims, but more often they took jobs as cooks, housekeepers, and seamstresses—for wages considerably higher than in the East. In most camps, between one-quarter and one-half of the population was foreign born. The lure of gold drew large numbers of Chinese, Chileans, Peruvians, Mexicans, French, Germans, and English. Experienced miners, the Latin Americans brought valuable mining techniques. At least six thousand Mexicans joined the California rush of 1849, and by 1852, there were twenty-five thousand Chinese in California. Painstakingly, the Chinese profitably worked claims others had abandoned. In the 1860s, almost one-third of the miners in the West were Chinese. Hostility often surfaced against foreign miners, particularly the French, Latin Americans, and Chinese. In 1850, California passed a Foreign Miners’ Tax that charged foreign miners a $20 monthly

 Gold from the Roots Up: The Cattle Bonanza “ There’s gold from the grass roots down,” said California Joe, a guide in the gold districts of Dakota in the 1870s, “but there’s more gold from the grass roots up.” Ranchers began to recognize the potential of the vast grasslands of the West. The plains were covered with buffalo or grama grass, a wiry variety with short, hard stems. Cattle thrived on it. For twenty years after 1865, cattle ranching dominated the “open range,” a vast fenceless area extending from the Texas Panhandle north into Canada. The techniques of the business came from Mexico. Long before American cowboys moved herds north, their Mexican counterparts, the vaqueros, developed the essential techniques of branding, roundups, and roping. The cattle themselves, the famous Texas longhorns, also came from Mexico. Spreading over the grasslands of southern Texas, the longhorns multiplied rapidly. Although their meat was coarse and stringy, they fed a nation hungry for beef at the end of the Civil War. The problem was getting the beef to eastern markets, and Joseph G. McCoy, a livestock shipper from Illinois, solved it. Looking for a way to market Texas beef, McCoy conceived the idea of taking the cattle to railheads in Kansas. He talked first with the president of the Missouri Pacific, who ordered him out of his office, and then with the head of the Kansas Pacific, who laughed at the idea. The persistent McCoy finally signed a contract in 1867 with the Hannibal and St. Joseph Railroad. Searching for an appropriate rail junction, he settled on the sleepy Kansas town of Abilene, “a very small, dead place,” he remembered, with about a dozen log huts and one nearly bankrupt saloon. In September 1867, McCoy shipped the first train of twenty cars of longhorn cattle. By the end of the year, a thousand carloads had

 CHAPTER 17

THE WEST: EXPLOITING AN EMPIRE

 followed, all headed for Chicago markets. In 1870, three hundred thousand head of Texas cattle reached Abilene, followed the next year—the peak year—by seven hundred thousand head. The Alamo Saloon, crowded with tired cowboys at the end of the drive, now employed seventy-five bartenders, working three 8-hour shifts. The profits were enormous. Drivers bought cheap Texas steers for $4 a head and sold them for $30 or $40 a head at the northern railhead. The most famous trail was the Chisholm, running from southern Texas through Oklahoma Territory to Ellsworth and Abilene, Kansas, on the Kansas Pacific Railroad. Dodge City, Kansas, became the prime shipping center between 1875 and 1879. Cowboys pushed steers northward in herds of two to three thousand. Novels and films have portrayed the cowboys as white, View the Closer Look

 but at least a quarter of them were black, and possibly another quarter were Mexicans. A typical crew on the trail north might have eight men, half of them black or Mexican. Most of the trail bosses were white; they earned about $125 a month. James “Jim” Perry, a renowned black cowboy who worked for more than twenty years as a rider, roper, and cook for the XIT ranch, said, “If it weren’t for my damned old black face, I’d have been a boss long ago.” Like miners, cattlemen lived beyond the formal reach of the law and so established their own. Before each drive, Charles Goodnight drew up rules governing behavior on the trail. A cowboy who shot another was hanged on the spot. Ranchers adopted rules for cattle ownership, branding, roundups, and drives, and they formed associations to enforce them. The Wyoming Stock

Railroad Routes, Cattle Trails, Gold and Silver Rushes


 MINN.

DAKOTA TERRITORY

 WISCONSIN

WYOMING TERRITORY

Cheyenne


Chicago


 IOWA

NEBRASKA UNION PAC IFIC R.R.

Ogallala


ILLINOIS KA

 SA

Denver


UTAH TERR.

N


S


 COLORADO

PA CIFIC

Abilene


R.R.


St. Louis


Ellsworth


SA NTA FE R .R.

Sedalia


KANSAS
Baxter Springs 
 dge ge City Dodge

 MISSOURI

INDIAN TERR. ARIZ. TERR.

 ARKANSAS

Fort Concho
HT -LOV ING TRAIL
Bandera 
San Antonio


 Cattle trails

 d an Gr





ME X I CO

 e

 Major railroads

 LOUISIANA

Rio


Railheads




 MISS.

AND BAX

NI OD GO

G


HOLM TRAIL CHIS

WESTERN TRAIL

 TEXAS

TER SPRINGS

TR AI L

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

SE DA LIA



Gulf of
Mexico


 300 miles 300 kilometers

CATTLE TRAILS
Cattle raised in Texas were driven along the cattle trails to the northern railheads, and trains carried them to market. 
The Bonanza West


 Growers’ Association, the largest and most formidable, had four hundred members owning two million cattle; its reach extended well beyond Wyoming into Colorado, Nebraska, Montana, and the Dakotas. Throughout this vast territory, the “laws” of the association were often the law of the land. By 1880, more than six million cattle had been driven to northern markets. But the era of the great cattle drive was ending. Farmers were planting wheat on the old buffalo ranges; barbed wire, a recent invention, cut across the trails and divided up the big ranches. Mechanical improvements in slaughtering, refrigerated transportation, and cold storage modernized the industry. Ranchers bred the Texas longhorns with heavier Hereford and Angus bulls, and as the new breeds proved profitable, more and more ranches opened on the northern ranges. By the mid-1880s, some 4.5 million cattle grazed the High Plains, reminding people of the once great herds of buffalo. Stories of vast profits circulated, attracting outside capital. Large investments transformed ranching into big business, often controlled by absentee owners and subject to new problems. By 1885, experienced cattle ranchers were growing alarmed. A presidential order that year forced them out of the Indian Territory in Oklahoma, adding two hundred thousand cattle to the overcrowded northern ranges. The winter of 1885 to 1886 was cold, and the following summer was one of the hottest on record. Water holes dried up; the grass turned brown. Beef prices fell. The winter of 1886–1887 was one of the worst in western history. Temperatures dropped to 45 degrees below zero, and cattle that once would have saved themselves by drifting ahead of the storms came up against the new barbed wire fences. Herds jammed together, pawing the frozen ground or stripping bark from trees in search of food. Cattle died by the tens of thousands. In the spring of 1887, when the snows thawed, ranchers found stacks of carcasses piled up against the fences. The melting snows did, however, produce a lush crop of grass for the survivors. The cattle business recovered, but it took different directions. Outside capital, so plentiful in the boom years, dried up. Ranchers began fencing their lands, reducing their herds, and growing hay for winter food. To the dismay of cowboys, mowing machines and hay rakes became as important as chuck wagons and branding irons. “I tell you times have changed,” one cowboy said sadly. The last roundup on the northern ranges took place in 1905. Ranches grew smaller, and some ranchers, at first in the scrub country of the Southwest, then on the plains themselves, switched to raising sheep. By 1900, there were nearly thirty-eight million sheep west of the Missouri River, far more than there were cattle. In Montana, there were six or seven sheep for each cow, and even Wyoming, the great center of the northern ranches, had more sheep than cows. Ranchers and sheepherders fought bitterly to control the grazing lands, but they had one problem in common: the troubles ahead. Homesteaders, armed with barbed wire and new strains of wheat, were pushing onto the plains, and the day of the open range was over.

Sodbusters on the Plains: The
Farming Bonanza
 Like miners and cattle ranchers, millions of farmers moved into the West in the decades after 1870 to seek crop bonanzas and new ways of life. Some realized their dreams; many fought just to survive.



 Said a folksong from Greer County, Oklahoma, Hurrah for Greer County! The land of the free, The land of the bedbug, grasshopper, and flea; I’ll sing of its praises, I’ll tell of its fame, While starving to death on my government claim. Between 1870 and 1900, farmers cultivated more land than ever before in American history. They peopled the plains from Dakota to Texas, pushed the Indians out of their last sanctuary in Oklahoma, and poured into the basins and foothills of the Rockies. By 1900, the western half of the nation contained almost 30 percent of the population, compared to less than 1 percent just a half century earlier. Unlike mining, farm settlement often followed predictable patterns, taking population from states east of the settlement line and moving gradually westward. Crossing the Mississippi, farmers settled first in western Iowa, Minnesota, Nebraska, Kansas, Texas, and South Dakota. The movement slumped during the depression of the 1870s, but then a new wave of optimism carried thousands more west. Several years of above average rainfall convinced farmers that the Dakotas, western Nebraska and Kansas, and eastern Colorado were the “rain belt of the plains.” Between 1870 and 1900, the population on the plains tripled. In some areas, the newcomers were blacks who had fled the South, fed up with beatings and murders, crop liens, and the Black Codes that institutionalized their subordinate status. In 1879, about six thousand African Americans known as the Exodusters left their homes in Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas to establish new and freer lives in Kansas, the home of John Brown and the Free-Soil campaigns of the 1850s. Once there, they farmed or worked as laborers; women worked in the fields alongside the men or cleaned houses and took in washing to make ends meet. All told, the Exodusters homesteaded 20,000 acres of land, and though they met prejudice, it was not as extreme as they had known at home. “I asked my wife did she know the ground she stands on,” said John Solomon Lewis, a Louisianan, soon after arriving. “She said, ‘No!’ I said it is free ground; and she cried like a child for joy.” Other African Americans moved to Oklahoma, thinking they might establish the first African American state. Whether headed for Oklahoma or Kansas, they picked up and moved in sizable groups that were based on family units; they took with them the customs they had known, and in their new homes they were able, for the first time, to have some measure of self-government. For blacks and whites alike, farming on the plains presented new problems. There was little surface water, and wells ranged between 50 and 500 feet deep. Well drillers charged up to $2 a foot. Taking advantage of the steady plains winds, windmills brought the water to the surface, but they too were expensive, and until 1900, many farmers could not afford them. Lumber for homes and fences was also scarce. Unable to afford wood, farmers often started out in dreary sod houses. Cut into 3-foot sections, the thick prairie sod was laid like brick, with space left for two windows and a door. Since glass was scarce, cloth hung over the windows; a blanket was hung from the ceiling to make two rooms. Sod houses were small, provided little light and air, and were impossible to keep



 CHAPTER 17

THE WEST: EXPLOITING AN EMPIRE

 Disappointed with the failures of Reconstruction and fearful of the violence that surrounded them, many southern blacks migrated to Kansas in the 1870s and 1880s. Comparing their trek to the biblical story of the Israelites’ exodus from Egypt, they became known as Exodusters.

 clean. When it rained, water seeped through the roof. Yet a sod house cost only $2.78 to build. Outside, the plains environment sorely tested the men and women who moved there. Neighbors were distant; the land stretched on as far as the eye could see. Always the wind blew. “As long as I live I’ll never see such a lonely country,” a woman said of the Texas plains; a Nebraska woman said, “These unbounded prairies have such an air of desolation—and the stillness is very oppressive.” In the winters, savage storms swept the open grasslands. Ice caked on the cattle until their heads were too heavy to hold up. Summertime temperatures stayed near 110 degrees for weeks at a time. Fearsome rainstorms, building in the summer’s heat, beat down the young corn and wheat. The summers also brought grasshoppers, arriving without warning, flying in clouds so huge they shut out the sun. The grasshoppers ate everything in sight: crops, clothing, mosquito netting, tree bark, even plow handles. In the summer of 1874, they devastated the whole plains from Texas to the Dakotas, eating everything “but the mortgage,” as one farmer said.

New Farming Methods
 Farmers adopted new techniques to meet conditions on the plains. For one thing, they needed cheap and effective fencing material, and in 1874, Joseph F. Glidden, a farmer from De Kalb, Illinois, provided it with the invention of barbed wire. By 1883, his factory was turning out six hundred miles of barbed wire every day, and farmers were buying it faster than it could be produced. Dry farming, a new technique, helped compensate for the lack of rainfall. By plowing furrows twelve to fourteen inches deep and creating a dust mulch to fill the furrow, farmers loosened the soil and slowed evaporation. Wheat farmers imported European varieties of plants that could withstand the harsh plains winters. Hard-kerneled varieties such as Turkey red wheat from Russia required new milling methods, developed during the 1870s. By 1881, Minneapolis, St. Louis, and Kansas City had become milling centers for the rich “new process” flour. Farm technology changed long before the Civil War, but later developments improved it. In 1877, James Oliver of Indiana patented a chilled-iron plow with a smooth-surfaced moldboard that did not

The Bonanza West


 clog in the thick prairie soils. The spring-tooth harrow (1869) sped soil preparation; the grain drill (1874) opened furrows and scientifically fed seed into the ground. The lister (1880) dug a deep furrow, planted corn at the bottom, and covered the seed—all in one operation. The first baling press was built in 1866, and the hay loader was patented in 1876. The first successful harvester, the cord binder (1878), cut and tied bundles of grain, enabling two men and a team of horses to harvest 20 acres of wheat a day. Invented earlier, threshers grew larger; employing as many as nine men and ten horses, one machine could thresh 300 bushels of grain a day. In 1890, more than nine hundred corporations manufactured farm machinery. Scientific agriculture flourished under new discoveries linking soil minerals and plant growth. Samuel Johnson of Yale University published How Crops Grow (1868) and How Crops Feed (1870), and one of his students pioneered work on nitrogen, the base of many modern fertilizers. The Hatch Act, passed in 1887, supported agricultural experiment stations that spread the discoveries among farmers. Four years later, the stations employed more than 450 persons and distributed more than 300 published reports annually to some 350,000 readers. In the late 1870s, huge bonanza farms rose, run by the new machinery and financed with outside capital. Oliver Dalrymple, the most famous of the bonanza farmers, headed an experiment in North Dakota’s Red River Valley in 1875, then moved on to manage the

 Grandin Bonanza of 61,000 acres, five times the size of Manhattan Island. Dalrymple hired armies of workers, bought machinery by the carload, and planted on a scale that dazzled the West. The bonanza farms—thanks to their size and machinery— captured the country’s imagination. Using 200 pairs of harrows, 155 binders, and 16 threshers, Dalrymple produced 600,000 bushels of wheat in 1881. He and other bonanza managers profited from the economies of scale, buying materials at wholesale prices and receiving rebates from the railroads. Then a period of drought began. Rainfall dropped between 1885 and 1890, and the large-scale growers found it hard to compete with smaller farmers who diversified their crops and cultivated more intensively. Many of the large bonanzas slowly disintegrated, and Dalrymple himself went bankrupt in 1896.

Discontent on the Farm
 Touring the South in the 1860s, Oliver H. Kelley, a clerk in the Department of Agriculture, was struck by the drabness of rural life. In 1867, he founded the National Grange of the Patrons of Husbandry, known simply as the Grange. The Grange provided social, cultural, and educational activities for its members. Its constitution banned involvement in politics, but Grangers often ignored the rules and supported railroad regulation and other measures.

 CANADA

Gr


 ea

 t L ak e

 s

PACIFIC OCEAN ATLANTIC OCEAN

Gulf of Mexico
 MEXICO





 400 miles

 400 kilometers

Predominantly
 cropland

 Beef cattle

Corn


Tobacco


 Forest with scattered cropland and pasture

Dairying


Wheat


 Sugar cane

Predominantly
 grazing land

Sheep


Rice


Cotton


 Sparsely populated or nonproductive land

Hogs


Hay


Fruit


AGRICULTURAL LAND USE IN THE 1880S
more land to be put to productive use. 


 New farming technology and new crops enabled more and

Wine




 CHAPTER 17

THE WEST: EXPLOITING AN EMPIRE

 The Grange grew rapidly during the depression of the 1870s, and by 1875, it had more than eight hundred thousand members in twenty thousand local Granges. Most were in the Midwest and South. The Granges set up cooperative stores, grain elevators, warehouses, insurance companies, and farm machinery factories. Many failed, but in the meantime the organization made its mark. Picking up where the Grange left off, farm-oriented groups such as the Farmers’ Alliance, with branches in both South and West, began to attract followers. Like the cattle boom, the farming boom ended sharply after 1887. A severe drought that year cut harvests, and other droughts followed in 1889 and 1894. Thousands of new farmers were wiped out on the western plains. Between 1888 and 1892, more than half the population of western Kansas left. Farmers grew angry and restless. They complained about declining crop prices, rising railroad rates, and heavy mortgages. Although many farmers were unhappy, the peopling of the West in those years transformed American agriculture. The states beyond the Mississippi became the garden land of the nation. California sent fruit, wine, and wheat to eastern markets. Under the Mormons, Utah flourished with irrigation. Texas beef stocked the country’s tables, and vast wheat fields, stretching to the horizon, covered Minnesota, the Dakotas, Montana, and eastern Colorado. All produced more than Americans could consume. By 1890, American farmers were exporting large amounts of wheat and other crops. Farmers became more commercial and scientific. They needed to know more and work harder. Mail-order houses and rural free delivery diminished their isolation and tied them ever closer to the national future. “This is a new age to the farmer,” said a statistician in the Department of Agriculture in 1889. “He is now, more than ever before, a citizen of the world.”

 Guthrie to the north had fifteen thousand. Speculators swiftly erected pay toilets, and drinking water cost as much as a beer. The “Boomers” (those who waited for the signal) and “Sooners” (those who had jumped the gun) reflected the speed of western settlement. “Creation!” a character in Edna Ferber’s novel Cimarron declared. “Hell! That took six days. This was done in one. It was History made in an hour—and I helped make it.”

Conclusion: The Meaning
 of the West Between the Civil War and 1900, the West witnessed one of the greatest migrations in history. With the Native Americans driven into smaller and smaller areas, farms, ranches, mines, and cities took over the vast lands from the Mississippi to the Pacific.

Read the Document


Turner, “The Significance
 of the Frontier in American History”

The Final Fling
 As the West filled in with people, pressure mounted on the president and Congress to open the last Indian territory, Oklahoma, to settlers. In March 1889, Congress acted and forced the Creek and Seminole tribes, which had been moved into Oklahoma in the 1820s, to surrender their rights to the land. With arrangements complete, President Benjamin Harrison announced the opening of the Oklahoma District as of noon, April 22, 1889. Preparations were feverish all along the frontier. “From all the West,” historian Ray Allen Billington noted, “the homeless, the speculators, the adventurers, flocked to the still forbidden land.” On the morning of April 22, nearly a hundred thousand people lined the Oklahoma borders; “for miles on end horsemen, wagons, hacks, carriages, bicycles, and a host of vehicles beggaring description stood wheel to wheel awaiting the signal.” Fifteen Santa Fe trains were jammed with people from platform to roof. At noon, the starting flag dropped. Bugles and cannon signaled the opening of the “last” territory. Horsemen lunged forward; overloaded wagons collided and overturned. The trains steamed slowly forward, forced by army troops to keep a pace that would not give their passengers an undue advantage. By sunset that day, settlers claimed twelve thousand homesteads, and the 1.92 million acres of the Oklahoma District were officially settled. Homesteaders threw up shelters for the night. By evening, Oklahoma City, that morning merely a spot on the prairie with cottonwoods and grass, had ten thousand people;

 During a gathering of historians at the World’s Columbian Exhibition in Chicago in 1893, Frederick Jackson Turner presented an essay titled “The Significance of the Frontier in American History.” Turner’s article, also known as the Frontier Thesis, argued that the settlement of the frontier made the American nation unique. Turner credited the frontier’s settlement as the primary force in shaping the nation’s democratic institutions.

STUDY RESOURCES

 The 1890 census noted that for the first time in the country’s history, “there can hardly be said to be a frontier line.” Picking up the theme, Frederick Jackson Turner, a young history instructor at the University of Wisconsin, examined its importance in an influential 1893 paper, “The Significance of the Frontier in American History.” “The existence of an area of free land,” Turner wrote, “its continuous recession, and the advance of American settlement westward, explain American development.” It shaped customs and character; gave rise to independence, self-confidence, and individualism; and fostered invention and adaptation. Historians have substantially modified Turner’s thesis by pointing to frontier conservatism and imitativeness, the influence of varying racial groups, and the persistence of European ideas and institutions. Most recently, they have shown that family and community loomed as large as individualism on the frontier; men, women, and children played very much the same roles as they had back home. Rejecting Turner almost completely, a group of “new Western historians” has advanced a different and complex view of the West, and one with few heroes and heroines. Emphasizing the region’s racial and ethnic diversity, these historians emphasize the role of women as well as men, trace struggles between economic interests instead of fights between gunslingers, and question the impact of development



 on the environment. White English-speaking Americans, they suggest, could be said to have conquered the West rather than settled it. The West, in this view, was not settled by a wave of white migrants moving west across the continent (Turner’s “frontier”) but by a set of waves—Anglo, Mexican American, African American, Asian American, and others—moving in many directions and interacting with each other and with Native American cultures to produce the modern West. Nor did western history end in 1890 as Turner would have it. Instead, migration, development, and economic exploitation continued into the twentieth century, illustrated in the fact that the number of people who moved to the West after 1900 far exceeded those who had moved there before. In both the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, there can be no doubt that the image of the frontier and the West influenced American development. Western lands attracted European, Latin American, and Asian immigrants, adding to the society’s talent and diversity. The mines, forests, and farms of the West fueled the economy, sent raw materials to eastern factories, and fed the growing cities. Though defeated in warfare, the Native Americans and Mexicans influenced art, architecture, law, and western folklore. The West was the first American empire, and it had a profound impact on the American mind and imagination.

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 17 The West: Exploiting an Empire on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1849
Gold Rush to California 1859 More gold and silver discoveries in Colorado and Nevada 1862 Congress passes Homestead Act encouraging western settlement 1864 Nevada admitted to the Union; Colonel John Chivington leads massacre of Indians at Sand Creek, Colorado 1865–1867 Sioux War against white miners and U.S. Army 1866 “Long drive” of cattle touches off cattle bonanzas 1867 Horace Greeley urges Easterners to “Go West, young man”; National Grange of the Patrons of Husbandry (the Grange) founded to enrich farmers’ lives 1867–1868 Policy of “small reservations” for Indians adopted 1873 Congress passes Timber Culture Act; Big bonanza discovered on the Comstock Lode in Nevada 1874 Joseph F. Glidden invents barbed wire; Discovery of gold in Dakota Territory sets off Black Hills Gold Rush 
 1876 Colorado admitted to the Union; Custer and his men defeated and killed by the Sioux at battle of the Little Bighorn (June) 1883 Museum expedition discovers fewer than two hundred buffalo in the West 1886–1887 Severe drought and winter damage cattle and farming bonanzas 1887 Congress passes Dawes Severalty Act, making Indians individual landowners; Hatch Act provides funds for establishment of agricultural experiment stations 1889 Washington, Montana, and the Dakotas admitted to the Union; Oklahoma Territory opened to settlement 1890 Idaho and Wyoming admitted to the Union; Teton Sioux massacred at battle of Wounded Knee, South Dakota (December) 1893 Young historian Frederick Jackson Turner analyzes closing of the frontier 1902 Congress passes National Reclamation Act (the Newlands Act)



 CHAPTER 8

CHAPTER REVIEW

CHAPTER REVIEW
Beyond the Frontier What were the challenges of settling the country west of the Mississippi? West of the Mississippi River, settlers encountered new conditions, including vast treeless plains and towering mountain ranges. Above all, they left behind the water and timber on which they had depended in the East, forcing them to devise new ways to deal with the different challenges. (p. 391) 
Settlement of the West
 Why did Americans and others move to the West? Americans moved west for many reasons, including a desire to get rich, seek religious freedom, and improve health. The federal government helped out with generous land laws and laws favoring irrigation in the arid West. In the Southwest a proud culture took shape around Spanish laws and customs, involving water, the rights of women, and the sale, ownership, and use of land. (p. 400)

Crushing the Native Americans
The Bonanza West
 How did white Americans crush the culture of the Native Americans as they moved west? Native Americans had a complex culture suited to the various environments in which they lived. The United States government and white settlers employed various methods— political, military, legal, and cultural—to oust the Indians from their lands, “civilize” them, and contain and control them. (p. 392)

 Why was the West a bonanza of dreams and get-rich-quick schemes? The West attracted many people seeking a better economic life. Many failed, but others found bonanzas in mining, cattle ranching, and farming. In many of these areas, western development paralleled trends in the rest of the nation: larger and larger businesses, new uses for technology, and the employment of outside capital. (p. 403)

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Ghost Dances A religious movement that arose in the late nineteenth century under the prophet Wavoka, a Paiute Indian. Its followers believed that dances and rites would cause white men to disappear and restore lands to the Native Americans. The U.S. government outlawed the Ghost Dances, and army intervention to stop them led to the Wounded Knee Massacre. p. 396 Wounded Knee Massacre In December 1890, troopers of the Seventh Cavalry, under orders to stop the Ghost Dance religion among the Sioux, took Chief Big Foot and his followers to a camp on Wounded Knee Creek in South Dakota. It is uncertain who fired the first shot, but two hundred Native Americans were killed. p. 396 Dawes Severalty Act Legislation passed by Congress in 1887 that aimed to break up traditional Indian life by promoting individual land ownership. It divided tribal lands into small plots that were distributed among members of each tribe. Provisions were made for education and eventual citizenship. The law led to corruption and exploitation and weakened tribal culture. p. 397 Gold Rush of 1849 Prospectors made the first gold strikes along the Sierra Nevada Mountains in California in 1849, touching off a mining boom that set the pattern for subsequent strikes in other regions. p. 401 Overland Trail The route from the Mississippi Valley to the Pacific Coast in the last half of the nineteenth century. p. 401 Homestead Act of 1862 Legislation granting 160 acres to anyone who paid a $10 fee and pledged to live on and cultivate the land for five years. Between 1862 and 1900, nearly 600,000 families claimed homesteads under its provisions. p. 402 National Reclamation Act (Newlands Act) Passed in 1902, this legislation set aside most of the proceeds from the sale of public land in sixteen western states to fund irrigation projects. p. 402 Placer mining Mining that included using a shovel and washing pan to separate gold from the ore in streams and riverbeds. Placer miners worked as individuals or in small groups. p. 404 
 Comstock Lode Discovered in 1859 near Virginia City, Nevada, this ore deposit was the richest discovery in the history of mining. Named after T. P. Comstock, the deposit produced silver and gold worth more than $306 million. p. 404 Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 Legislation passed in 1882 that excluded Chinese immigrants for ten years and denied U.S. citizenship to Chinese nationals. It was the first U.S. exclusionary law aimed at a specific racial group. p. 405 Exodusters A group of about 6,000 African Americans who left Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas in 1879, for freer lives as farmers or laborers in Kansas. p. 406 Dry farming A farming technique developed to allow farming in the more arid parts of the West where settlers had to deal with far less rainfall than they had east of the Mississippi. Furrows were plowed approximately a foot deep and filled with a dust mulch to loosen soil and slow evaporation. p. 408 Bonanza farms Huge farms covering thousands of acres on the Great Plains. In relying on large size and new machinery, they represented a development in agriculture similar to that taking place in industry. p. 409 National Grange of the Patrons of Husbandry Founded by Oliver H. Kelly in 1867, the Grange sought to relieve the drabness of farm life by providing a social, educational, and cultural outlet for its members. It also set up grain elevators, cooperative stores, warehouses, insurance companies, and farm machinery factories. p. 409 Turner’s thesis Put forth by historian Frederick Jackson Turner in 1893, this thesis asserted that the existence of a frontier and its settlement had shaped American character; given rise to individualism, independence, and self-confidence; and fostered the American spirit of invention and adaptation. Later historians modified the thesis by pointing out the environmental and other consequences of frontier settlement, the federal government’s role in peopling the West, and the clash of races and cultures that took place on the frontier. p. 411

STUDY RESOURCES



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
What kinds of conditions did settlers find as they moved into lands west of the Mississippi River, and how had the peoples who already lived there dealt with these conditions? 
 2. What was the nature of Indian culture on the Plains, and how did it deal with the hordes of settlers moving into the area?

 3. By what methods did settlers move west and adjust to the “bonanzas” they found in the West and Southwest?

 4. What were the three bonanzas that drew settlers into the West, and in what ways did they lead to the destruction of Native American culture and shape the growth of the area?

 MyHistoryLab y sto y ab Media ed a Assignments ss g e ts Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 17 on MyHistoryLab Crushing the Native Americans ◾

View the Map


Read the Document


Native Americans, 1850–1896 p. 394


Read the Document


◾


Settlement of the West


Watch the Video


 Chief Red Cloud’s Speech p. 395

Homestead Act of 1862 p. 402


The Bonanza West
Read the Document


Sioux Ghost Dance p. 396


John Lester, “Hydraulic Mining”


 p. 404 Read the Document

Accounts of the Wounded Knee


View the Closer Look


Railroad Routes, Cattle
Trails, Gold and Silver Rushes p. 407


Massacre p. 397


◾
◾


Complete the Assignment
Soldiers in the West p. 398
View the Closer Look


Blacks in Blue: The Buffalo


Railroad and Buffalo p. 400


◾


Read the Document


Turner, “The Significance of the
Frontier in American History” p. 410


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




The Industrial Society


Contents and Learning Objectives
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT PG. 416

THE WAGE EARNERS PG. 428

 What enabled the United States to build an industrial economy?

 Who were the wage earners in the new economy?

AN EMPIRE ON RAILS PG. 416

 How did wage earners organize in this period, and what demands did they make?

CULTURE OF WORK PG. 430

 How and why did the railroad system grow?

AN INDUSTRIAL EMPIRE PG. 421
What were the main characteristics of the new steel and oil industries? 
FEATURE ESSAY
Shopping in a New Society 
THE SELLERS PG. 428
Why were the new methods of advertising so important? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

