Chapter 26 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal


The Struggle Against Despair
 Oscar Heline never forgot the terrible waste of the Great Depression. “Grain was being burned,” he told interviewer Studs Terkel. “It was cheaper than coal.” Heline lived in Iowa, in the heart of the farm belt. “A county just east of here, they burned corn in their courthouse all winter. . . . You couldn’t hardly buy groceries for corn.” Farmers, desperate for higher prices, resorted to destruction. As Heline recalled, “People were determined to withhold produce from the market—livestock, cream, butter, eggs, what not. If they would dump the produce, they would force the market to a higher level. The farmers would man the highways, and cream cans were emptied in ditches and eggs dumped out. They burned the trestle bridge, so the trains wouldn’t be able to haul grain.” Film critic Pauline Kael recounted a different memory of the 1930s. Kael was a college student in California during the Great Depression, and was struck by the number of students who were missing fathers. “They had wandered off in disgrace because they couldn’t support their families. Other fathers had killed themselves, so the family could have the insurance. Families had totally broken down.” Kael and many of her classmates struggled to stay in school. “There were kids who didn’t have a place to sleep, huddling under bridges on the campus. I had a scholarship, but there were times when I didn’t have any food. The meals were often three candy bars.” Howard Worthington resorted to trickery after losing his job in Chicago. One Easter Sunday during

 the depression, when his son was four years old, Worthington couldn’t afford enough eggs for a proper egg hunt. So he devised a plan. “I hid a couple in the piano and all around. Tommy got his little Easter basket, and as he would find the eggs, I’d steal ’em out of the basket and rehide them. . . . He hunted Easter eggs for three hours and he never knew the difference.” o American who lived through the Great Depression ever forgot the experience. As the stories of Heline, Kael, and Worthington show, the individual memories were of hard times, but also of determination, adaptation, and survival. The depression decade had an equally profound effect on American institutions. To cope with the problems of poverty and dislocation, Americans looked to government as never before, and in doing so transformed American politics and public life. The agent of the transformation—the man America turned to in its moment of trial—was Franklin D. Roosevelt. His answer to the country’s demands for action was an ambitious program of relief and reform called the New Deal.

N


The Great Depression
 What were the causes and effects of the Great Depression? The depression of the 1930s came as a shock to Americans who had grown used to the prosperity of the 1920s. The consumer revolution of that earlier decade had fostered a general confidence that the American way of life would continue to improve. But following the collapse of the stock market in late 1929, factories

 During the Great Depression, market prices for produce were so low that farmers could scarcely afford to harvest their crops. Many resorted to destroying produce in an attempt to limit supplies and force prices higher, such as these striking dairy farmers in Illinois dumping cans of milk into the street.

 closed, machines fell silent, and millions of Americans walked the streets looking for jobs that didn’t exist.

The Great Crash
 The consumer goods revolution contained the seeds of its own demise. The productive capacity of the automobile and appliance industries grew faster than the effective demand. Each year after 1924, the rate of increase in the sale of cars and refrigerators and ranges slowed, a natural consequence as more and more people already owned these durable goods. Production began to falter, and in 1927, the nation underwent a mild recession. The sale of durable goods declined, and construction of houses and buildings fell slightly. If corporate leaders had heeded these warning signs, they might have responded by raising wages or lowering prices, both effective ways to stimulate purchasing power and sustain the consumer goods revolution. Or if government officials had

 recognized the danger signals and forced a halt in installment buying and slowed bank loans, the nation might have experienced a sharp but brief depression. Neither government nor business leaders were so farsighted. The Federal Reserve Board lowered the discount rate, charging banks less for loans in an attempt to stimulate the economy. Much of this additional credit, however, went not into solid investment in factories and machinery but instead into the stock market, touching off a new wave of speculation that obscured the growing economic slowdown and ensured a far greater crash to come. Individuals with excess cash began to invest heavily in the stock market, betting the already impressive rise in security prices would bring them even greater windfall profits. The market had advanced in spurts during the decade; the value of all stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange rose from $27 billion in 1925 to $67 billion in early 1929. The strongest surge began in the spring of 1928, when investors ignored the declining production figures in



 CHAPTER 26

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT AND THE NEW DEAL

View the Map The Great Depression


U.S. UNEMPLOYMENT, 1929–1942
Millions 
New Deal
Recovery




Stock
Market
Crash


World War II
Begins


FDR
Inaugurated President Recession 


1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940


 the belief they could make a killing in the market. People bet their savings on speculative stocks. Corporations used their large cash reserves to supply money to brokers who in turn loaned it to investors on margin; in 1929, for example, the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey loaned out $69 million a day in this fashion. Investors could now play the market on credit, buying stock listed at $100 a share with $10 down and $90 on margin, the broker’s loan for the balance. If the stock advanced to $150, the investor could sell and reap a gain of 500 percent on the $10 investment. And in the bull market climate of the 1920s, everyone was sure the market would go up. By 1929, it seemed the whole nation was engaged in speculation. In city after city, brokers opened branch offices, each complete with a stock ticker and a huge board covered with the latest Wall Street quotations. People crowded into the customers’ rooms in the offices, filling the seats and greeting the latest advances of their favorite stocks with shouts of approval. So great was the public’s interest in the stock market that newspapers carried the stock averages on their front pages. In reality, though, more people were spectators than speculators; fewer than three million Americans owned stocks in 1929, and only about a half million were active buyers and sellers. But the bull market became a national obsession, assuring everyone that the economy was healthy and preventing any serious analysis of its underlying flaws. When the market soared to more than $80 billion in total value by mid-summer, the Wall Street Journal discounted any possibility of a decline, proclaiming, “The outlook for the fall months seems brighter than at any time.” And then things changed, almost overnight. On October 24— later known as Black Thursday—the rise in stock prices faltered, and when it did investors nervously began to sell. Such leading stocks as RCA and Westinghouse plunged, losing nearly half their value in a single day. Speculators panicked as their creditors demanded new collateral, and the panic caused prices to plummet still further.

 Within weeks the gains of the previous two years had vanished. The great crash of the stock market soon spilled over into the larger economy. Banks and other financial institutions suffered heavy losses in the market and were forced to curtail lending for consumer purchases. As consumers came up short, factories cut back production, laying off some workers and reducing hours for others. The layoffs and cutbacks lowered purchasing power even further, so fewer people bought cars and appliances. More factory layoffs resulted, and some plants closed entirely, leading to U.S. Enters World War II the availability of even less money for the December 1941 purchase of consumer goods. This downward economic spiral continued for four years. By 1932, unemployment had swelled to 25 percent of the workforce. Steel production was down to 12 percent of capacity, and the vast assembly lines in Detroit 1941 1942 produced only a trickle of cars each day. The gross national product fell to 67 percent of the 1929 level. The bright promise of mass production had ended in a nightmare. The basic explanation for the Great Depression lies in the fact that U.S. factories produced more goods than the American people could consume. The problem was not that the market for such products was fully saturated. In 1929, there were still millions of Americans who did not own cars or radios or refrigerators, but many of them could not afford the new products. There were other contributing causes—unstable economic conditions in Europe, the agricultural decline since 1919, corporate mismanagement, and excessive speculation—but it all came down to the fact that people did not have enough money to buy the consumer products coming off the assembly lines. Installment sales helped bridge the gap, but by 1929 the burden of debt was just too great. The new economic system had failed to distribute wealth more broadly. Too much money had gone into profits, dividends, and industrial expansion, and not enough had gone into the hands of the workers, who were also consumers. Factory productivity had increased 43 percent during the decade, but the wages of industrial workers had gone up only 11 percent. If the billions that went into stock market speculation had been used instead to increase wages—which would then have increased consumer purchasing power—production and consumption could have been brought into balance. Yet it is too much to expect that the prophets of the new era could have foreseen this flaw and corrected it. They were pioneering a new industrial system, and only out of the bitter experience of the Great Depression would they discover the full dynamics of the consumer goods economy.

Effect of the Depression
 It is difficult to measure the human cost of the Great Depression. The material hardships were bad enough. Men and women lived in lean-tos made of scrap wood and metal, and families went without

The Great Depression


 meat and fresh vegetables for months, existing on a diet of soup and beans. The psychological burden was even greater: Americans suffered through year after year of grinding poverty with no letup in sight. The unemployed stood in line for hours waiting for relief checks; veterans sold apples or pencils on street corners, their manhood—once prized so highly by the nation—now in question. People left the city for the countryside but found no salvation on the farm. Crops rotted in the fields because prices were too low to make harvesting worthwhile; sheriffs fended off angry crowds as banks foreclosed long-overdue mortgages on once prosperous farms. Few escaped the suffering. African Americans who had left the poverty of the rural South for factory jobs in the North were

View the Closer Look




 among the first to be laid off. Mexican immigrants, who had flowed in to replace European immigrants, met with competition from angry citizens now willing to do stoop labor in the fields and work as track layers on the railroads. Immigration officials used technicalities to halt the flow across the Rio Grande and even to reverse it; nearly a half million Mexicans were deported in the 1930s, including families with children born in the United States. The poor—black, brown, and white—survived because they knew better than most Americans how to exist in poverty. They stayed in bed in cold weather, both to keep warm and to avoid unnecessary burning up of calories; they patched their shoes with pieces of rubber from discarded tires, heated only

Homeless Shantytown, Seattle, 1937


 Urban shantytowns, often called “Hoovervilles,” named after President Herbert Hoover, were built by homeless men and women during the Great Depression. These settlements were composed of shacks and tents and often constructed on empty urban land near soup kitchens.



 CHAPTER 26

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT AND THE NEW DEAL

Read the Document


Women on the Breadlines


 The Great Depression devastated millions who lost their jobs and often then the means to provide food and shelter for themselves and their families. Overwhelmed local and private charities could not keep up with the demands for assistance, and many looked to the federal government for direct relief from their suffering. Breadlines stretched as far as the eye could see as impoverished workers lined up in the hope of obtaining some meager rations for their hungry families.

 the kitchens of their homes, and ate scraps of food that others would reject. The middle class, which had always lived with high expectations, was hit hard. Professionals and white-collar workers refused to ask for charity even while their families went without food; one New York dentist and his wife turned on the gas and left a note saying, “We want to get out of the way before we are forced to accept relief money.” People who fell behind in their mortgage payments lost their homes and then faced eviction when they could not pay the rent. Health care declined. Middle-class people stopped going to doctors and dentists regularly, unable to make the required cash payment in advance for services rendered. Even the well-to-do were affected, giving up many of their former luxuries and weighed down with guilt as they watched former friends and business associates join the ranks of the impoverished. “My father lost everything in the depression” became an all-toofamiliar refrain among young people who dropped out of college. Many Americans sought escape in movement. Men, boys, and some women rode the rails in search of jobs, hopping freights

 to move south in the winter or west in the summer. On the Missouri Pacific alone, the number of vagrants increased from just over 13,000 in 1929 to nearly 200,000 in 1931. One town in the Southwest hired special police to keep vagrants from leaving the boxcars. Those who became tramps had to keep on the move, but they did find a sense of community in the hobo jungles that sprang up along the major railroad routes. Here the unfortunate could find a place to eat and sleep, and people with whom to share their misery. Louis Banks, a black veteran, told interviewer Studs Terkel what these informal camps were like: Black and white, it didn’t make any difference who you were, ‘cause everybody was poor. All friendly, sleep in a jungle. We used to take a big pot and cook food, cabbage, meat and beans all together. We all set together, we made a tent. Twenty-five or thirty would be out on the side of the rail, white and colored: They didn’t have no mothers or sisters, they didn’t have no home, they were dirty, they had overalls on, they didn’t have no food, they didn’t have anything.

Fighting the Depression


Fighting the Depression
 How did Franklin Roosevelt fight the Depression? The Great Depression presented an enormous challenge for American political leadership. The inability of the Republicans to overcome the economic catastrophe provided the Democrats with the chance to regain power. Although they failed to achieve full recovery before the outbreak of World War II, the Democrats did succeed in alleviating some of the suffering and establishing political dominance.



 Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), which Congress established in early 1932. The RFC loaned government money to financial institutions to save them from bankruptcy. Hoover’s critics, however, pointed out that while he favored aid to business, he still opposed measures such as direct relief and massive public works that would help the millions of unemployed. By 1932, Hoover’s efforts to overcome the depression had clearly failed. The Democrats had gained control of the House of

Watch the Video


Dorothea Lange and Migrant Mother


Hoover and Voluntarism
 Herbert Hoover was the Great Depression’s most prominent victim. When the economic downturn began in late 1929, he tried to rally the nation with bold forecasts of better days ahead. His repeated assertion that prosperity was just around the corner bred cynicism and mistrust. Expressing complete faith in the American economic system, Hoover blamed the depression on foreign causes, especially unstable European banks. The president rejected proposals for bold government action and relied instead on voluntary cooperation within business to halt the slide. He called the leaders of industry to the White House and secured their agreement to maintain prices and wages at high levels. Yet within a few months, employers were reducing wages and cutting prices in a desperate effort to survive. Hoover also believed in voluntary efforts to relieve the human suffering brought about by the depression. He called on private charities and local governments to help feed and clothe those in need. But when these sources were exhausted, he rejected all requests for direct federal relief, asserting that such handouts would undermine the character of proud American citizens. As the depression deepened, Hoover reluctantly began to move beyond voluntarism to undertake more sweeping government measures. A new Federal Farm Board loaned money to aid cooperatives and bought up surplus crops in the open market in a vain effort to raise farm prices. At Hoover’s request, Congress cut taxes in an attempt to restore public confidence and adopted a few federal public works projects, such as Boulder (Hoover) Dam, to provide jobs for idle men. To help imperiled banks and insurance companies, Hoover proposed the

 Dorothea Lange was a documentary photographer whose work for the New Deal agencies, the Resettlement Administration (RA) and the Farm Security Administration (FSA), highlighted and sympathized with the plight of poor and displaced sharecroppers, farm families, and migrant worker families (above) during the Great Depression.



 CHAPTER 26

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT AND THE NEW DEAL

BANK FAILURES, 1929–1933















 Source: Data compiled from C. D. Bremer, American Bank Failures (New York: Columbia University Press, 1935), p. 42.

 Representatives in the 1930 elections and were pressing the president to take bolder action, but Hoover stubbornly resisted. His public image suffered its sharpest blow in the summer of 1932 when he ordered General Douglas MacArthur to clear out the bonus army. This ragged group of some twenty-two thousand World War I veterans had come to Washington in the summer of 1932 to lobby Congress to pay immediately a bonus for military service that was due them in 1945. After the Senate rejected the bonus bill, some of the veterans stayed in Washington, living in ramshackle huts in Anacostia Flats along the Potomac. Mounted troops drove the bonus army out of the capital, blinding the veterans with tear gas and burning their shacks. Meanwhile, the nation’s banking structure approached collapse. Bank failures rose steadily in 1931 and 1932 as customers responded to rumors of bankruptcy by rushing in to withdraw their deposits. The banking crisis completed the nation’s disenchantment with Hoover; people were ready for a new leader in the White House.

 a winning smile; and a buoyant confidence he could easily transmit to others. Some believed he was too vain and superficial as a young man, but his bout with polio gave him both an understanding of human suffering and a broad political appeal as a man who had faced heavy odds and overcome them. He understood the give-and-take of politics, knew how to use flattery to win over doubters, and was especially effective in exploiting the media, whether in bantering with newspaper reporters or reaching out to the American people on the radio. Although his mind was quick and agile, he had little patience with philosophical nuances; he dealt with the appearance of issues, not their deeper substance, and he displayed a flexibility toward political principles that often dismayed even his warmest admirers. Roosevelt took advantage of the opportunity offered by the Great Depression. With the Republicans discredited, he cultivated the two wings of the divided Democrats, appealing to both the traditionalists from the South and West and the new urban elements in the North. After winning the party’s nomination in 1932, he broke with tradition by flying to Chicago and accepting in person, telling the cheering delegates, “I pledge you—I pledge myself to a new deal for the American people.” In the fall, he defeated Herbert Hoover in a near landslide for the Democrats. Roosevelt tallied 472 electoral votes as he swept the South and West and carried nearly all the large industrial states as well. Farmers and workers, Protestants and Catholics, immigrants and native born rallied behind the new leader who promised to restore prosperity. Roosevelt not only met the challenge of the depression but also solidified the shift to the Democratic Party and created an enduring coalition that would dominate American politics for a half century.

Election of 1932
Electoral Vote by State


The Emergence of Roosevelt
 The man who came forward to meet this national need was Franklin D. Roosevelt. Born into the old Dutch colonial aristocracy of New York, FDR was a distant cousin of the Republican Teddy. He grew up with all the advantages of wealth: private tutors, his own sailboat and pony, frequent trips to Europe, and education at Groton and Harvard. His strong-willed mother smoothed all the obstacles in the path of her only child and gave him a priceless sense of inner security. After graduation from Harvard, he briefly attended law school but left to plunge into politics. He served in the New York legislature and then went to Washington as assistant secretary of the navy under Wilson, a post he filled capably during World War I. Defeated as the Democratic vice presidential candidate in 1920, Roosevelt had just begun a banking career when he suffered an attack of polio in the summer of 1921. Refusing to give in, he fought back bravely, and though he never again walked unaided, he reentered politics in the mid-1920s and was elected governor of New York in 1928. Roosevelt’s dominant trait was his ability to persuade and convince other people. He possessed a marvelous voice, deep and rich;

Popular Vote


DEMOCRATIC
Franklin D. Roosevelt 


22,821,857


REPUBLICAN
Herbert C. Hoover 


15,761,841


1,153,306


MINOR PARTIES

39,737,004












































































Fighting the Depression


PRESIDENTIAL VOTING IN CHICAGO BY ETHNIC GROUPS, 1924–1932 (PERCENTAGE DEMOCRATIC)
Czechoslovakians Poles Lithuanians Yugoslavs Italians Germans Jews 






Source: John M. Allswang, A House for All Peoples: Ethnic Politics in Chicago,
1890–1936 (Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 1971).


The Hundred Days




 people could safely put their money back into these institutions. The next day, March 13, the nation’s largest and strongest banks opened their doors; at the end of the day, customers had deposited more cash than they withdrew. The crisis was over; gradually, other banks opened, and the runs and failures ceased. “Capitalism was saved in eight days,” boasted one of Roosevelt’s advisers. Most surprising was the conservative nature of FDR’s action. Instead of nationalizing the banks, he had simply thrown the government’s resources behind them and preserved private ownership. Though some other New Deal measures would be more radical, Roosevelt set a tone in the banking crisis. He was out to reform and restore the American economic system, not change it drastically. He drew on the progressive tradition and his experience with World War I mobilization to fashion a moderate program of government action. For the next three months, until it adjourned in June, Congress responded to a series of presidential initiatives. During these “Hundred Days,” Roosevelt sent fifteen major requests to Congress and received back fifteen pieces of legislation. A few created agencies that have become a part of American life. The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) was one of the most ambitious of Roosevelt’s New Deal measures. This innovative effort at regional planning resulted in the building of a series of dams in seven states to control floods, ease navigation, and produce electricity.

 When Franklin Roosevelt took the oath of office on March 4, 1933, the nation’s economy was on the brink of collapse. Unemployment stood at nearly thirteen million, one-fourth of the labor force; banks were closed in thirty-eight states. On inauguration morning, the governors of New York and Illinois closed the banks in the nation’s two largest cities, thus bringing the country’s financial transactions to a halt. Speaking from the steps of the Capitol, FDR declared boldly, Watch the Video FDR’s Inauguration “First of all, let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself—nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror.” Then he announced he would call Congress into special session and request “broad executive power to wage a war against the emergency, as great as the power that would be given to me if we were in fact invaded by a foreign foe.” Within the next ten days, Roosevelt won his first great New Deal victory by saving the nation’s banks. On March 5, he issued a decree closing the banks and called Congress back into session. His aides drafted new banking legislation and presented it to Congress on March 9; a few hours later, both houses passed it, and FDR signed the new legislation that evening. The measure provided for government supervision and aid to the banks. Strong ones would be reopened with federal support, weak ones closed, and those in difficulty bolstered by government loans. On March 12, FDR addressed the nation by radio in the first of his fireside chats. In conversational tones, he told the public what he had done. Some banks would begin to reopen the next day, with Franklin Roosevelt’s presidential inaugural on March 4, 1933 marked the beginning of a frenzied and the government standing behind them. dramatic effort by the president and Congress to save the nation’s economy and capitalism itself from Other banks, once they became solvent, complete collapse. President Roosevelt’s inaugural speech offered a bold and optimistic confidence that would open later, and the American Americans would recover from their desperate economic woes.



 CHAPTER 26

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT AND THE NEW DEAL

View the Map


The Tennessee Valley Authority


Ohio R.


WEST VIRGINIA

ILL. KENTUCKY

Paducah
 VIRGINIA

Bristol


.
 berland R Cum

Nashville


Knoxville
Asheville


 TENNESSEE

Tenne
 s

Muscle
Shoals


 see

R.


NORTH CAROLINA

Chattanooga


SOUTH CAROLINA GEORGIA

 ALABAMA





 100 miles 100 kilometers

 Tennessee River watershed Major TVA dams

THE TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY
The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) served a seven-state region in the Southeast. Developing such a vast project required federal funding and management, both of which were provided through a federally owned corporation. Although critics lamented the cost of the project and its impact on the environment and certain local communities, it went far toward bringing one of the most underdeveloped parts of the country into the modern era. Other New Deal agencies were temporary in nature, designed to meet the specific economic problems of the depression. None were completely successful; the depression would continue for another six years, immune even to Roosevelt’s magic. But psychologically, the nation turned the corner in the spring of 1933. Under FDR, the government seemed to be responding to the economic crisis, enabling people for the first time since 1929 to look to the future with hope. 
Roosevelt and Recovery
 Two major New Deal programs launched during the Hundred Days were aimed at industrial and agricultural recovery. The first was the National Recovery Administration (NRA), FDR’s attempt to achieve economic advance through planning and cooperation among government, business, and labor. In the midst of the depression, business owners were intent on stabilizing production and raising prices for their goods. Labor leaders were equally determined to spread work through maximum hours and to put a floor under workers’ income with minimum wages. The NRA hoped to achieve both goals by permitting companies in each major industry to cooperate in writing codes of fair competition that would set realistic limits on production, allocate percentages to individual producers, and set firm guidelines for prices. Section 7a of the enabling act mandated protection for labor in all the codes by establishing maximum

 hours, minimum wages, and the guarantee of collective bargaining by unions. No company could be compelled to join, but the New Deal sought complete participation by appealing to patriotism. Each firm that took part could display a blue eagle and stamp the symbol on its products. With energetic Hugh Johnson in charge, the NRA quickly enrolled the nation’s leading companies and unions. By the summer of 1933, more than five hundred industries had adopted codes that covered 2.5 million workers. The NRA quickly bogged down in a huge bureaucratic morass. The codes proved to be too detailed to enforce easily. Written by the largest companies, the rules favored big business at the expense of smaller competitors. Labor quickly became disenchanted with Section 7a. The minimum wages were often near starvation level, while business avoided the requirement for collective bargaining by creating company unions that did not represent the real needs of workers. After a brief upsurge in the spring of 1933, industrial production began to sag as disillusionment with the NRA grew. By 1934, more and more business owners were complaining about the new agency, calling it the “National Run Around.” When the Supreme Court finally invalidated the NRA in 1935 on constitutional grounds, few mourned its demise. The idea of trying to overcome the depression by relying on voluntary cooperation between competing businesses and labor leaders had collapsed in the face of individual self-interest and greed. The New Deal’s attempt at farm recovery fared a little better. Henry A. Wallace, FDR’s secretary of agriculture, came up with an answer to the farmers’ old dilemma of overproduction. The government would act as a clearinghouse for producers of major crops, arranging for them to set production limits for wheat, cotton, corn, and other leading crops. The Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA), created by Congress in May 1933, would allocate acreage among individual farmers, encouraging them to take land out of production by paying them subsidies (raised by a tax on food processors). Unfortunately, Wallace preferred not to wait until the 1934 planting season to implement this program, and so farmers were paid in 1933 to plow under crops they had already planted and to kill livestock they were raising. Faced with the problem of hunger in the midst of plenty, the New Deal seemed to respond by destroying the plenty. The AAA program worked better in 1934 and 1935 as land removed from production led to smaller harvests and rising farm prices. Farm income rose for the first time since World War I, increasing from $2 billion in 1933 to $5 billion by 1935. Severe weather, especially Dust Bowl conditions on the Great Plains, contributed to the crop-limitation program, but most of the gain in farm income came from the subsidy payments themselves rather than from higher market prices. On the whole, large farmers benefited most from the program. Possessing the capital to buy machinery and fertilizer, they were able to farm more efficiently than before on fewer acres of land. Small farmers, tenants, and sharecroppers did not fare as well, receiving very little of the government payments and often being driven off the land as owners took the acreage previously cultivated by tenants and sharecroppers out of production. Some three million people left the land in the 1930s, crowding into the cities where they swelled the relief rolls. In the long run, the New Deal reforms improved the efficiency of American agriculture, but at a real human cost.

Fighting the Depression


 WYOMING

IOWA NEBRASKA

Denver
Topeka
 COLORADO

MO KANSAS

 OKLAHOMA

Santa Fe


 AR

Oklahoma
City


NEW MEXICO

 LA

 TEXAS

Austin


 MEXICO

Areas of Wind Erosion
1935–1940
Severe
Most Severe


THE DUST BOWL
Drought and soil erosion brought on by overfarming turned the agricultural land of the Great Plains into a giant dust bowl during the 1930s. Especially hard hit were western Kansas and Oklahoma, eastern Colorado, and the Texas Panhandle. Giant dust storms forced many farmers to abandon their land. 
 The Supreme Court eventually found the AAA unconstitutional in 1936, but Congress reenacted it in modified form that year and again in 1938. The system of allotments, now financed directly by the government, became a standard feature of the farm economy. Other New Deal efforts to assist the rural poor, notably the Farm Security Administration (FSA), sought to loan money to tenants and sharecroppers so they could acquire land of their own, but the sums appropriated by Congress were too modest. The FSA was able to extend loans to fewer than 2 percent of the nation’s tenant farmers. “Obviously,” the FSA director informed Roosevelt, “this . . . program can be regarded as only an experimental approach to the farm tenancy problem.” The result of the New Deal for American farming was to hasten its transformation into a business in which only the efficient and well capitalized would thrive.

Roosevelt and Relief
 The New Deal was far more successful in meeting the most immediate problem of the 1930s—relief for the millions of unemployed and destitute citizens. Roosevelt never shared Hoover’s distaste for direct federal support; on May 12, 1933, in response to FDR’s March request, Congress authorized the RFC to distribute $500 million to the states to help individuals and families in need. Roosevelt brought in Harry Hopkins to direct the relief program. A former social worker who seemed to live on black coffee and cigarettes, Hopkins set up a desk in the hallway of the RFC building and proceeded to spend more than $5 million in less than



 two hours. By the end of 1933, Hopkins had cut through red tape to distribute money to nearly one-sixth of the American people. The relief payments were modest in size, but they enabled millions to avoid starvation and stay out of humiliating breadlines. Another, more imaginative early effort was the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), which was Roosevelt’s own idea. The CCC enrolled young males from city families on relief and sent them to work on the nation’s public lands, cutting trails, planting trees, building bridges, and paving roads. Ultimately, more than two million young people served in the CCC, contributing both to their families’ incomes and to the nation’s welfare. Hopkins realized the need to do more than just keep people alive, and he soon became an advocate of work relief. Hopkins argued that the government should put the jobless to work, not just to encourage self-respect, but also to enable them to earn enough to purchase consumer goods and thus stimulate the entire economy. A Public Works Administration (PWA) headed by Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes had been authorized in 1933, but Ickes, intent on the quality of the projects rather than human needs, failed to put many people to work. In the fall of 1933, Roosevelt created the Civil Works Administration (CWA) and charged Hopkins with getting people off the unemployment lines and relief rolls and back to work. Hopkins had more than four million men and women at work by January 1934, building roads, schools, playgrounds, and athletic fields. Many of the workers were unskilled, and some of the projects were shoddy, but the CWA at least enabled people to work and earn enough money to survive the winter. Roosevelt, appalled at the huge expenditures involved, shut down the CWA in 1934 and forced Hopkins to return to federal relief payments as the only source of aid to the jobless. The final commitment to the idea of work relief came in 1935 when Roosevelt established the Works Progress Administration (WPA) to spend nearly $5 billion authorized by Congress for emergency relief. The WPA, under Hopkins, put the unemployed on the federal payroll so they could earn enough to meet their basic needs and help stimulate the stagnant economy. Conservatives complained that the WPA amounted to nothing more than hiring the jobless to do make-work tasks with no real value. But Hopkins cared less about what was accomplished than about helping those who had been unemployed for years to get off the dole and gain self-respect by working again. In addition to funding the usual construction and conservation projects, the WPA tried to preserve the skills of American artists, actors, and writers. The Federal Theatre Project produced plays, circuses, and puppet shows that enabled entertainers to practice their crafts and to perform before people who often had never seen a professional production before. Similar projects for writers and artists led to a series of valuable state guidebooks and to murals that adorned public buildings across the land. A separate National Youth Administration (NYA) found part-time jobs for young people still in school and developed projects—ranging from automobile repairing in New York City to erecting tuberculosis isolation units in Arizona—for 2.5 million young adults. The WPA helped ease the burden for the unemployed, but it failed to overcome the depression. Rather than spending too much, as his critics charged, Roosevelt’s greatest failure was not spending enough. The WPA never employed at any one time more than three million of the ten million jobless. The wages, although larger than relief payments, were still pitifully low, averaging only $52



 CHAPTER 26

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT AND THE NEW DEAL

 a month. Thus the WPA failed to prime the American economy by increasing consumer purchasing power. Factories remained closed and machinery idle because the American people still did not have the money, either from relief or the WPA, to buy cars, radios, appliances, and the other consumer goods that had been the basis for the prosperity of the 1920s. By responding to basic human needs, Roosevelt had made the depression bearable. The New Deal’s failure, however, to go beyond relief to achieve prosperity led to a growing frustration and the appearance of more radical alternatives that challenged the conservative nature of the New Deal and forced FDR to shift to the left.

Roosevelt and Reform
 How did the New Deal reform American life? In 1935, the focus of the New Deal shifted from relief and recovery to reform. During his first two years in office, FDR had concentrated on fighting the Great Depression by shoring up the sagging American economy. Only a few new agencies, notably TVA, sought to make permanent changes in national life. Roosevelt was developing a “broker-state” concept of government, responding to pressures from organized elements such as corporations, labor unions, and farm groups while ignoring the needs and wants of the dispossessed who had no clear political voice. The early New Deal tried to assist bankers and industrialists, large farmers, and members of the labor unions, but it did little to help unskilled workers and sharecroppers. The continuing depression and high unemployment began to build pressure for more sweeping changes. Roosevelt faced the choice of either providing more radical programs, ones designed to end historical inequities in American life, or deferring to others who put forth solutions to the nation’s ills. Bolstered by an impressive Democratic victory in the 1934 congressional elections, Roosevelt responded by embracing a reform program that marked the climax of the New Deal.

Challenges to FDR
 The signs of discontent were visible everywhere by 1935. In the upper Midwest, progressives and agrarian radicals, led by Minnesota governor Floyd Olson, were calling for government action to raise farm and labor income. “I am a radical in the sense that I want a definite change in the system,” Olson declared. “I am not satisfied with patching.” Upton Sinclair, the muckraking novelist, nearly won the governorship of California in 1934 running on the slogan “End poverty in California,” while in the East a violent strike in the textile industry shut down plants in twenty states. The most serious challenge to Roosevelt’s leadership, however, came from three demagogues who captured national attention in the mid-1930s. The first was Father Charles Coughlin, a Roman Catholic priest from Detroit, who had originally supported FDR. Speaking to a rapt nationwide radio audience in his rich, melodious voice, Coughlin appealed to the discontented with a strange mixture of crank monetary schemes and anti-Semitism. He broke with the New Deal in late 1934, denouncing it as the “Pagan Deal,” and founded his own National Union for Social Justice. Increasingly vitriolic, he called for monetary inflation and the nationalization of

 the banking system in his weekly radio sermons to an audience of more than thirty million. A more benign but equally threatening figure appeared in California. Francis Townsend, a 67-year-old physician, came forward in 1934 with a scheme to assist the elderly, who were suffering greatly during the depression. The Townsend Plan proposed giving everyone over the age of 60 a monthly pension of $200 with the proviso that it must be spent within thirty days. Although designed less as an old-age pension plan than as a way to stimulate the economy, the proposal understandably had its greatest appeal among the elderly. They embraced it as a holy cause, joining Townsend Clubs across the country. Despite the criticism from economists that the plan would transfer more than half the national income to less than 10 percent of the population, more than ten million people signed petitions endorsing the Townsend Plan, and few politicians dared oppose it. The third new voice of protest was that of Huey Long, the flamboyant senator from Louisiana. Like Coughlin, an original supporter of the New Deal, Long turned against FDR and by 1935 had become a major political threat to the president. A shrewd, ruthless, yet witty man, Long had a remarkable ability to mock those in power. The Kingfish (a nickname he borrowed from Amos ’n Andy) announced a nationwide “Share the Wealth” movement in 1934. He spoke grandly of taking from the rich to make “every man a king,” guaranteeing each American a home worth $5,000 and an annual income of $2,500. To finance the plan, Long advocated seizing all fortunes of more than $5 million and levying a tax of 100 percent on incomes greater than $1 million. By 1935, Long claimed to have founded twenty-seven thousand Share the Wealth clubs and had a mailing list of more than seven million people, including workers, farmers, college professors, and even bank presidents. Threatening to run as a thirdparty candidate in 1936, Long generated fear among Democratic leaders that he might attract three to four million votes, possibly enough to swing the election to the Republicans. Although an assassin killed Huey Long in Louisiana in late 1935, his popularity showed the need for the New Deal to do more to help those still in distress.

Social Security
 When the new Congress met in January 1935, Roosevelt was ready to support a series of reform measures designed to take the edge off national dissent. The recent elections had increased Democratic congressional strength significantly, with the Republicans losing thirteen seats in the House and retaining less than one-third of the Senate. Many of the Democrats were to the left of Roosevelt, favoring increased spending and more sweeping federal programs. “Boys—this is our hour,” exulted Harry Hopkins. “We got to get everything we want . . . now or never.” Congress quickly appropriated $4.8 billion for the WPA and was prepared to enact virtually any proposal that Roosevelt offered. The most significant reform enacted in 1935 was the Social Security Act. The Townsend movement had reminded Americans that the United States, alone among modern industrial nations, had never developed a welfare system to aid the aged, the disabled, and the unemployed. A cabinet committee began studying the

Roosevelt and Reform


 Federal work relief programs helped millions maintain their self-respect. Workers in the CCC (top) received $30 a month for planting trees and building parks and trails. As indicated on the map, the PWA hired workers to build schools, dig irrigation ditches, construct sewage treatment plants, and erect bridges across the country.





 CHAPTER 26

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT AND THE NEW DEAL

Read the Document


Huey Long, “Share Our


Wealth” (1935)


 Townsend’s proposal for $200 monthly pensions and increases in unemployment benefits. Congress then passed the Social Security Act by overwhelming margins. Critics began to point out its shortcomings, as they have ever since. The old-age pensions were paltry. Designed to begin in 1942, they ranged from $10 to $85 a month. Not everyone was covered; many of those who most needed protection in their old age, such as farmers and domestic servants, were not included. And all participants, regardless of income or economic status, paid in at the same rate, with no supplement from the general revenue. The trust fund also took out of circulation money that was desperately needed to stimulate the economy in the 1930s. Other portions of the act were equally open to question. The cumbersome unemployment system offered no aid to those currently

Read the Document


Frances Perkins and
 the Social Security Act (1935, 1960)

 This political cartoon published in the Chicago Tribune in 1935 illustrates that conservatives and other opponents of the New Deal vehemently asserted that FDR’s recovery and reform program represented a dangerous threat to Americans’ economic liberties and the political freedoms secured by the Constitution of the United States.

 problem in 1934, and President Roosevelt sent its recommendations to Congress the following January. The proposed legislation had three major parts. First, it provided for old-age pensions financed equally by a tax on employers and workers, without government contributions. In addition, it gave states federal matching funds to provide modest pensions for the destitute elderly. Second, it set up a system of unemployment compensation on a federal-state basis, with employers paying a payroll tax and with each state setting benefit levels and administering the program locally. Finally, it provided for direct federal grants to the states, on a matching basis, for welfare payments to the blind, handicapped, needy elderly, and dependent children. Although there was criticism from conservatives who mourned the passing of traditional American reliance on self-help and individualism, the chief objections came from those who argued that the administration’s measure did not go far enough. Democratic leaders, however, defeated efforts to incorporate

 Despite the administration’s boosterism, many believed that Social Security could not fulfill its promises.

Impact of the New Deal


 out of work, only to people who would lose their jobs in the future, and the benefits (depending on the state) ranged from barely adequate to substandard. The outright grants to the handicapped and dependent children were minute in terms of the need; in New York City, for example, a blind person received only $5 a week in 1937. The conservative nature of the legislation reflected Roosevelt’s own fiscal orthodoxy, but even more it was a product of his political realism. Despite the severity of the depression, he realized that establishing a system of federal welfare went against deeply rooted American convictions. He insisted on a tax on participants to give those involved in the pension plan a vested interest in Social Security. He wanted them to feel they had earned their pensions and that in the future no one would dare take them away. “With those taxes in there,” he explained privately, “no damned politician can ever scrap my social security program.” Above all, FDR had succeeded in establishing the principle of government responsibility for the aged, the handicapped, and the unemployed. Whatever the defects of the legislation, Social Security stood as a landmark of the New Deal, creating a system to provide for the welfare of individuals in a complex industrial society.

Labor Legislation
 The other major reform achievement in 1935 was passage of the National Labor Relations Act, or the Wagner Act, as it became known. Senator Robert Wagner of New York introduced legislation in 1934 to outlaw company unions and other unfair labor practices in order to ensure collective bargaining for unions. FDR, who had little knowledge of labor-management relations and apparently little interest in them, opposed the bill. In 1935, however, Wagner began to gather broad support for his measure, which passed the Senate in May with only twelve opposing votes, and the president, seeing passage as likely, gave it his approval. The bill moved quickly through the House, and Roosevelt signed it into law in July. The Wagner Act created a National Labor Relations Board to preside over labor-management relations and enable unions to engage in collective bargaining with federal support. The act outlawed a variety of union-busting tactics and in its key provision decreed that whenever the majority of a company’s workers voted for a union to represent them, management would be compelled to negotiate with the union on all matters of wages, hours, and working conditions. With this unprecedented government sanction, labor unions could now recruit the large number of unorganized workers throughout the country. The Wagner Act, the most far-reaching of all New Deal measures, led to the revitalization of the American labor movement and a permanent change in labor-management relations. Three years later, Congress passed a second law that had a lasting impact on American workers—the Fair Labor Standards Act. A long-sought goal of the New Deal, this measure aimed to establish both minimum wages and maximum hours of work per week. Since labor unions usually were able to negotiate adequate levels of pay and work for their members, the act was aimed at unorganized workers and met with only grudging support from unions. Southern conservatives opposed it strongly, both on ideological grounds (it meant still greater government involvement in private enterprise) and because it threatened the low southern wages that had attracted northern industry since Reconstruction.



 Roosevelt finally succeeded in winning passage of the Fair Labor Standards Act in 1938, but only at the cost of exempting many key industries from its coverage. The act provided for a minimum wage of 40 cents an hour by 1940 and a standard workweek of forty hours, with time and a half for overtime. Despite its loopholes, the legislation did lead to pay raises for the twelve million workers earning less than 40 cents an hour. More important, like Social Security it set up a system—however inadequate—that Congress could build on in the future to reach more generous and humane levels. Other New Deal reform measures met with a mixed reception in Congress. Proposals to break up the huge public utility holding companies created by promoters in the 1920s and to levy a “soak the rich” tax on the wealthy stirred up bitter debate, and these bills were passed only in greatly weakened form. Roosevelt was more successful in passing a banking act that made important reforms in the Federal Reserve System. He also gained congressional approval of the Rural Electrification Administration (REA), which helped bring electricity to the 90 percent of American farms that still did not have it in the 1930s. All in all, Roosevelt’s record in reform was similar to that in relief and recovery—modest success but no sweeping victory. A cautious and pragmatic leader, FDR moved far enough to the left to overcome the challenges of Coughlin, Townsend, and Long without venturing too far from the mainstream. His reforms improved the quality of life in America significantly, but he made no effort to correct all the nation’s social and economic wrongs.

Impact of the New Deal
 What was the lasting impact of the New Deal? The New Deal had a broad influence on the quality of life in the United States in the 1930s. Government programs reached into areas hitherto untouched. Many of them brought about long-overdue improvements, but others failed to make any significant dent in historic inequities. The most important advances came with the dramatic growth of labor unions; the conditions for working women and minorities in nonunionized industries showed no comparable advance.

Rise of Organized Labor
 Trade unions were weak at the onset of the Great Depression, with a membership of fewer than three million workers. Most were in the American Federation of Labor (AFL), composed of craft unions that served the needs of skilled workers. The nation’s basic industries, such as steel and automobiles, were unorganized; the great mass of unskilled workers thus fared poorly in terms of wages and working conditions. Section 7a of the NRA had led to some growth in AFL ranks, but the union’s conservative leaders, eager to cooperate with business, failed to take full advantage of the opportunity to organize the mass production industries. John L. Lewis, head of the United Mine Workers, took the lead in forming the Committee on Industrial Organization (CIO) in 1935. The son of a Welsh coal miner, Lewis was a dynamic and ruthless man. He had led the mine workers since 1919 and was determined to spread the benefits of unions throughout industry. Lewis first battled



 CHAPTER 26

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT AND THE NEW DEAL

Watch the Video


Responding to the Great Depression: Whose New Deal?


 Mary McLeod Bethune was an African American educator and civil rights leader. She was one of several African American executive department administrators for President Franklin Roosevelt. McLeod was also a close friend of President Roosevelt’s wife and confidant, Eleanor, and a key political supporter of the president in the African American community.

 with the leadership of the AFL, and then—after being expelled—he renamed his group the Congress of Industrial Organizations and announced in 1936 that he would use the Wagner Act to extend collective bargaining to the nation’s auto and steel industries. Within five years, Lewis had scored a remarkable series of victories. Some came easily. The big steel companies, led by U.S. Steel, surrendered without a fight in 1937; management realized that federal support put the unions in a strong position. There was greater resistance in the automobile industry. When General Motors, the first target, resisted, the newly created United Automobile Workers (UAW) developed an effective strike technique. In late December 1936, GM workers in Flint, Michigan, simply sat down in the factory, refusing to leave until the company recognized their union, and threatening to destroy the valuable tools and machines if they were removed

 forcibly. When the Michigan governor refused to call out the national guard to break the strike, General Motors conceded defeat and signed a contract with the UAW. Chrysler quickly followed suit, but Henry Ford refused to give in and fought the UAW, hiring strikebreakers and beating up organizers. In 1941, however, Ford finally recognized the UAW. Smaller steel companies, led by Republic Steel, engaged in even more violent resistance; in one incident in 1937, police shot ten strikers. The companies eventually reached a settlement with the steelworkers’ union in 1941. By the end of the 1930s, the CIO had some five million members, slightly more than the AFL. The successes were remarkable—in addition to the automaking and steel unions, organizers for the CIO and the AFL had been successful in the textile, rubber, electrical, and metal industries. For the first time, unskilled as well as skilled workers were unionized. Women and African Americans benefited from the creation of the CIO, not because the union followed enlightened policies, but simply because they made up a substantial proportion of the unskilled workforce that the CIO organized. Yet despite these impressive gains, only 28 percent of all Americans (excluding farmworkers) belonged to unions by 1940. Millions in the restaurant, retail, and service trades remained unorganized, working long hours for very low wages. Employer resistance and traditional hostility to unions blocked further progress, as did the aloof attitude of President Roosevelt, who commented to labor and management, “A plague on both your houses” during the steel strike. The Wagner Act had helped open the way, but labor leaders such as Lewis, Philip Murray of the Steel Workers Organizing Committee, and Walter Reuther of the United Automobile Workers deserved most of the credit for union achievements.

The New Deal Record on Help to
Minorities
 The Roosevelt administration’s attempts to aid the downtrodden were least effective with African Americans and other racial minorities. The Great Depression had hit blacks with special force. Share croppers and tenant farmers had seen the price of cotton drop from 18 to 6 cents a pound, far below the level needed to sustain a family on the land. In the cities, the saying “Last hired, first fired” proved all too true; by 1933, more than 50 percent of urban blacks were unemployed. Hard times sharpened racial prejudice. “No jobs for niggers until every white man has a job” became a rallying cry for many whites in Atlanta.

Impact of the New Deal


 The New Deal helped African Americans survive the depression, but it never tried to confront squarely the racial injustice built into the federal relief programs. Although the programs served blacks as well as whites, in the South the weekly payments blacks received were much smaller. In the early days, NRA codes permitted lower wage scales for blacks, while the AAA led to the eviction of thousands of Negro tenants and sharecroppers. African American leaders referred to the NRA as standing for “Negro Robbed Again” and dismissed the AAA as “a continuation of the same old raw deal.” Nor did later reform measures help very much. Neither the minimum wage nor Social Security covered those working as farmers or domestic servants, categories that comprised 65 percent of all African American workers. Thus an NAACP official commented that Social Security “looks like a sieve with the holes just large enough for the majority of Negroes to fall through.” Despite this bleak record, African Americans rallied behind Roosevelt’s leadership, abandoning their historic ties to the Republican party. In 1936, more than 75 percent of those African Americans who voted supported FDR. In part, this switch came in response to Roosevelt’s appointment of a number of prominent African Americans to high-ranking government positions, such as William H. Hastie in the Interior Department and Mary McLeod Bethune (founder and president of Bethune-Cookman College) in the National Youth Administration. Eleanor Roosevelt spoke out eloquently throughout the decade against racial discrimination, most notably in 1939 when the Daughters of the American Revolution refused to let African American contralto Marian Anderson sing in Constitution Hall. The first lady and Interior Secretary Harold Ickes arranged for the singer to perform at the Lincoln Memorial, where seventy-five thousand people gathered to hear her on Easter Sunday. Perhaps the most influential factor in the African Americans’ political switch was the color-blind policy of Harry Hopkins. He had more than one million blacks working for the WPA by 1939, many of them in teaching and artistic positions as well as in construction jobs. Overall, the New Deal provided assistance to 40 percent of the nation’s blacks during the depression. Uneven as his record was, Roosevelt had still done more to aid this oppressed minority than any previous president since Lincoln. One African American newspaper commented that while “relief and WPA are not ideal, they are better than the Hoover bread lines and they’ll have to do until the real thing comes along.” The New Deal did far less for Mexican Americans. Engaged primarily in agricultural labor, these people found their wages in California fields dropping from 35 to 14 cents an hour by 1933. The pool of unemployed migrant labor expanded rapidly with Dust Bowl conditions in the Great Plains and the subsequent flight of “Okies” and “Arkies” to the cotton fields of Arizona and the truck farms of California. The Roosevelt administration cut off any further influx from Mexico by barring entry of any immigrant likely to become a public charge; local authorities rounded up migrants and shipped them back to Mexico to reduce the welfare rolls. The New Deal relief program did aid many thousands of Mexican Americans in the Southwest in the 1930s, although migrant workers had difficulty meeting state requirements. The WPA hired Mexican Americans for a variety of construction and cultural programs, but after 1937 such employment was denied to



 aliens. Overall, the pattern was one of great economic hardship and relatively little federal assistance for Mexican Americans. Native Americans, after decades of neglect, fared slightly better under the New Deal. Roosevelt appointed John Collier, a social worker who championed Indian rights, to serve as commissioner of Indian affairs. In 1934, Congress passed the Indian Reorganization Act, a reform measure designed to emphasize tribal unity and autonomy instead of attempting (as previous policy had done) to transform Indians into self-sufficient farmers by granting them small plots of land. Collier employed more Native Americans in the Indian Bureau, supported educational programs on the reservations, and encouraged tribes to produce native handiwork such as blankets and jewelry. Despite modest gains however, the nation’s one-third million Indians remained the most impoverished citizens in America.

Women at Work
 The decade witnessed no significant gain in the status of American women. In the midst of the Great Depression, there was little concern expressed for protecting or extending their rights. The popular idea that women worked for “pin money” while men were the breadwinners for their families led employers to discriminate in favor of men when cutting the workforce. Working women “are holding jobs that rightfully belong to the God-intended providers of the household,” declared a Chicago civic group. More than three-fourths of the nation’s school boards refused to hire married women, and more than half of them fired women teachers who married. Federal regulations prohibited more than one member of a family from working in the civil service, and almost always it was the wife who had to defer to her husband. A Gallup poll revealed that 82 percent of the people disapproved of working wives, with 75 percent of the women polled agreeing. Many of the working women in the 1930s were either single or the sole supporters of an entire family. Yet their wages remained lower than those for men, and their unemployment rate ran higher than 20 percent throughout the decade. Women over age 40 found it particularly hard to find or retain jobs during the depression. The New Deal offered little encouragement. NRA codes sanctioned lower wages for women, permitting laundries, for example, to pay them as little as 14 cents an hour. The minimum wage did help those women employed in industry, but too many worked as maids and waitresses—jobs not covered by the law—for the new law to have much overall effect on women’s income. Despite these hardships, the number of married women and women between the ages of 25 and 40 in the labor force increased during the 1930s. Relatively few women worked in heavy industry, where unemployment was greatest; most were employed in the clerical and service sectors, areas of traditional female employment, in which jobs were more plentiful. The one area of advance in the 1930s came in government. Eleanor Roosevelt set an example that encouraged millions of American women. Not content to be mistress of the White House, she traveled around the country, eager to uncover wrongs, bring them to the president’s attention, and, if possible, rectify them. (See the Feature Essay, “Eleanor Roosevelt and the Quest for Social Justice,” pp. 632–633.) Frances Perkins, the secretary of labor, became the first woman cabinet member, and FDR appointed women as ambassadors and federal judges for the first time.



 CHAPTER 26

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT AND THE NEW DEAL

 Women also were elected to office in larger numbers in the 1930s. Hattie W. Caraway of Arkansas succeeded her husband in the Senate, winning a full term in 1934. That same year, voters elected six women to the House of Representatives. Public service, however, was one of the few professions open to women. The nation’s leading medical and law schools discouraged women from applying, and the percentage of female faculty members in colleges and universities continued to decline in the 1930s. In sum, a decade that was grim for most Americans was especially hard on American women.

End of the New Deal


 Republican majority that Al Smith had begun in 1928, carried urban areas by impressive margins, winning 3.6 million more votes than his opponents in the nation’s twelve largest cities. He held on to the traditional Democratic votes in the South and West and added to them by appealing strongly to the diverse religious and ethnic groups in the northern cities—Catholics and Jews, Italians and Poles, Irish and Slavs. The strong support of labor, together with three-quarters of the black vote, indicated that the nation’s new alignment followed economic as well as cultural lines. The poor and the oppressed, who in the depression years included many middle-class Americans, became attached to the Democratic party, leaving the GOP in a minority position, limited to the well-to-do and to rural and smalltown Americans of native stock.

 How and why did the New Deal end? The New Deal reached its high point in 1936, when Roosevelt was overwhelmingly reelected, and the Democratic party strengthened its hold on Congress. This political triumph was deceptive. In the next two years, Roosevelt met with a series of defeats in Congress. Yet despite the setbacks, he remained a popular political leader who had restored American self-confidence as he strove to meet the challenges of the Great Depression.

The Election of 1936
 Franklin Roosevelt enjoyed his finest political hour in 1936. A man who loved the give-and-take of politics, FDR faced challenges from both the left and the right as he sought reelection. Father Coughlin and Gerald L. K. Smith, who inherited Huey Long’s following after the senator’s assassination in 1935, organized a Union Party, with North Dakota Progressive Congressman William Lemke heading the ticket. At the other extreme, a group of wealthy industrialists formed the Liberty League to fight what they saw as the New Deal’s assault on property rights. The Liberty League attracted prominent Democrats, including Al Smith, but in 1936 it endorsed the Republican presidential candidate, Governor Alfred M. Landon of Kansas. A moderate, colorless figure, Landon disappointed his backers by refusing to campaign for repeal of the popular New Deal reforms. Roosevelt ignored Lemke and the Union Party, focusing attention instead on the assault from the right. Democratic spokesmen condemned the Liberty League as a “millionaire’s union” and reminded the American people of how much Roosevelt had done for them in fighting unemployment and providing relief. In his speeches, FDR condemned the “economic royalists” who were “unanimous in their hatred for me.” “I welcome their hatred,” he declared, and promised that in his second term, these forces would meet “their master.” This frank appeal to class sympathies proved enormously successful. Roosevelt won easily, receiving five million more votes than he had in 1932 and outscoring Landon in the electoral college by 523 to 8. The Democrats did almost as well in Congress, piling up margins of 331 to 89 in the House and 76 to 16 in the Senate (with 4 not aligned with either major party). Equally important, the election marked the stunning success of a new political coalition that would dominate American politics for the next three decades. FDR, building on the inroads into the

THE ELECTION OF 1936
Candidate Roosevelt Landon 
Party
Democratic
Republican


Popular
Vote
27,751,597
16,679,583


Electoral
Vote


The Supreme Court Fight
 FDR proved to be far more adept at winning electoral victories than in achieving his goals in Congress. In 1937, he attempted to use his recent success to overcome the one obstacle remaining in his path—the Supreme Court. During his first term, the Court had ruled several New Deal programs unconstitutional, most notably the NRA and the AAA. Only three of the nine justices were sympathetic to the need for emergency measures in the midst of the depression. Two others were unpredictable, sometimes approving New Deal measures and sometimes opposing them. Four justices were bent on using the Constitution to block Roosevelt’s proposals. All were elderly men, and one, Willis Van Devanter, had planned to retire in 1932 but remained on the Court because he believed Roosevelt to be “unfitted and unsafe for the Presidency.” When Congress convened in 1937, the president offered a startling proposal to overcome the Court’s threat to the New Deal. Instead of seeking a constitutional amendment either to limit the Court’s power or to clarify the constitutional issues, FDR chose an oblique attack. Declaring the Court was falling behind schedule because of the age of its members, he asked Congress to appoint a new justice for each member of the Court over the age of 70, up to a maximum of six. Although this “court-packing” scheme, as critics quickly dubbed it, was perfectly legal, it outraged not only conservatives but liberals as well, who realized it could set a dangerous precedent for the future. Republicans wisely kept silent, letting prominent Democrats such as Senator Burton Wheeler of Montana lead the fight against Roosevelt’s plan. Despite all-out pressure from the White House, resistance in the Senate blocked early action on the proposal. The Court defended itself well. Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes testified tellingly to the Senate Judiciary Committee, pointing out that in fact the Court was up to date and not behind schedule as Roosevelt charged. The Court then surprised observers with

Conclusion: The New Deal and American Life


 a series of rulings approving such controversial New Deal measures as the Wagner Act and Social Security. In the midst of the struggle, Justice Van Devanter resigned, enabling FDR to make his first appointment to the Court since taking office in 1933. Believing he had proved his point, the president allowed his court-packing plan to die in the Senate. During the next few years, four more vacancies occurred, and Roosevelt was able to appoint such distinguished jurists as Hugo Black, William O. Douglas, and Felix Frankfurter to the Supreme Court. Yet the price was high. The Court fight had badly weakened the president’s relations with Congress, opening deep rifts with members of his own party. Many senators and representatives who had voted reluctantly for Roosevelt’s measures during the depths of the Great Depression now felt free to oppose any further New Deal reforms.

The New Deal in Decline
 The legislative record during Roosevelt’s second term was meager. Aside from the minimum wage and a maximum-hour law passed in 1938, Congress did not extend the New Deal into any new areas. Attempts to institute national health insurance met with stubborn resistance, as did efforts by civil rights advocates to pass antilynching legislation. Disturbed by the growing congressional resistance, Roosevelt set out in the spring of 1938 to defeat a number of conservative Democratic congressmen and senators, primarily in the South. His targets gleefully charged the president with interference in local politics; only one of the men he sought to defeat lost in the primaries. The failure of this attempted purge further undermined Roosevelt’s strained relations with Congress. The worst blow came in the economic sector. The slow but steady improvement in the economy suddenly gave way to a sharp recession in the late summer of 1937. In the following ten months, industrial production fell by one-third, and nearly four million workers lost their jobs. Critics of the New Deal quickly labeled the downturn “the Roosevelt recession,” and business executives claimed that it reflected a lack of confidence in FDR’s leadership. The criticism was overblown but not without basis. In an effort to reduce expanding budget deficits, Roosevelt had cut back sharply on WPA and other government programs after the election. Federal contributions to consumer purchasing power fell from $4.1 billion in 1936 to less than $1 billion in 1937. For several months, Roosevelt refused to heed calls from economists to restore heavy government spending. Finally, in April 1938, Roosevelt asked Congress for a $3.75 billion relief appropriation, and the economy began to revive. But FDR’s premature attempt to balance the budget had meant two more years of hard times and had marred his reputation as the energetic foe of the depression. The political result of the attempted purge and the recession was a strong Republican upsurge in the elections of 1938. The GOP won an impressive 81 seats in the House and 8 more in the Senate, as well as 13 governorships. The party many thought dead suddenly had new life. The Democrats still held a sizable majority in Congress, but their margin in the House was particularly deceptive. There were 262 Democratic representatives to 169 Republicans, but 93 southern Democrats held the balance of power.



 More and more often after 1938, anti–New Deal Southerners voted with Republican conservatives to block social and economic reform measures. Thus not only was the New Deal over by the end of 1938, but a new bipartisan conservative coalition that would prevail for a quarter century had formed in Congress.

Conclusion: The New Deal and
American Life
 The New Deal lasted a brief five years, and most of its measures came in two legislative bursts in the spring of 1933 and the summer of 1935. Yet its impact on American life was enduring. Nearly every aspect of economic, social, and political development in the decades that followed bore the imprint of Roosevelt’s leadership. The least impressive achievement of the New Deal came in the economic realm. Whatever credit Roosevelt is given for relieving human suffering in the depths of the Great Depression must be balanced against his failure to achieve recovery in the 1930s. The moderate nature of his programs, especially the unwieldy NRA, led to slow and halting industrial recovery. Although much of the improvement that was made came as a result of government spending, FDR never embraced the concept of planned deficits, striving instead for a balanced budget. As a result, the nation had barely reached the 1929 level of production a decade later, and there were still nearly ten million men and women unemployed. Equally important, Roosevelt refused to make any sweeping changes in the American economic system. Aside from the TVA, there were no broad experiments in regional planning and no attempts to alter free enterprise beyond imposing some limited forms of government regulation. The New Deal did nothing to alter the basic distribution of wealth and power in the nation. The outcome was the preservation of the traditional capitalist system with a thin overlay of federal control. More significant change occurred in American society. With the adoption of Social Security, the government acknowledged for the first time its responsibility to provide for the welfare of those unable to care for themselves in an industrial society. The Wagner Act helped stimulate the growth of labor unions to balance corporate power, and the minimum wage law provided a much needed floor for many workers. Yet the New Deal tended to help only the more vocal and organized groups, such as union members and commercial farmers. Those without effective voices or political clout— African Americans, Mexican Americans, women, sharecroppers, restaurant and laundry workers—received little help from the New Deal. For all the appealing rhetoric about the “forgotten man,” Roosevelt did little more than Hoover in responding to the long-term needs of the dispossessed. The most lasting impact of the Roosevelt leadership came in politics. Taking advantage of the emerging power of ethnic voters and capitalizing on the frustration growing out of the depression, FDR proved to be a genius at forging a new coalition. Overcoming the friction between rural and urban Democrats that had prolonged Republican supremacy in the 1920s, he attracted new groups to the Democratic Party, principally African Americans

 Complete the Assignment Eleanor Roosevelt and the Quest for Social Justice on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


Eleanor Roosevelt and the
Quest for Social Justice


 During the Great Depression, Eleanor Roosevelt traveled thousands of miles each year to learn about conditions throughout the country. She is shown here in Des Moines, Iowa, in 1936, inspecting a WPA project to convert a city dump into a waterfront park.

I


 n August 1933, Eleanor Roosevelt journeyed to Scotts Run, a poor mining community in West Virginia, to observe life in one of the nation’s poorest and most desolate areas. The first lady toured the dilapidated homes and listened to the problems of the unemployed miners, some of whom had not worked in eight years. She also met with their wives and children, and visited with local African Americans. It was an experience few would forget; “Some of the Negroes,” wrote a local newspaper editor to Eleanor’s husband, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, “think she is God.” Millions of Americans held her in similar esteem. At the height of the Great Depression, ER’s willingness to listen to, and act on

 behalf of, those whose voices often went unheard made her one of the nation’s leading symbols of hope and compassion. Eleanor Roosevelt entered public life as a reformer long before she became first lady. Growing up shy and insecure in a prominent New York family (she was the niece of Theodore Roosevelt), she sought personal fulfillment through voluntary social work. Like many reformers of her day, she found her sense of social justice upset by the existence of poverty and inequality. Avoiding politics, which she then considered a “sinister affair,” she limited her activities to nonpartisan reform and relief organizations, such as settlement houses and the Consumer’s League. She curtailed her social work after her 1905 marriage to

 Franklin Roosevelt, placing her responsibilities as wife and mother first, as she believed a woman should. FDR, as a New York state senator and later as assistant secretary of the Navy, carried the political torch for the family. However, her role changed in 1921 when Franklin was stricken with polio. Eleanor was determined to return him as soon as possible to political life, which she believed was the best antidote to his pain and depression. While working tirelessly to speed his recovery, she also struck out on her own to keep the Roosevelt name alive in New York politics, making speeches, writing magazine articles, and chairing the Women’s Platform Committee at the Democratic National Convention in 1924. In the newly formed League of Women Voters and other activist

 organizations, she brought her reformer’s impulse to politics by advocating measures such as a maximum hours law for working women. Through these efforts, she also formed the nucleus of a “woman’s network” that she would employ extensively during the New Deal years. Focusing on those whose needs were greatest, Eleanor became the administration’s champion for the dispossessed. While her husband appealed to the “forgotten man,” she concerned herself with the “forgotten woman.” She worked with Harry Hopkins to achieve equity for women on relief and to create more jobs for women under the auspices of the CWA and the WPA. With Frances Perkins, she helped establish camps for unemployed girls patterned after the CCC, and worked with the Women’s Trade Union League to guarantee women equal pay for equal work on federal projects. She saw to it that, whenever possible, women administrators were hired to supervise projects for women, and in her syndicated newspaper column, “My Day,” she often dealt with the problems faced by women during the Great Depression. Her 1933 book, It’s Up to the Women, urged American women to join her in a crusade for decency and fairness. “For more than a century,” wrote one reviewer, “the Great White Father in the White House has been instructing his people in right conduct . . . But now the Great White Mother emerges as a personality in her own right and starts an independent course of instruction on her own account.” Eleanor worked hard for African Americans, whose position at the bottom of American society deeply offended her sense of fairness and decency; in the late 1930s, threequarters of adult blacks in America had not finished high school, and almost 90 percent lived below the

 federal poverty standard. The first lady spoke out eloquently in favor of equal opportunity for blacks and sought their inclusion in New Deal programs. She worked with Hopkins to employ more African Americans in federal projects, and lobbied within the administration for the appointment of black men and women to administer programs designed specifically for them. Publicly, she endeavored to set an example by addressing black audiences throughout the country, presiding over a more egalitarian White House, and resigning her membership in the Daughters of the American Revolution over the Marian Anderson incident (see p. 629). Her struggle against racial discrimination sometimes put Mrs. Roosevelt in conflict with her husband’s efforts to keep the Democratic Party intact. Conservative southern Democrats castigated her as a radical; her more extreme critics called her a communist. Rumors of “Eleanor Clubs”—said to be secret associations of black maids pledged to boycott white households— circulated in every southern state. (The FBI investigated the rumors and found no factual basis for them.) Hate mail emphasized the criticism. The attacks didn’t deter Eleanor, but they caused Franklin Roosevelt to temporize on bills to ban lynching and abolish the poll tax; his wife’s support of these measures, however, put the Roosevelt name behind them without the same damaging political consequences. In her efforts to advance the cause of civil rights, Eleanor arranged for White House meetings between FDR and African American leaders, supported interracial projects, and spoke out forcefully against racial discrimination. To ER, such change did not help just one element of society, but brought benefits to the entire country. “To deny any part of a population the opportunities for more enjoyment

 in life, for higher aspirations,” she declared, “is a menace to the nation as a whole.” Like other first ladies, Eleanor Roosevelt had to strike a balance between capitalizing on her unique access to the president and intruding illegitimately into the affairs of the nation’s elected officials. Her position was complicated, as well, by her own ambivalence on certain issues. Although she advocated greater rights for women, for example, she did not believe in full equality between men and women. She thought that women required protective legislation on account of their special roles as wives and mothers. While Mrs. Roosevelt was instrumental in the few gains made by women and African Americans in the 1930s, her advocacy could not overcome the sexual and racial stereotypes that continued to limit their role in the workplace and society. Thus despite her efforts, the plight of these groups during the depression was only slightly relieved. However, this is not to minimize her achievements. As the self-appointed conscience of the Roosevelt administration, she exposed the areas where the New Deal had not been realized. Her courage and vitality in the pursuit of human rights and equality made her the embodiment of reform and social justice in the New Deal. Eleanor Roosevelt’s goal was a simple one, concluded one biographer, “a life of dignity and decency for all.”

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why did Eleanor Roosevelt’s work with minorities upset some people? 
 2. What did Eleanor Roosevelt’s advocacy for more rights for women, blacks, and other minorities actually accomplish?





 CHAPTER 26

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT AND THE NEW DEAL

MAJOR NEW DEAL LEGISLATION AND AGENCIES
Year Created 
Act or Agency
Agricultural Adjustment
 Administration (AAA)

 Banking Act of 1933 (GlassSteagall Act) Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC)

 Civil Works Administration (CWA)

Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation (FDIC) Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) National Recovery Administration (NRA)

 Public Works Administration (PWA)

 Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)



Federal Communications
 Commission (FCC)

Federal Housing Administration
 (FHA)



Securities and Exchange
 Commission (SEC) National Labor Relations Board (NLRB); established by Wagner Act Social Security Act

Provisions
 Attempted to regulate agricultural production through farm subsidies; reworked after the Supreme Court ruled its key regulatory provisions unconstitutional in 1936; coordinated agricultural production during World War II, after which it was disbanded. Prohibited commercial banks from selling stock or financing corporations; created FDIC. Young men between the ages of 18 and 25 volunteered to be placed in camps to work on regional environmental projects, mainly west of the Mississippi; they received $30 a month, of which $25 was sent home; disbanded during World War II. Emergency work relief program put more than four million people to work during the extremely cold winter of 1933–1934, after which it was disbanded. A federal guarantee of savings bank deposits initially of up to $2,500, raised to $5,000 in 1934, and frequently thereafter; continues today with a limit of $100,000. Combined cash relief to needy families with work relief; superseded in early 1935 by the extensive work relief projects of the WPA and unemployment insurance established by Social Security. Attempted to combat the Great Depression through national economic planning by establishing and administering a system of industrial codes to control production, prices, labor relations, and trade practices among leading business interests; ruled unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in 1935. Financed more than 34,000 federal and nonfederal construction projects at a cost of more than $6 billion; initiated the first federal public housing program, made the federal government the nation’s leading producer of power, and advanced conservation of the nation’s natural resources; discontinued in 1939 due to its effectiveness at reducing unemployment and promoting private investment. An attempt at regional planning. Included provisions for environment and recreational design; architectural, educational, and health projects; and controversial public power projects; continues today to meet the Tennessee Valley’s energy and flood-control needs. Regulatory agency with wide discretionary powers established to oversee wired and wireless communication; reflected growing importance of radio in everyday lives of Americans during the Great Depression; continues to regulate television as well as radio. Expanded private home ownership among moderate-income families through federal guarantees of private mortgages, the reduction of down payments from 30 to 10 percent, and the extension of repayment from 20 to 30 years; continues to function today. Continues today to regulate trading practices in stocks and bonds according to federal laws. Greatly enhanced power of American labor by overseeing collective bargaining; continues to arbitrate labor-management disputes today. Guaranteed retirement payments for enrolled workers beginning at age 65; set up federal-state system of unemployment insurance and care for dependent mothers and children, the handicapped, and public health; continues today.

STUDY RESOURCES

Year
Created


Act or Agency
National Youth Administration
 (NYA)

Works Progress Administration
 (WPA) Farm Security Administration (FSA)



Rural Electrification Administration
 (REA)



Fair Labor Standards Act




Provisions
 Established by the WPA to reduce competition for jobs by supporting education and training of youth; paid grants to more than 2 million high school and college students in return for work performed in their schools; also trained another 2.6 million out-of-school youths as skilled labor to prepare them for later employment in the private sector; disbanded during World War II. Massive work relief program funded projects ranging from construction to acting; disbanded by FDR during World War II. Granted loans to small farmers and tenants for rehabilitation and purchase of small-sized farms; Congress slashed its appropriations during World War II when many poor farmers entered the armed forces or migrated to urban areas. Transformed American rural life by making electricity available at low rates to American farm families in areas that private power companies refused to service; closed the cultural gap between rural and urban everyday life by making modern amenities, such as radio, available in rural areas. Established a minimum wage of 40 cents an hour and a maximum workweek of 40 hours for businesses engaged in interstate commerce.

 and organized labor. His political success led to a major realignment that lasted long after he left the scene. His political achievement also reveals the true nature of Roosevelt’s success. He was a brilliant politician who recognized the essence of leadership in a democracy—appealing directly to the people and giving them a sense of purpose. He succeeded in

 infusing them with the same indomitable courage and jaunty optimism that had marked his own battle with polio. Thus, despite his limitations as a reformer, Roosevelt proved to be the leader the American people needed in the 1930s—a president who provided the psychological lift that helped them endure and survive the Great Depression.

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 26 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1932
Franklin D. Roosevelt elected president 1933 Emergency Banking Relief Act passed in one day 
 (March; Twenty-first Amendment repeals prohibition (December) Securities and Exchange Commission authorized (June) Works Progress Administration (WPA) hires unemployed (April); Wagner Act grants workers collective bargaining (July); Congress passes Social Security Act (August)

 1936 FDR wins second term as president 1937 United Automobile Workers sit-down strike forces



 General Motors contract (February); FDR loses court-packing battle (July); “Roosevelt recession” begins (August) Congress sets minimum wage at 40 cents an hour (June)



 CHAPTER 26

CHAPTER REVIEW

CHAPTER REVIEW
The Great Depression What were the causes and effects of the Great Depression? The Great Depression resulted from imbalances in the American economy that developed during the 1920s. Wealth was unequally distributed, depriving millions of the purchasing power necessary to keep America’s factories and farms operating at full capacity. The depression threw millions out of work, out of their homes, and into despair. (p. 614) 
The Impact of the New Deal
 What was the lasting impact of the New Deal? The New Deal encouraged the emergence of organized labor as a major force in American economic life. It modestly improved the lot of African Americans, although it failed to tackle the racial prejudice that was at the heart of much black poverty. It did little for Mexican Americans, and only a bit more for Native Americans. (p. 627)

End of the New Deal
Fighting the Depression
 How and why did the New Deal end? How did Franklin Roosevelt fight the Depression? Roosevelt persuaded Congress to pass relief, recovery, and reform measures known collectively as the New Deal. Begun during the Hundred Days, the New Deal stabilized the banks, reorganized American industry, assisted American agriculture, and put Americans to work conserving and restoring the nation’s resources. (p. 619)

 After a high point in 1936, the New Deal declined as a result of Roosevelt’s overreaching in the court-packing effort, growing resistance from conservatives, and a recession in 1937 that reminded the country that the New Deal had not ended the Great Depression. (p. 630)

Roosevelt and Reform
 How did the New Deal reform American life? In responses to the challenges of Charles Coughlin, Francis Townsend, and Huey Long, Roosevelt persuaded Congress to approve sweeping measures to reform American life. The Social Security Act established old-age and disability pensions to alleviate poverty among the elderly and those unable to work. (p. 624)

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
New Deal President Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s program to combat the Great Depression. p. 614 
 Works Progress Administration (WPA) New Deal agency to provide work relief for the unemployed. p. 623

 Bonus Army In June 1932, a group of 20,000 World War I veterans marched on Washington, D.C., to demand immediate payment of their “adjusted compensation” bonuses voted by Congress in 1924. Congress rejected their demands, and President Herbert Hoover had the Bonus Army forcibly dispersed. p. 620

 National Recovery Administration (NRA) This New Deal agency was created in 1933 to promote economic recovery and revive industry during the Great Depression. It permitted manufacturers to establish industry wide codes of “fair business practices” setting prices and production levels. It also provided for minimum wages and maximum working hours for labor and guaranteed labor the right to organize and bargain collectively (Section 7a). The Supreme Court declared it unconstitutional in 1935. p. 622

 Fireside chats Radio addresses by President Franklin D. Roosevelt from 1933 to 1944, in which he spoke to the American people about such issues as the banking crisis, Social Security, and World War II. The chats enhanced Roosevelt’s popularity among ordinary Americans. p. 621 Tennessee Valley Authority A New Deal effort created in 1933 to build dams and power plants on the Tennessee River. Its programs helped raise the standard of living for millions in the Tennessee River valley. p. 621 Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) One of the most popular New Deal programs, the CCC provided 300,000 young men between the ages of 18 and 25 with government jobs in reforestation and other conservation projects. p. 623

 Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA) Created by Congress in 1933 as part of the New Deal, this agency attempted to restrict agricultural production by paying farmers subsidies to take land out of production. The object was to raise farm prices, and it did, but the act did nothing for tenant farmers and sharecroppers. The Supreme Court declared it unconstitutional in 1936. p. 622 Social Security Act The 1935 Social Security Act established a system of old age, unemployment, and survivors’ insurance funded by wage and payroll taxes. p. 624

STUDY RESOURCES

 Wagner Act The 1935 Wagner Act, formally known as the National Labor Relations Act, created the National Labor Relations Board to supervise union elections and designate winning unions as official bargaining agents. The board could also issue cease-and-desist orders to employers who dealt unfairly with their workers. p. 627



 “court-packing” scheme Concerned that the conservative Supreme Court might declare all his New Deal programs unconstitutional, President Franklin D. Roosevelt asked Congress to allow him to appoint additional justices to the Court. Both Congress and the public rejected this “courtpacking” scheme. p. 630

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
Could the Great Depression have been averted? What steps might the government have taken to prevent it? 
 4. Why did minorities not fully share the benefits of New Deal reforms?

 2. Why did Americans respond so positively to Franklin Roosevelt?

 5. Why was Roosevelt’s “court-packing” scheme so unpopular?

 3. How was the popularity of Francis Townsend and Huey Long like the popularity of Roosevelt? How was it different?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 26 on MyHistoryLab The Great Depression View the Map

◾


Roosevelt and Reform
Read the Document
(1935) p. 626


The Great Depression p. 616


View the Closer Look
1937 p. 617
Read the Document


Huey Long, “Share Our Wealth”


Homeless Shantytown, Seattle


◾


Women on the Breadlines p. 618


Read the Document Frances Perkins and the Social
Security Act (1935, 1960) p. 626


The Impact of the New Deal
Fighting the Depression
◾


Watch the Video
Mother p. 619
Watch the Video


◾


View the Map


Watch the Video Responding to the Great Depression:
Whose New Deal? p. 628


Dorothea Lange and Migrant


End of the New Deal
FDR’S
Inauguration p. 621 
The Tennessee Valley Authority p. 622


◾


Complete the Assignment Eleanor Roosevelt and
 the Quest for Social Justice p. 632

◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




America and the World,
1921–1945


Contents and Learning Objectives
RETREAT, REVERSAL, AND RIVALRY PG. 639

TURNING THE TIDE AGAINST THE AXIS PG. 647

 Why were the United States and Japan on a collision course in the years following World War I?

 How did America and its allies halt the advances of Germany and Japan?

ISOLATIONISM PG. 641

THE HOME FRONT PG. 649

 What was isolationism, and why was it so appealing to Americans in the 1920s and 1930s?

 How did American domestic life change during World War II?

THE ROAD TO WAR PG. 644

 How did the war end, and what were its consequences?

VICTORY PG. 654

 How did the United States go from neutrality in the 1930s to war in 1941?

 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

FEATURE ESSAY
The Face of the Holocaust 
