 slavery and increase the political power of the southern states. While battles were being fought in Mexico, Congress debated the Wilmot Proviso, a proposal to prohibit slavery in any territories that might be acquired from Mexico. The Mexican-American War left a legacy of a bitter sectional quarrel over the status of slavery in new areas (see Chapter 14). The domestic controversies aroused by the war and the propaganda of Manifest Destiny revealed the limits of mid-nineteenthcentury American expansionism and put a damper on additional efforts to extend the nation’s boundaries. Concerns about slavery and race impeded acquisition of new territory in Latin America and the Caribbean. Resolution of the Oregon dispute clearly indicated that the United States was not willing to go to war with a powerful adversary to obtain large chunks of British North America, and the old ambition of incorporating Canada faded. From 1848 until the revival of expansionism in the late nineteenth century, American growth usually took the form of populating and developing the vast territory already acquired. Although the

Internal Expansionism


 rights of former inhabitants of Mexico were supposedly guaranteed by treaty, they in effect became second-class citizens of the United States. (See the Feature Essay, “Hispanic America After 1848,” pp. 308–309.)



Read the Document Senate Report on the
Railroads (1852)


Internal Expansionism


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)
Grea t L ak e 
 How did developments in transportation foster industrialization and encourage immigration?

 s

 Young American expansionists saw a clear link between acquisition of new territory and other forms of material growth and development. In 1844, Samuel F. B. Morse perfected and demonstrated his electric telegraph, a device that would make it possible to communicate rapidly over the expanse of a continental nation. Simultaneously, the railroad was becoming increasingly important as a means of moving people and goods over the same great distances. Improvements in manufacturing and agricultural methods led to an upsurge in the volume and range of internal trade, and the beginnings of mass immigration were providing human resources for the exploitation of new areas and economic opportunities. After gold was discovered in California in 1848, a flood of emigrants from the East and several foreign nations arrived by ship or wagon train, their appetites whetted by the thought of striking it rich. The gold they unearthed spurred the national economy, and the rapid growth of population centers on the Pacific Coast inspired projects for transcontinental telegraph lines and railroad tracks. Despite the best efforts of the Young Americans, the spirit of Manifest Destiny and the thirst for acquiring new territory waned after the Mexican-American War. The expansionist impulse was channeled instead into internal development. Although the nation ceased to grow in size, the technological advances and population increase of the 1840s continued during the 1850s, resulting in an acceleration of economic growth, a substantial increase in industrialization and urbanization, and the emergence of a new American working class.

The Triumph of the Railroad
 More than anything else, the rise of the railroad transformed the American economy during the 1840s and 1850s. In 1830 and 1831, two American railroads began commercial operation—the Charleston and Hamburg in South Carolina and the Baltimore and Ohio in Maryland. After these pioneer lines had shown that steam locomotion was practical and profitable, several other railroads were built and began to carry passengers and freight during the 1830s. By 1840, railroads had 2,818 miles of track—a figure almost equal to the combined length of all canals—but the latter still carried a much larger volume of goods. Passengers might prefer the speed of trains, but the lower unit cost of transporting freight on the canal boats prevented most shippers from changing their habits. Furthermore, states such as New York and Pennsylvania had invested heavily in canals and resisted chartering a competitive form of transportation. Most of the early railroads reached out from port cities, such as Boston and Baltimore, that did not have good canal routes to the interior. Steam locomotion provided them a chance to cut into the enormous commerce that flowed along the Erie Canal and gave New York an advantage in the scramble for western trade.

Boston


Detroit


New York
Pittsburgh
Philadelphia


Chicago


Washington, D.C.
Cincinnati


St. Joseph


ATLANTIC OCEAN

St. Louis


Charleston


Railroads in 1850
 Railroads built between 1850 and 1860 New Orleans

Gulf of Mexico


Houston




 400 miles

 400 kilometers

 RAILROADS, 1850 AND 1860

 During the 1840s and 1850s, railroad lines moved rapidly westward. By 1860, more than 30,000 miles of track had been laid.

 During the 1840s, rails extended beyond the northeastern and Middle Atlantic states, and mileage increased more than threefold, reaching a total of more than 9,000 miles by 1850. Expansion, fueled by massive European investment, was even greater in the following decade, when about 20,000 miles of additional track were laid. By 1860, all the states east of the Mississippi had rail service, and a traveler could go by train from New York to Chicago and return by way of Memphis. Throughout the 1840s and 1850s, railroads cut deeply into the freight business of the canals and succeeded in driving many of them out of business. The cost of hauling goods by rail decreased dramatically because of improved track construction and the introduction of powerful locomotives that could haul more cars. New York and Pennsylvania were slow to encourage rail transportation because of their early commitment to canals, but by the 1850s, both states had accepted the inevitable and were promoting massive railroad building. The development of railroads had an enormous effect on the economy as a whole. Although the burgeoning demand for iron rails was initially met mainly by importation from England, it eventually spurred development of the domestic iron industry. Since railroads required an enormous outlay of capital, their promoters pioneered new methods for financing business enterprise. At a time when most manufacturing and mercantile concerns were still owned by families or partnerships, the railroad companies sold stock to the general public and helped to set the pattern for the separation



 CHAPTER 13

AN AGE OF EXPANSIONISM

 Pennsylvania, iron was being forged and rolled in factories by 1850. Among the other indusWatch the Video Mastering Time and Space: How the Railroads tries that adopted the factory system during this Changed America period were those producing firearms, clocks, and sewing machines. While small workshops continued to predominate in most industries, and some relatively large factories were not yet mechanized, mass production was clearly the wave of the future. The essential features of the emerging mode of production were the gathering of a supervised workforce in a single place, the payment of cash wages to workers, the use of interchangeable parts, and manufacture by “continuous process.” Within a factory setting, standardized parts, manufactured separately and in bulk, could be efficiently and rapidly assembled into a final product by an ordered sequence of continuously repeated operations. Mass production, which involved the division of labor into a series of relatively simple and repetitive tasks, contrasted sharply with the traditional craft mode of production, in which a single worker produced the entire product out of raw materials. The transformation of a craft into a modern industry is well illustrated by the evolution Railroads began to spread across the United States in the early 1830s, slowly at first and then more rapidly, growing from zero in 1830 to three thousand miles in 1840, to nine thousand miles of shoemaking. The independent cobbler proof railroad track in 1850. ducing shoes for order was first challenged by a putting-out system involving the assignment of of ownership and control that characterizes the modern corporation. various tasks to physically separated workers and then was virtually They also developed new types of securities, such as “preferred displaced by the great shoe factories that by the 1860s were operatstock” (with no voting rights but the assurance of a fixed rate of ing in cities such as Lynn, Massachusetts. return) and long-term bonds at a set rate of interest. New technology often played an important role in the transition The gathering and control of private capital did not fully meet to mass production. Elias Howe’s invention of the sewing machine the desires of the early railroad barons. State and local governments, in 1846 laid the basis for the ready-to-wear clothing industry and convinced that railroads were the key to their future prosperity, also contributed to the mechanization of shoemaking. During the loaned the railroads money, bought their stock, and guaranteed 1840s, iron manufacturers adopted the British practice of using coal their bonds. The federal government helped the railroads by surrather than charcoal for smelting and thus produced a metal betveying the routes of projected lines, by devolving significant powers ter suited to industrial needs. Charles Goodyear’s discovery in 1839 of eminent domain onto the railroads to allow them to take lands of the process for the vulcanization of rubber made a new range that had been in private hands, and by providing land grants. In of manufactured items available to the American consumer, most 1850, for example, several million acres of public land were granted notably the overshoe. Perhaps the greatest triumph of American to the Illinois Central. In all, forty companies received such aid technology during the mid-nineteenth century was the development before 1860, setting a precedent for the massive land grants of the of the world’s most sophisticated and reliable machine tools. post–Civil War era. Yet the United States was still not an industrial society. Factory workers remained a small fraction of the workforce, and nearly 60 percent of the gainfully employed still worked on the land. But The Industrial Revolution Takes Off farming itself, at least in the North, was undergoing a technologiWhile railroads were initiating a revolution in transportation, cal revolution of its own. John Deere’s steel plow, invented in 1837 American industry was entering a new phase of rapid and susand mass produced by the 1850s, enabled midwestern farmers to tained growth. The factory mode of production, which had origicultivate the tough prairie soils that had resisted cast-iron implenated before 1840 in the cotton mills of New England, was extended ments. The mechanical reaper, patented by Cyrus McCormick in to a variety of other products (see Chapter 9). The weaving and 1834, offered an enormous saving in the labor required for harprocessing of wool, instead of being carried on in different locavesting grain; by 1851, McCormick was producing more than tions, was concentrated in single production units beginning in the a thousand reapers a year in his Chicago plant. Other new farm 1830s, and by 1860 some of the largest textile mills in the country implements that came into widespread use before 1860 included were producing wool cloth. In the coal and iron regions of eastern seed drills, cultivators, and threshing machines.

Internal Expansionism


 A dynamic interaction between advances in transportation, industry, and agriculture gave great strength and resiliency to the economy of the northern states during the 1850s. Railroads offered western farmers better access to eastern markets. After Chicago and New York were linked by rail in 1853, the flow of most midwestern farm commodities shifted from the north-south direction based on river-borne traffic, which had still predominated in the 1830s and 1840s, to an east-west pattern. The mechanization of agriculture provided an additional impetus to industrialization, and its laborsaving features released workers for other economic activities. The growth of industry and the modernization of agriculture can thus be seen as mutually reinforcing aspects of a single process of economic growth.

Mass Immigration Begins
 The original incentive to mechanize northern industry and agriculture came in part from a shortage of cheap labor. Compared with that of industrializing nations of Europe, the economy of the United States in the early nineteenth century was labor-scarce.



 Women and children made up a large percentage of the workers in the early textile mills, and commercial farmers had to rely heavily on the labor of their family members. In the face of such limited and uncertain labor supplies, producers were greatly tempted to experiment with laborsaving machinery. By the 1840s and 1850s, however, even the newly industrialized operations were ready to absorb a new influx of unskilled workers. During the 1840s, what had been a substantial flow of European immigrants to the United States suddenly became a flood. No fewer than 4.2 million people crossed the Atlantic between 1840 and 1860, with 3 million arriving in the single decade between 1845 and 1855. This was the greatest influx in proportion to total population—then about 20 million—that the nation has ever experienced. The largest single source of the new mass immigration was Ireland, but Germany was not far behind. Smaller contingents came from Switzerland, Norway, Sweden, and the Netherlands. The massive transatlantic movement had many causes. The great push factor that caused 1.5 million Irish to forsake the Emerald Isle between 1845 and 1854 was the great potato blight, which brought

THE AGE OF PRACTICAL INVENTION
Year* 
Inventor
John Fitch
Eli Whitney


Contribution
Steamboat
Cotton gin




Eli Whitney
Oliver Evans


 Jig for guiding tools Steam engine



 Cast-iron plow



Richard B.
Chenaworth
Peter Cooper
 Cyrus McCormick Samuel Colt John Deere



Charles Goodyear


 Vulcanization of rubber



Crawford W. Long
Samuel F. B. Morse
Elias Howe
Norbert Rillieux


 First administered ether Telegraph Sewing machine Vacuum evaporator



Richard M. Hoe
William Kelly


 Rotary printing press “Air-boiling process”



Elisha G. Otis


 Passenger elevator



Edwin L. Drake
George M. Pullman


 First American oil well Pullman passenger car

 Railroad locomotive Reaper Revolver Steel plow

Importance/Description
 First successful American steamboat Simplified process of separating fiber from seeds; helped make cotton a profitable staple of southern agriculture Facilitated manufacture of interchangeable parts First American steam engine; led to manufacture of high-pressure engines used throughout eastern United States First iron plow to be made in three separate pieces, thus making possible replacement of parts First steam locomotive built in America Mechanized harvesting; early model could cut six acres of grain a day First successful repeating pistol Steel surface kept soil from sticking; farming thus made easier on rich prairies of Midwest Made rubber much more useful by preventing it from sticking and melting in hot weather Reduced pain and risk of shock during operations in surgery Made long-distance communication almost instantaneous First practical machine for automatic sewing Improved method of removing water from sugar cane; revolutionized sugar industry and was later applied to many other products Printed an entire sheet in one motion; vastly speeded up printing process Improved method of converting iron into steel (usually known as Bessemer process because English inventor Bessemer had more advantageous patent and financial arrangements) Improved movement in buildings; when later electrified, stimulated development of skyscrapers Initiated oil industry in the United States First railroad sleeping car suitable for long-distance travel

 *Dates refer to patent or first successful use. Source: From Freedom and Crisis: An American History, 3rd ed., by Allen Weinstein and Frank Otto Gatell. Copyright © 1974, 1978, 1981 by Random House, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Random House, Inc.

 Complete the Assignment Hispanic America After 1848: A Case Study in Majority Rule on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


W


 ith the discovery of gold in 1848, more than one thousand Californians of Mexican ancestry joined the frenetic rush to the Sierras. Among them was Don Antonio Franco Coronel, a Los Angeles schoolteacher, who led a group of fellow Californios into the rich goldfields. Just months before the expedition, the United States and Mexico had concluded the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which transformed Coronel and his companions from Mexicans to Americans. At the insistence of the Mexican government, the treaty stipulated that Mexicans living in the newly acquired territories would be granted “all the rights of citizens of the United States . . . according to the principles of the Constitution.” Coronel’s gold-seeking enterprise would put that promise to the test. Upon arriving in gold country, Coronel and his men immediately hit pay dirt. In the first day alone, Coronel pulled 45 ounces of gold from the ground; within eight days, one of his associates had amassed a pile of gold weighing a staggering 52 pounds. The Californios seemed to have a head start in the race for gold. They understood the terrain, cooperated among themselves, and were familiar with the best mining techniques. Not surprisingly, their dramatic successes stirred the envy of their Anglo-American competitors. After a year of relatively peaceful competition, Anglo miners began to express their resentments. Lumping Californios with all other “foreigners,” they unleashed a barrage of physical and political attacks against their competitors. Lynch mobs, camp riots, and legal harassment were common forms

Hispanic America After 1848
A
Case Study in Majority Rule  of Yankee intimidation. Despite their entitlements to the rights of citizenship, the Californios were badgered and bullied into retreat. Fearing for his life, Coronel returned to Southern California, where Hispanics still outnumbered the newcomers. Earning prestige and prosperity in Los Angeles, Coronel went on to become mayor and state treasurer. But to the end of his life, he still painfully remembered his experiences in Northern California, where his rights as a U.S. citizen were so easily disregarded by his fellow Americans. Coronel’s experiences exemplify two truths about the effect U.S. expansion had on the lives of Mexicans who suddenly found themselves in American territory. First, in areas where Anglo-American settlement grew rapidly—such as Northern California— the Hispanic community typically faced discrimination, intimidation, and a denial of the very civil rights that Guadalupe Hidalgo had supposedly guaranteed. Second, in areas where the Hispanic population remained a majority—such as Southern California— Spanish-speaking Americans were able to exercise the rights of republican citizenship, often wielding considerable political influence. Coronel had a taste of both experiences, going from intimidated miner to powerful politician. However, as Anglo settlers began to stream into Southern California, even that region ceased to be a safe haven for Hispanic rights. By the mid-1840s, Hispanics living in Texas, known as Tejanos, were outnumbered by Anglos at a ratio of twenty to one. True to the pattern described above, this decided minority faced intense prejudice. Among the most notable victims of this prejudice was Juan Seguin, a hero of the Texas war

 for independence (see p. 296). Perhaps no Tejano family fell further or faster than the posterity of Don Martin de Leon. The scion of an aristocratic family, de Leon had spearheaded Spanish efforts to colonize Texas and continued to organize settlements after Mexican independence. Establishing extensive cattle ranches, the de Leons enjoyed prominence and wealth on their holdings. As with most Tejanos, they fervently supported the struggle for Texan independence, fighting shoulder to shoulder with their Anglo neighbors. But when the war ended, the de Leon estate fell under siege from the surging wave of new settlers. Relying on the intricacies of Anglo-American law and the power of an electoral majority, the newcomers quickly encroached on de Leon’s lands. With frightening rapidity, the de Leon family was reduced from its preeminent position to abject poverty. The de Leons were not alone. A contemporary observed that many Anglo settlers worked “dark intrigues against the native families, whose only crime was that they owned large tracts of land and desirable property.” Even after U.S. annexation of the Lone Star Republic, Hispanics continued to be pushed off their land. In 1856, a Texas newspaper reported that “The people of Matagorda county have held a meeting and ordered every Mexican to leave the county. To strangers this may seem wrong, but we hold it to be perfectly right and highly necessary.” For many Mexican Americans, life on U.S. soil taught the cruelest lesson in white man’s democracy. Yet majority rule actually worked to the favor of Hispanics living in New Mexico, where they enjoyed numerical dominance. When U.S. troops entered

 Blessing of the Enrequita Mine, 1860, by Alexander Edouart. Spaniards and Mexicans, men and women, surround the makeshift altar where the priest is saying the blessing to dedicate the Enrequita Mine in northern California. The idyllic scene does not hint at the violent and rough treatment Hispanic miners experienced during the California gold rush days.

 Santa Fe in 1846, Albino Chacón, a prominent city judge, controlled his own future. Although he had been loyal to the Mexican government throughout the war, the U.S. Army offered him the opportunity to retain his judgeship. Given similar offers, other New Mexicans who had initially opposed the U.S. invasion accepted positions of prominence, such as Donanciano Vigil, who served as interim governor of the territory. But Chacón lived by a strict code of honor and could not switch loyalties so easily. Opting for exile,

 Chacón moved out of Santa Fe, left the practice of law, and took up farming. Aside from such self-imposed changes, however, American rule actually had little impact on most New Mexicans’ lives. Hispanics still formed the demographic and political backbone of the territory and often served their new nation with distinction. Chacón’s own son, Rafael, served as a Union officer during the Civil War, winning acclaim in defending New Mexico against a Confederate invasion from Texas, and was eventually elected as

 territorial senator. Rafael’s son studied law at Notre Dame and held several important positions in the Department of Justice. Majority status afforded New Mexican Hispanics opportunities in the American system that were denied their compatriots living in Anglo-dominated regions. As settlement increased throughout the century, such Hispanic-controlled communities dwindled. The rise of the railroad acted as a funnel through which Anglo-Americans poured into western territories, and remaining pockets of Hispanic dominance rapidly disappeared. American majoritarianism and racism combined to place Hispanics in positions subordinate to those of the Anglo newcomers. Throughout the region the story was sadly similar: As Hispanic Americans lost their majority status, they also lost many of their basic rights.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
How did the American citizenship granted them under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo benefit persons of Mexican ancestry in California and the Southwest? 2. How did Anglo prejudice and discrimination deny these benefits in subsequent years? 




 CHAPTER 13

AN AGE OF EXPANSIONISM

IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES, 1820–1860
Thousands 
427,833


371,603
369,980




 Total immigration for indicated year



200,877




153,640
114,371




84,066




8,385


23,322










 famine to a population that subsisted on this single crop. Escape to America was made possible by the low fares then prevailing on sailing ships bound from England to North America. Ships involved in the timber trade carried their bulky cargoes from Boston or Halifax to Liverpool; as an alternative to returning to America partly in ballast, they packed Irish immigrants into their holds. The squalor and misery in these steerage accommodations were almost beyond belief. Because of the ports involved in the lumber trade—Boston, Halifax, Saint John’s, and Saint Andrews—the Irish usually arrived in Canada or the northeastern states. Immobilized by poverty and a lack of the skills required for pioneering in the West, most of them remained in Northeastern cities. Forced to subsist on low-paid menial labor and crowded into festering urban slums, they were looked down on by most native-born Americans. Their devotion to Catholicism aroused Protestant resentment and mob violence. Some race-conscious people even doubted that the Irish were “white” like other northern Europeans. (See Chapter 14 for a discussion of the growth of nativism and anti-Catholicism.) The million or so Germans who also came in the late 1840s and early 1850s were somewhat more fortunate. Most of them were also peasants, but they had fled hard times rather than outright catastrophe. Changes in German landholding patterns and a fluctuating market for grain crops put pressure on small operators. Unlike the Irish, they often escaped with a small amount of capital with which to make a fresh start in the New World. Many German immigrants were artisans and sought to ply their trades in cities such as New York, St. Louis, Cincinnati, and Milwaukee. But a large portion of those with peasant backgrounds went back to the land. The possession of diversified agricultural skills and small amounts of capital enabled many Germans to become successful midwestern farmers. In general, they encountered less prejudice and discrimination than the Irish. For Germans who were Protestant, religious affinity with their American neighbors made

 for relative tolerance. But even Germans who were Catholic normally escaped the virulent scorn heaped on the Irish, perhaps because they were not so poverty stricken and did not carry the added burden of being members of an ethnic group Anglo-Americans had learned to despise from their English ancestors and cousins. What attracted most of the Irish, German, and other European immigrants to America was the promise of economic opportunity. A minority, like some of the German revolutionaries of 1848, chose the United States because they admired its democratic political system. But most immigrants were more interested in the chance to make a decent living than in voting or running for office. The arrival of large numbers of immigrants exacerbated the already serious problems of America’s rapidly growing cities. The old “walking city” in which rich and poor lived in close proximity near the center of town was changing to a more segregated environment. The advent of railroads and horsedrawn streetcars enabled the affluent to move to the first American suburbs, while areas nearer commercial and industrial centers became the congested abode of newcomers from Europe. Emerging slums, such as the notorious Five Points district in New York City, were characterized by overcrowding, poverty, disease, and crime. Recognizing that these conditions created potential dangers for the entire urban population, middle-class reformers worked for the professionalization of police forces, introduction of sanitary water and sewage disposal systems, and the upgrading of housing standards. They made some progress in these endeavors in the period before the Civil War, but the lot of the urban poor, mainly immigrants, was not dramatically improved. Except to the extent that their own communal activities—especially those sponsored by churches and mutual aid societies—provided a sense of security and solidarity, the existence of most urban immigrants remained unsafe, unhealthy, and unpleasant. Despite the increasing segregation of the city into ethnic neighborhoods, the urban experience also produced a unifying effect on its mixed population. Individuals of all classes, occupations, and ethnicities met on the crowded streets and in the public squares of cities. Often, the entire population—or at least wide cross sections—came together in colorful parades, public celebrations, and political contests. Many city residents met other citizens as members of political parties, religious groups, and civic organizations. A single individual may have voted as a Democrat, worshiped as a Baptist, and served as a member of a volunteer fire department. These different affiliations created relationships that existed outside of ethnic identity. Antebellum cities showed the dark side of urbanization in their crowded slums and growing poverty, but they also became cauldrons of democracy in which different elements of nineteenth-century America met face to face to create a wider definition of what it meant to be an American.

The New Working Class
 A majority of immigrants ended up as wage workers in factories, mines, and construction camps or as casual day laborers doing the many unskilled tasks required for urban and commercial growth. During the 1850s, factory production in Boston and other port cities previously devoted to commerce grew—partly because thousands of recent Irish immigrants worked for the kind of low wages that almost guaranteed large profits for entrepreneurs. In established industries and older mill towns of the Northeast, immigrants added to, or in some cases displaced, the

Conclusion: The Costs of Expansion


Read the Document




Samuel Morse, Foreign Immigration (1835)


 This 1854 cartoon titled “The Old World and the New” shows a shabbily dressed man in Ireland examining posters for trips to New York (left). At right, he is shown later, in America, wearing finer clothes and looking at posters advertising trips for emigrants returning to Dublin. As was the case for many immigrants seeking economic opportunities in the “New World,” his situation has apparently changed for the better.

 native-born workers who had predominated in the 1830s and 1840s. The changing workforce of the textile mills in Lowell, Massachusetts, provided a striking example of this process. In 1836, only 3.7 percent of the workers in one Lowell mill were foreign born; most members of the labor force at that time were young unmarried women from New England farms. By 1860, immigrants constituted 61.7 percent of the workforce. Women still formed the majority, but there had been a great proportional increase in the number of men who tended machines in textile factories. Irish males, employers found, were willing to perform tasks that nativeborn men had generally regarded as women’s work. This trend reveals much about the changing character of the American working class. In the 1830s, most male workers were artisans, and factory work was still largely the province of native-born American women and children. In the 1840s, the proportion of men engaged in factory work increased, and work conditions in many mills deteriorated. Workdays of twelve to fourteen hours were not new, but a more impersonal and cost-conscious form of management replaced paternalism and cooperation. During the depression that followed the Panic of 1837, bosses attempted to reduce expenses and increase productivity by cutting wages, increasing the speed of machinery, and “stretching out”—giving each worker more machinery to operate. The result was a new upsurge of labor militancy involving female as well as male factory workers. Mill girls in Lowell, for example, formed a union of their own—the Female Labor Reform Association—and agitated for shorter working hours. On a broader front, workers’ organizations petitioned state legislatures to pass laws limiting the workday to ten hours. The laws that were actually passed turned out to be ineffective because employers could still require a prospective worker to sign a special contract agreeing to longer hours.

 The employment of immigrants in increasing numbers between the mid-1840s and the late 1850s made it more difficult to organize industrial workers. Impoverished fugitives from the Irish potato famine tended to have lower economic expectations and more conservative social attitudes than did native-born workers. Consequently, the Irish immigrants were initially willing to work for less and were not so prone to protest bad working conditions. By contrast, some German immigrants brought labor radicalism with them from their native land, and became leaders of union organization.

Conclusion: The Costs of Expansion
 By 1860, industrial expansion and immigration had created a working class of men and women who seemed destined for a life of low-paid wage labor. This reality stood in contrast to America’s self-image as a land of opportunity and upward mobility. Wage labor was popularly viewed as a temporary condition from which workers were supposed to extricate themselves by hard work and frugality. According to Abraham Lincoln, speaking in 1859 of the North’s “free-labor” society, “there is no such thing as a freeman being fatally fixed for life, in the condition of a hired laborer.” This ideal still had some validity in rapidly developing regions of the western states, but it was mostly myth when applied to the increasingly foreign-born industrial workers of the Northeast. Both internal and external expansion had come at a heavy cost. Tensions associated with class and ethnic rivalries were only one part of the price of rapid economic development. The acquisition of new territories became politically divisive and would soon lead to a catastrophic sectional controversy. The Young America wing of



 CHAPTER 13

CHAPTER REVIEW

 the Democratic party fought vainly to prevent this from happening. Its leader in the late 1840s and early 1850s was Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois, called the Little Giant because of his small stature and large public presence. More than anyone else of this period, he sought political power for himself and his party by combining an expansionist foreign policy with the encouragement of economic development within the territories already acquired. His youthful dynamism made him seem the very embodiment of the Young

 America ideal. Recognizing that the slavery question was the main obstacle to his program, he sought to neutralize it through compromise and evasion (see Chapter 14). His failure to win the presidency or even the Democratic nomination before 1860 showed that the Young Americans’ dream of a patriotic consensus supporting headlong expansion and economic development could not withstand the tensions and divisions that expansionist policies created or brought to light.

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 13 An Age of Expansionism on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE

 Santa Fe opened to American traders Earliest American settlers arrive in Texas Mexico attempts to halt American migration to Texas American railroads begin commercial operation Cyrus McCormick patents mechanical reaper Revolution breaks out in Texas Texas becomes independent republic John Deere invents steel plow President John Tyler inaugurated Webster-Ashburton Treaty fixes border between Maine and New Brunswick Mass migration to Oregon begins; Mexico closes Santa Fe trade to Americans Samuel F. B. Morse demonstrates electric telegraph; James K. Polk elected president on platform of expansionism

 1845 Mass immigration from Europe begins; United States



 annexes Texas; John L. O’Sullivan coins slogan “Manifest Destiny” War with Mexico breaks out; United States and Great Britain resolve diplomatic crisis over Oregon American conquest of California completed; Mormons settle Utah; American forces under Zachary Taylor defeat Mexicans at Buena Vista; Winfield Scott’s army captures Veracruz and defeats Mexicans at Cerro Gordo; Mexico City falls to American invaders Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo consigns California and New Mexico to United States; Gold discovered in California “Forty-niners” rush to California to dig for gold War between Utah Mormons and U.S. forces averted

CHAPTER REVIEW
Movement to the Far West Ceded 
 WASH.

OREGON COUNTRY

 MONT

 ORE.

 What were some of the reasons for which Americans headed into the Western territories, and what were some of the consequences of expansion?

 Americ ans believed that it was America’s “Manifest Destiny” to expand across the continent. This ideology was a useful rallying cry for politicians willing to go to war with Mexico to gain new territory. (p. 298)

Internal Expansionism


IDAHO WY

 In the 1820s and 1830s, pioneers pursued fertile land in the West beyond the borders of the United States and thus helped set the stage for the annexations and international crises of the 1840s. Some went for adventure, others for material gain or to escape religious persecution. (p. 293)

Manifest Destiny and the Mexican-American War
 Why did the U.S. annex Texas and the Southwest? The annexation of Texas and the Southwest had several causes. Early settlers of Texas grew dissatisfied with the Catholic, antislavery Mexican administration. Many

 How did developments in transportation foster industrialization and encourage immigration? Rail transportation allowed the swift movement of people and goods. Other advances in technology permitted the new “mass production.” The new industries drew many immigrants from Ireland and Germany, who were fleeing famine and persecution. Immigration made labor more plentiful and thus cheaper, so working conditions declined. (p. 305)

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Young America In the 1840s and early 1850s, many public figures— especially younger members of the Democratic party—used this term to describe their program of territorial expansion and industrial growth. p. 292 
 Mexican-American War Conflict (1846–1848) between the United States and Mexico after the U.S. annexation of Texas. As victor, the United States acquired vast new territories from Mexico. p. 302

 Alamo In 1835, Americans living in Mexican-ruled Texas fomented a revolution. Mexico lost the resulting conflict, but not before its troops defeated and killed a group of American rebels at the Alamo, a fortified mission in San Antonio. p. 296

 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo Signed in 1848, this treaty ended the Mexican-American War. Mexico relinquished its claims to Texas and ceded an additional 500,000 square miles to the United States for $15 million. p. 303

 Manifest Destiny Coined in 1845, this term referred to a doctrine in support of territorial expansion based on the belief that the United States should expand to encompass all of North America. p. 298

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
Why do you think Americans turned from expansion beyond U.S. borders to internal expansion after the Mexican-American War? 
 2. What do you think was the most important force driving change in American life during the 1840s and 1850s: Technology, politics, or international movements of people? Why?

 3. Once again in this period, economic and material changes greatly influenced the makeup of American society. What lessons can you draw from the ongoing interplay of social and material changes in U.S. history?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 13 on MyHistoryLab Movement to the Far West ◾

Read the Document
(1852) p. 305


View the Map United States Territorial Expansion in
 the 1850s p. 294 View the Map

Texas Revolution, 1836 p. 296


Manifest Destiny and the Mexican-American War
Watch the Video


The Annexation of Texas p. 299


Read the Document John O’Sullivan, “The Great Nation
 of Futurity” (1845) p. 300 Read the Document Thomas Corwin, “Against the Mexican War” (1847) p. 303

◾


Internal Expansionism


View the Map
 p. 304

Mexican-American War, 1846–1848


Senate Report on the Railroads


◾


Watch the Video Mastering Time and Space: How
 the Railroads Changed America p. 306

◾


Complete the Assignment Hispanic America After
A
Case Study in Majority Rule p. 308 

◾


Read the Document Samuel Morse, Foreign
Immigration (1835) p. 311


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




The Sectional Crisis


Contents and Learning Objectives
THE COMPROMISE OF 1850 PG. 315

FEATURE ESSAY
The Enigma of John Brown 
 How did territorial expansion intensify the conflict over slavery?

LAW AND SOCIETY
The Case of Dred and Harriet Scott: Blurring the Borders of Politics and Justice 
POLITICAL UPHEAVAL, 1852–1856 PG. 319
How did the two-party system change during this period? 
THE HOUSE DIVIDED, 1857–1860 PG. 324
How did the institution of slavery go bey ond political and economic debates? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

Chapter 14 The Sectional Crisis


Brooks Assaults Sumner
 in Congress On May 22, 1856, Representative Preston Brooks of South Carolina erupted onto the floor of the Senate with a cane in his hand. He approached Charles Sumner, the antislavery senator from Massachusetts who had recently given a fiery oration condemning the South for plotting to extend slavery to the Kansas Territory. What was worse, the speech had included insulting references to Senator Andrew Butler of South Carolina, a kinsman of Brooks. When Brooks found Sumner seated at his desk, Brooks proceeded to batter him over the head. Amazed and stunned, Sumner made a desperate effort to rise and ripped his bolted desk from the floor. He then collapsed under a continued torrent of blows. Sumner was so badly injured by the assault that he did not return to the Senate for three years. But his home state reelected him in 1857 and kept his seat vacant as testimony against southern brutality and “barbarism.” In parts of the North that were up in arms against the expansion of slavery, Sumner was hailed as a martyr to the cause of “free soil.” Brooks, denounced in the North as a bully, was lionized by his fellow Southerners. When he resigned from the House after a vote of censure had narrowly failed because of solid southern opposition, his constituents reelected him unanimously.

 These contrasting reactions show how bitter sectional antagonism had become by 1856. Sumner spoke for the radical wing of the new Republican Party, which was making a bid for national power by mobilizing the North against the alleged aggressions of “the slave power.” Southerners viewed the very existence of this party as an insult to their section of the country and a threat to its vital interests. Sumner came closer to being an abolitionist than any other member of Congress, and nothing created greater fear and anxiety among Southerners than their belief that antislavery forces were plotting against their way of life. To many Northerners, “bully Brooks” stood for all the arrogant and violent slaveholders who were allegedly conspiring to extend their barbaric labor system. By 1856, therefore, the sectional cleavage that would lead to the Civil War had already undermined the foundations of national unity. he crisis of the mid-1850s came only a few years after the elaborate compromise of 1850 had seemingly resolved the dispute over the future of slavery in the territories acquired as a result of the Mexican War. The Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 set in motion the renewed agitation over the extension of slavery that led to Brooks’ attack on Sumner. This legislation revived the sectional conflict and led to the emergence of the Republican Party. From that point on, a dramatic series of events increased sectional

T


 After his constituents learned of Preston Brooks’ caning of Senator Sumner, they sent Brooks a gold-handled cowhide whip to use on other antislavery advocates.

 confrontation and destroyed the prospects for a new compromise. The caning of Charles Sumner was one of these events, and violence on the Senate floor foreshadowed violence on the battlefield.

 less tangible features of sectionalism—emotion and ideology—were not as divisive as they would later become. Hence a fragile compromise was achieved through a kind of give-and-take that would not be possible in the changed environment of the mid-1850s.

The Compromise of 1850


The Problem of Slavery in the
Mexican Cession


 How did territorial expansion intensify the conflict over slavery? The “irrepressible conflict” over slavery in the territories began in the late 1840s. The positions taken on this issue between 1846 and 1850 established the range of options that would reemerge after 1854. But during this earlier phase of the sectional controversy, the leaders of two strong national parties, each with substantial followings in both the North and the South, had a vested interest in resolving the crisis. Efforts to create uncompromising sectional parties failed to disrupt what historians call the second party system—the vigorous competition between Whigs and Democrats that had characterized elections since the 1830s. Furthermore, the

 As the price of union between states committed to slavery and those in the process of abolishing it, the Founders had attempted to limit the role of the slavery issue in national politics. The Constitution gave the federal government the right to abolish the international slave trade but no definite authority to regulate or destroy the institution where it existed under state law. Although many of the Founders hoped for the eventual demise of slavery, they provided no direct means to achieve this end except voluntary state action. These ground rules limited the effect of northern attacks on the South’s peculiar institution. It was easy to condemn slavery in principle but very difficult to develop a practical program to eliminate it without defying the Constitution.



 CHAPTER 14

THE SECTIONAL CRISIS

 Radical abolitionists saw this problem clearly and resolved it by rejecting the law of the land in favor of a “higher law” prohibiting human bondage. In 1844, William Lloyd Garrison publicly burned the Constitution, condemning it as “a Covenant with Death, an Agreement with Hell.” But Garrison spoke for a small minority dedicated to freeing the North, at whatever cost, from the sin of condoning slavery. During the 1840s, the majority of Northerners showed that while they disliked slavery, they were not abolitionists. They were inclined to view slavery as a backward and unwholesome institution, much inferior to their own free-labor system, and could be persuaded that slaveholders were power-hungry aristocrats seeking more than their share of national political influence. But they regarded the Constitution as a binding contract between slave and free states and were likely to be prejudiced against blacks and reluctant to accept large numbers of them as free citizens. Consequently, they saw no legal or desirable way to bring about emancipation within the southern states. But the Constitution had not predetermined the status of slavery in future states. Since Congress had the power to admit new states to the Union under any conditions it wished to impose, a majority arguably could require the abolition of slavery as the price of admission. An effort to use this power had led to the Missouri crisis of 1819–1820 (see Chapter 9). The resulting compromise was designed to decide future cases by drawing a line between slave and free states and extending it westward through the unsettled portions of what was then American soil. When specific territories were settled, organized, and prepared for statehood, slavery would be permitted south of the line and prohibited north of it. The tradition of providing both the free North and the slave South with opportunities for expansion and the creation of new states broke down when new territories were wrested from Mexico in the 1840s. When Texas was admitted as a slave state, northern expansionists could still look forward to the admission of Oregon as a counterbalancing free state. But the Mexican War raised the prospect that California and New Mexico, both south of the Missouri Compromise line, would also be acquired. Since it was generally assumed in the North that Congress had the power to prohibit slavery in new territories, a movement developed in Congress to do just that.

The Wilmot Proviso Launches the
Free-Soil Movement
 The Free-Soil crusade began in August 1846, only three months after the start of the Mexican-American War, when Congressman David Wilmot, a Pennsylvania Democrat, proposed an amendment to the military appropriations bill that would ban slavery in any territory acquired from Mexico. Wilmot spoke for the large number of northern Democrats who felt neglected and betrayed by the party’s choice of Polk over Van Buren in 1844 and by the “prosouthern” policies of the Polk administration, including a low tariff and lack of federal funding for internal improvements. Democratic expansionists also felt betrayed that Polk had gone back on his pledge to obtain “all of Oregon” right before waging a war to win all of Texas and the Southwest. Like David Wilmot, they were “jealous of the power of the South.” The pioneer Free-Soilers had a genuine interest in the issue actually at hand—the question of who would control and settle the

 new territories. Combining an appeal to racial prejudice with opposition to slavery as an institution, Wilmot defined his cause as involving the “rights of white freemen” to go to areas where they could live “without the disgrace which association with negro slavery brings on white labor.” Wilmot proposed that slavery as well as settlement by free African Americans be prohibited in the territory obtained in the Mexican cession, thus enhancing the opportunities of the North’s common folk by preventing job competition from slaves and free blacks. By linking racism with resistance to the spread of slavery, Wilmot appealed to a broad spectrum of northern opinion. Northern Whigs backed the proviso because they shared Wilmot’s concern about the outcome of an unregulated competition between slave and free labor in the territories. Furthermore, voting for the measure provided a good outlet for their frustration at being unable to halt the annexation of Texas and the Mexican-American War. The preferred position of some Whig leaders was no expansion at all, but when expansion could not be avoided, the northern wing of the party endorsed the view that acquisition of Mexican territory should not be used to increase the power of the slave states. In the first House vote on the Wilmot Proviso, party lines crumbled and were replaced by a sharp sectional cleavage. Every northern congressman with the exception of two Democrats voted for the amendment, and every Southerner except two Whigs went on record against it. After passing the House, the proviso was blocked in the Senate by a combination of southern influence and Democratic loyalty to the administration. When the appropriations bill went back to the House without the proviso, the administration’s arm-twisting succeeded in changing enough northern Democratic votes to pass the bill and thus send the proviso down to defeat. The end of the Mexican-American War, the formal acquisition of New Mexico and California, and the approaching election of 1848 gave new urgency to a search for politically feasible solutions. The extreme alternatives—the proviso policy of free soil and the radical southern response that slavery could be extended to any territory—threatened to destroy the national parties because there was no bisectional support for either of them.

Squatter Sovereignty and the
Election of 1848
 After a futile attempt was made to extend the Missouri Compromise line to the Pacific—a proposal that was unacceptable to Northerners because most of the Mexican cession lay south of the line—a new approach was devised that appealed especially to Democrats. Its main proponent was Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan, an aspirant for the party’s presidential nomination. Cass, who described his formula as “squatter sovereignty,” would leave the determination of the status of slavery in a territory to the actual settlers. From the beginning, this proposal contained an ambiguity that allowed it to be interpreted differently in the North and the South. For northern Democrats, squatter sovereignty—or popular sovereignty as it was later called—meant the settlers could vote slavery up or down at the first meeting of a territorial legislature. For the southern wing of the party, it meant a decision would be made only at the time a convention drew up a constitution and applied for statehood. It was in the interest of national Democratic leaders to leave this ambiguity unresolved for as long as possible.

The Compromise of 1850


THE ELECTION OF 1848
Candidate Taylor Cass Van Buren 
Party
Whig
Democratic
Free-Soil


Popular
Vote
1,360,967
1,222,342
291,263


Electoral
Vote
—


 Congress failed to resolve the future of slavery in the Mexican cession in time for the election of 1848, and the issue entered the arena of presidential politics. The Democrats nominated Cass on a platform of squatter sovereignty. The Whigs evaded the question by running General Zachary Taylor—the hero of the battle of Buena Vista—without a platform. Taylor refused to commit himself on the status of slavery in the territories, but northern Whigs favoring restriction took heart from the general’s promise not to veto any territorial legislation passed by Congress. Southern Whigs went along with Taylor mainly because he was a Southerner who owned slaves and would presumably defend the interests of his native region. Northerners who strongly supported the Wilmot Proviso—and felt betrayed that neither the Whigs nor the Democrats were supporting it—were attracted by a third-party movement. In August, a tumultuous convention in Buffalo nominated former-President Van Buren to carry the banner of the Free-Soil Party. Support for the Free-Soilers came from antislavery Whigs dismayed by their party’s nomination of a slaveholder and its evasiveness on the territorial issue, disgruntled Democrats who had backed the proviso and resented southern influence in their party, and some of the former



 adherents of the abolitionist Liberty Party. Van Buren himself was motivated less by antislavery zeal than by bitterness at being denied the Democratic nomination in 1844 because of southern obstructionism. The founding of the Free-Soil Party was the first significant effort to create a broadly based sectional party addressing itself to voters’ concerns about the extension of slavery. After a noisy and confusing campaign, Taylor came out on top, winning a majority of the electoral votes in both the North and the South and a total of 1,360,967 popular votes to 1,222,342 for Cass and 291,263 for Van Buren. The Free-Soilers failed to carry a single state but did quite well in the North, coming in second behind Taylor in New York, Massachusetts, and Vermont.

Taylor Takes Charge
 Once in office, Taylor devised a bold plan to decide the fate of slavery in the Mexican cession. A brusque military man who disdained political give-and-take, he tried to engineer the immediate admission of California and New Mexico to the Union as states, thus bypassing the territorial stage entirely and avoiding a congressional debate on the status of slavery in the federal domain. Under the administration’s urging, California, which was filling up rapidly with settlers drawn by the lust for gold, convened a constitutional convention and applied for admission to the Union as a free state. Instead of resolving the crisis, President Taylor’s initiative only worsened it. Once it was clear that California was going to be a free state, the administration’s plan aroused intense opposition in the South. Fearing that New Mexico would also be free because

 In this cartoon, Democrats Lewis Cass and John C. Calhoun and antislavery radicals Horace Greeley, William Lloyd Garrison, and Abby Folsom look on as Martin Van Buren, the Free-Soil Party candidate in the election of 1848, attempts to bridge the chasm between the Democratic platform and that of the antislavery Whigs. The Free-Soil influence was decisive in the election; it split the New York Democratic vote, thus allowing Whig candidate Zachary Taylor to win New York and the presidency.

 CHAPTER 14

THE SECTIONAL CRISIS

 Mexican law had prohibited slavery there, Southerners of both parties accused the president of trying to impose the Wilmot Proviso in a new form. The prospect that only free states would emerge from the entire Mexican cession inspired serious talk of secession. In Congress, Senator John C. Calhoun of South Carolina saw a chance to achieve his long-standing goal of creating a southern voting bloc that would cut across regular party lines. State legislatures and conventions throughout the South denounced “northern aggression” against the rights of the slave states. As signs of southern fury increased, Calhoun rejoiced that the South had never been so “united . . . bold, and decided.” In the fall and winter of 1849–1850, several southern states agreed to participate in a convention, to be held in Nashville in June, where grievances could be aired and demands made. For an increasing number of southern political leaders, the survival of the Union would depend on the North’s response to the demands of the southern rights movement.

Forging a Compromise
 When it became clear that the president would not abandon or modify his plan in order to appease the South, independent efforts began in Congress to arrange a compromise. Hoping that he could again play the role of “great pacificator” as he had in the Missouri

View the Closer Look


 Compromise of 1820, Senator Henry Clay of Kentucky offered a series of resolutions meant to restore sectional harmony. He hoped to reduce tension by providing mutual concessions. On the critical territorial question, his solution was to admit California as a free state and organize the rest of the Mexican cession with no explicit prohibition of slavery—in other words, without the Wilmot Proviso. Noting that Mexican law had already abolished slavery there, he also pointed to the arid climate of the New Mexico region, which made it unsuitable for cotton culture and slavery. He also sought to resolve a major boundary dispute between New Mexico and Texas by granting the disputed region to New Mexico while compensating Texas through federal assumption of its state debt. As a concession to the North on another issue—the existence of slavery in the District of Columbia—he recommended prohibiting the buying and selling of slaves at auction and permitting the abolition of slavery itself with the consent of the District’s white inhabitants. He also called for a more effective Fugitive Slave Law. These proposals provided the basis for the Compromise of 1850. Proposed in February 1850, it took several months for the compromise to get through Congress. One obstacle was President Taylor’s firm resistance to the proposal; another was the difficulty of getting congressmen to vote for it in the form of a single package or “omnibus bill.” Few politicians from either section

The Compromise of 1850


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)
ke La 
UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

 WIS.

VT. N.H.

 MICH.

 ke La

 ie Er

R.I.
CONN. N.J.

PA. MD.

OHIO IND.

 ILL.

 DEL.

VA. MO.

 CALIFORNIA

KY. N.C.

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

 TENN.

INDIAN TERRITORY

S.C.


ARK. MISS.

 TEXAS

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 GA.

 ALA.

LA. FLA.

 Free state or territory

Gulf of Mexico


 Slave state or territory Opened to slavery by principle of popular sovereignty

 MASS.

N.Y.


 IOWA

UTAH TERRITORY

PACIFIC OCEAN

Lak
 ron Hu

MINNESOTA TERRITORY

Lake
Ontario


 e

OREGON TERRITORY

 ME.

Superior
Lake Michigan




 MEXICO





 500 miles

 500 kilometers

THE COMPROMISE OF 1850
The “compromise” was actually a series of resolutions granting some concessions to the North—especially admission of California as a free state—and some to the South, such as a stricter Fugitive Slave Law. 
Political Upheaval, 1852–1856


 were willing to go on record as supporting the key concessions to the other section. The logjam was broken in July by two crucial developments: President Taylor died and was succeeded by Millard Fillmore, who favored the compromise, and a decision was made to abandon the omnibus strategy in favor of a series of measures that could be voted on separately. After the breakup of the omnibus bill, Democrats replaced the original Whig sponsors as leaders of the compromise movement, and some of Clay’s proposals were modified to make them more acceptable to the South and the Democrats. Senator Stephen A. Douglas, a Democrat from Illinois, was particularly influential. As the price of Democratic support, the popular sovereignty principle was included in the bills organizing New Mexico and Utah. Territorial legislatures in the Mexican cession were explicitly granted power over “all rightful subjects of legislation.” Abolition of slave auctions and depots in the District of Columbia and a new Fugitive Slave Law were also enacted. The latter was a particularly outrageous piece of legislation: Suspected fugitives were now denied a jury trial, the right to testify in their own behalf, and other basic constitutional rights. As a result, there were no effective safeguards against falsely identifying fugitives or kidnapping free blacks. The compromise passed because its key measures were supported by northern Democrats, southern Whigs, and representatives of both parties from the border states. No single bill was backed by a majority of the congressmen from both sections, and few senators or representatives actually voted for the entire package.

Read the Document


The Fugitive Slave


Act (1850)




 Both sides doubted the value and workability of a “compromise” that was really more like an armistice or a cease-fire. Yet the Compromise of 1850 did serve for a short time as a basis for sectional peace. Probably the greatest challenges to the stability of the compromise came from a few sensational rescues or attempted rescues of fugitive slaves by free blacks in the North. In Boston in 1854, an antislavery mob led by armed abolitionists tried to free fugitive Anthony Burns from the court house where his extradition hearing was to take place. One of the men guarding Burns was killed, but the fugitive himself could not be reached. After the hearing had declared Burns an escaped slave, he was escorted by units of the U.S. Army through a hissing and groaning crowd of twenty thousand to a waiting ship. After this event few efforts were made to apprehend escaped slaves in those parts of the North where antislavery sentiment was deeply rooted.

Political Upheaval, 1852–1856
 How did the two-party system change during this period? The second party system—Democrats versus Whigs—survived the crisis over slavery in the Mexican cession, but in the long run the Compromise of 1850 may have weakened it. Although both national parties had been careful during the 1840s not to take stands on the slavery issue that would alienate their supporters in either section of the country, they had in fact offered voters alternative ways of dealing with the question. Democrats had endorsed headlong territorial expansion with the promise of a fair division of the spoils between slave and free states. Whigs had generally opposed annexations or acquisitions, because they were likely to bring the slavery question to the fore and threaten sectional harmony. With some shifts of emphasis and interpretation, each strategy could be presented as either a protection or containment of slavery. Yet the stability of the situation was fragile. When the Democrats sought to revive the Manifest Destiny issue in 1854, they reopened the explosive issue of slavery in the territories. The Whigs were too weak and divided to respond with a policy of their own, and a purely sectional Free-Soil Party—the Republicans—gained prominence. Without strong national parties to contain sectionalism, the divisions between North and South intensified.

The Party System in Crisis


 Southerners had long objected to northern states’ attitudes toward runaway slaves. In fact, many northern states had passed personal liberty laws in an effort to protect free black people from kidnapping and to shield runway slaves from capture by making it more difficult, as well as more expensive, for slaveholders to recover their property. Nevertheless, for the thousands of northerners who wanted to remain neutral, passage of the Fugitive Slave Act quashed their comfortable middle ground.

 The presidential campaign of 1852 was singularly devoid of major issues. With the slavery question under wraps, some Whigs tried to revive interest in the nationalistic economic policies that were the traditional hallmarks of their party. But convincing arguments in favor of a protective tariff, a national bank, and internal improvements were hard to make in a period of sustained prosperity. Another tempting issue was immigration. Many evangelical Protestant Whigs were upset by the massive influx of Catholics from Europe, who voted overwhelmingly for their Democratic opponents. While some Whig leaders called for restrictions on immigrant voting rights, others wanted to compete with the Democrats for the immigrant vote, including the Whig nominee for President, General Winfield Scott. The fact that Scott’s

 CHAPTER 14

THE SECTIONAL CRISIS

THE ELECTION OF 1852
Candidate Pierce Scott Hale 
Popular
Vote
1,601,117
1,385,453
155,825


Party
Democratic
Whig
Free-Soil


 Pierce received 254 electoral votes from 27 states while Scott carried only 4 states with 42 electoral votes. This outcome revealed that the Whig Party was in deep trouble because it lacked a program that would distinguish it from the Democrats and would appeal to voters in both sections of the country. Despite their overwhelming victory in 1852, the Democrats had reasons for anxiety about the loyalty of their supporters. Because the major parties had ceased to offer clear-cut alternatives to the electorate, voter apathy or alienation was a growing trend in the early 1850s.

Electoral
Vote
—


 daughters were being raised as Catholics was publicized to demonstrate his good intentions toward immigrant communities. This strategy backfired. For the most part, Catholic immigrants retained their Democratic allegiance, and some nativist Whigs apparently sat out the election to protest their party’s disregard of their cultural prejudices. But the main cause for Scott’s crushing defeat was the support he lost in the South when he allied himself with the dominant northern antislavery wing of the party, led by Senator William Seward of New York. The Democratic candidate, Franklin Pierce of New Hampshire, was a colorless nonentity compared to his rival, but he ran up huge majorities in the Deep South, where Whigs stayed home in massive numbers. He also edged out Scott in most of the free states. In the most one-sided election since 1820,

View the Map


The Kansas-Nebraska Act Raises
 a Storm In January 1854, Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois proposed a bill to organize the territory west of Missouri and Iowa. Since this region fell within the area where slavery had been banned by the Missouri Compromise, Douglas anticipated objections from Southerners concerned about the creation of more free states. To head off this opposition and keep the Democratic Party united, Douglas disregarded the compromise line and sought to set up the territorial government in Kansas and Nebraska on the basis of popular sovereignty, relying on the alleged precedent set in the Compromise of 1850.

The Compromise of 1850 and the Kansas-Nebraska Act


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

W


Lak


MICH.
La 
 ke

 ie Er

IOWA OHIO ILL.

UTAH TERRITORY

PACIFIC OCEAN

VT. N.H.

 IND.

 PA.

 n and Maso ine L Dixon

R.I.
CONN. N.J. DEL. MD.

VA. KANSAS TERRITORY

 MO.

 KY.

Missouri Compromise Line 36°3


 CALIFORNIA

INDIAN TERRITORY

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

N.C.


0'


TENN. S.C.

ARK. MISS. ALA.

 GA.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 LA.

 TEXAS

FLA.
Free state or territory 
Gulf of Mexico


 Slave state or territory Opened to slavery by principle of popular sovereignty, Compromise of 1850

 MASS.

N.Y.


 ron

NEBRASKA TERRITORY

 WIS.

Lake
Ontario


Hu


MINNESOTA TERRITORY

OREGON TERRITORY

 ME.

 uperior

 e

R.
ER NT TO NG HI AS

S
 ke La

Lake Michigan




 MEXICO

 Opened to slavery by principle of popular sovereignty, Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854

THE KANSAS-NEBRASKA ACT OF 1854





 500 miles 500 kilometers

 The Kansas Nebraska Act applied the principle of popular sovereignty to voters in the Kansas and Nebraska territories, allowing them to decide for themselves whether to permit slavery in their territories. The act repudiated the Missouri Compromise of 1820, which had prohibited slavery in the territory of the Louisiana Purchase north of 36°30’ latitude.

Political Upheaval, 1852–1856


 Douglas wanted to organize the Kansas-Nebraska area quickly. Along with other midwestern promoters of the economic development of the frontier, he hoped a railroad would soon be built from Chicago to the Pacific and did not want controversy over the status of slavery in the new territory to slow down the building of the railroad. Douglas also hoped his Kansas-Nebraska bill would revive the spirit of Manifest Destiny that had given the Democratic Party cohesion and electoral success in the mid1840s (see Chapter 13). The price of southern support, Douglas soon discovered, was the addition of an amendment explicitly repealing the Missouri Compromise. Although he realized this would “raise a hell of a storm,” he reluctantly agreed. In this more provocative form, the bill made its way through Congress, passing the Senate by a large margin and the House by a narrow one. The vote in the House showed that Douglas had split his party rather than uniting it; exactly half of the northern Democrats voted against the legislation. The Democrats who broke ranks created the storm that Douglas had predicted but underestimated. A manifesto of “independent Democrats” denounced the bill as “a gross violation of a sacred pledge.” A memorial from three thousand New England ministers described it as a craven and sinful surrender to the slave power. For many Northerners, probably a majority, the Kansas-Nebraska Act

 was an abomination because it permitted the possibility of slavery in an area where it had previously been prohibited. Southerners who had not pushed for such legislation or even shown much interest in it now felt obligated to support it, lending fuel to Northern fears of a conspiracy to extend slavery. Douglas’s bill had a catastrophic effect on sectional harmony. It repudiated a compromise that many in the North regarded as a binding sectional compact, almost as sacred and necessary to the survival of the Union as the Constitution itself. In defiance of the whole compromise tradition, it made a concession to the South on the issue of slavery extension without providing an equivalent concession to the North. From then on, northern sectionalists would be fighting to regain what they had lost, while Southerners would battle to maintain rights already conceded. The act also destroyed what was left of the second party system. The already weakened and tottering Whig Party totally disintegrated when its congressional representation split cleanly along sectional lines on the Kansas-Nebraska issue. The Democratic Party survived, but now firmly under southern control, without the ability to act as a unifying national force. The congressional elections of 1854 revealed the political chaos Douglas had created. In the North, “anti-Nebraska” coalitions of Whigs, dissident Democrats, and Free-Soilers swept regular

 VT.

 MAINE -2 N.H. -3

 WIS. -2

 ILL. -1

 MICH. -3

 PA. -9

 OHIO -12

 IND. -8

 MISS. -1

 ALA. -1

 MD. -2

N.C.


TENN. ARK.

R.I. -3
 CONN. -4 N.J. -3 DEL. -1

 VA. -1

 KY. -1

 MO. -2 CALIF.

 MASS. -2

N.Y.
-15


 IOWA

 TEXAS -1

S.C.
 GA.

LA. FLA.

House of Representatives Totals
Party
Democratic
Whig
Republican
American
Other


1852–1853


1854–1855






Source: Congressional Quarterly,
 Guide to U.S. Elections, 2nd ed., 1985.

CONGRESSIONAL ELECTION OF 1854



 "Bolting" ex-Democratic majority states

 No-majority-party states

 Democratic majority states

 Nonvoting territories

Previously Whig
 majority states

 or gain in –2, +1 Loss Democratic seats

 The impact of the Kansas-Nebraska Act was immediately felt in the election of 1854. “Anti-Nebraska” coalitions and the fledgling Republican Party made gains in the North; the Democrats remained dominant in the South.



 CHAPTER 14

THE SECTIONAL CRISIS

 Democrats out of office. In some states, these anti-Democratic coalitions would evolve directly into a new and stronger Free-Soil Party—the Republicans. In the Deep South, however, the Democrats routed the remaining Whigs and came close to ending two-party competition on the state level. The furor over Kansas-Nebraska also doomed the efforts of the Pierce administration to revive an expansionist foreign policy by acquiring Cuba from Spain. In October 1854, the American ministers to England, France, and Spain met in Ostend, Belgium, and drew up a memorandum for the administration urging acquisition of Cuba by any means necessary—including force—if Spain refused to sell the island. The Ostend Manifesto became public in the midst of the controversy resulting from the Kansas-Nebraska Act. Northerners who were convinced that the administration was trying to extend slavery to the Great Plains were enraged to discover it was also scheming to fulfill the southern expansionist dream of a “Caribbean slave empire.” The resulting storm of protest forced Pierce and his cohorts to abandon their scheme.

 Native-born and even some immigrant Protestants looked with suspicion on the mostly Catholic Irish and Germans (see Chapter 13), who clustered in separate communities or neighborhoods in American cities. Nativists expressed their hatred in bloody anti-Catholic riots, in church and convent burnings, and in a barrage of propaganda and lurid literature trumpeting the menace of “popery” to the American way of life. In 1849, a secret fraternal organization, the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, was founded in New York as a vehicle for anti-immigrant attitudes. When members were asked about the organization, they were instructed to reply, “I know nothing.” The order grew rapidly in size, by 1854 reaching a membership of between 800,000 and 1,500,000. The political objective of the American Party, or Know-Nothing Party, as it became known, was to extend the period of naturalization in order to undercut immigrant voting strength and to keep aliens in their place. Much of the party’s backing came from Whigs looking for a new home, but the party also attracted some ex-Democrats. In the North, KnowNothing candidates generally opposed the Kansas-Nebraska Act, and some of their support came from voters who were as anxious about the expansion of slavery as they were about the An Appeal to Nativism: evils of immigration. The Know-Nothing Episode The success of the new party was so dramatic that it was The collapse of the Whigs created the opening for a new politicompared to a hurricane. In 1854, it won complete control in cal party. The anti-Nebraska coalitions of 1854 suggested that such Massachusetts, capturing the governorship, most of the seats in a party might be organized on the basis of northern opposition the legislature, and the entire congressional delegation. In 1855, to the extension of slavery to the territories. Instead, for a time the Know-Nothings took power in three more New England states; it appeared that the Whigs would be replaced by a nativist party swept Maryland, Kentucky, and Texas; and emerged as the principal rather than an antislavery one. opposition to the Democrats everywhere else except in the Midwest. By late 1855, the Know-Nothings showed every sign of displacing the Whigs as the nation’s second party. Read the Document John Gihon, Kansas Begins to Bleed Yet, the Know-Nothing movement quickly collapsed. Its demise in 1856 is one of the great mysteries of American political history. As an intersectional party, its failure is understandable enough. When the Know-Nothings attempted to hold a national convention in 1856, northern and southern delegates split on the question of slavery in the territories, showing that former Whigs were still at odds over the same issue that had destroyed their old party. Less clear is why the KnowNothings failed to become the major opposition party to the Democrats in the North. The most persuasive explanation is that their Free-Soil Republican rivals, who were seeking to build a party committed to the containment of slavery, had an issue with wider appeal. In 1855 and 1856, the rate of immigration declined The bitter contest over popular sovereignty in Kansas erupted into violence between proslavery and antislavery noticeably, and the conflict in Kansas groups. The skirmishes, including the one at Hickory Point, near Leavenworth, depicted here, resulted in two hundred deaths and heavy property destruction before federal troops were brought in to restore order. heightened the concern about slavery.

Political Upheaval, 1852–1856


 Consequently, voters who opposed both the expansion of slavery and unrestricted immigration were inclined to give priority to the former threat.

Kansas and the Rise of the Republicans
 The new Republican Party was an outgrowth of the anti-Nebraska coalition of 1854. The Republican name was first used in midwestern states such as Wisconsin and Michigan where Know-Nothingism failed to win a mass following. A new political label was required because Free-Soil Democrats—who were an especially important element in the midwestern coalitions—refused to march under the Whig banner or even support any candidate for high office who called himself a Whig. When the Know-Nothing Party split over the Kansas-Nebraska issue in 1856, most of the northern nativists became Republicans. The Republican argument that the “slave-power conspiracy” was a greater threat to American liberty and equality than an alleged “popish plot” proved to be persuasive. Although Republican leaders generally avoided taking anti-immigrant positions—some out of strong principle and others with an eye to the votes of the foreign born—the party showed a clear commitment to the values of native-born evangelical Protestants. On the local level, Republicans generally supported causes that reflected an anti-immigrant or antiCatholic bias—such as prohibition of the sale of alcoholic beverages, observance of the Sabbath, defense of Protestant Bible reading in schools, and opposition to state aid for parochial education. Unlike the Know-Nothings, the Republican Party was led by seasoned professional politicians who had earlier been prominent Whigs or Democrats. Adept at organizing the grass roots, building coalitions, and employing all the techniques of popular campaigning, they built up an effective party apparatus in an amazingly short time. By late 1855, the party had won over two-thirds of the anti-Nebraska congressmen elected in 1854. By early 1856, the new party was well established throughout the North and was preparing to make a serious bid for the presidency. The Republican Party’s position on slavery in the territories had a strong and growing appeal. Republicans viewed the unsettled West as a land of opportunities, a place to which the ambitious and hardworking could migrate in the hope of improving their social and economic position. Free soil would serve as a guarantee of free competition or “the right to rise.” But if slavery was permitted to expand, the rights of “free labor” would be denied. Slaveholders would monopolize the best land, use their slaves to compete unfairly with free white workers, and block efforts at commercial and industrial development. They could also use their political control of new western states to dominate the federal government in the interest of the “slave power.” Some Republicans also pandered to racial prejudice: They presented their policy as a way to keep African Americans out of the territories, thus preserving the new lands for exclusive white occupancy. The turmoil associated with attempts to implement popular sovereignty in Kansas kept the territorial issue alive and enabled the Republicans to increase their following throughout the North. When Kansas was organized in the fall of 1854, a bitter contest began for control of the territorial government. New Englanders founded an Immigrant Aid Society to encourage



 antislavery settlement in Kansas, but the earliest arrivals came from the neighboring slaveholding state of Missouri. In the first territorial elections, proslavery settlers were joined at the polls by thousands of Missouri residents who crossed the border to vote illegally. The result was a decisive victory for the slave-state forces. The legislature then proceeded to pass laws that not only legalized slavery but made it a crime to speak or act against it. Settlers favoring free soil were already a majority of the actual residents of the territory when the fraudulently elected legislature denied them the right to agitate against slavery. To defend themselves and their convictions, they took up arms and established a rival territorial government under a constitution that outlawed slavery. The Pierce administration and its appointed local agents refused to recognize this “free-state” initiative, but Republicans in Congress defended it. A small-scale civil war then broke out between the rival regimes, culminating in May 1856 when proslavery adherents raided the free-state capital at Lawrence. Portrayed in Republican propaganda as “the sack of Lawrence,” this incursion resulted in substantial property damage but no deaths. More bloody was the reprisal carried out by the antislavery zealot John Brown. Upon hearing of the attack on Lawrence, Brown and a few followers murdered five proslavery settlers in cold blood. During the next few months—until a truce was arranged by an effective territorial governor in the fall of 1856—a hit-and-run guerrilla war raged between free-state and slave-state factions. Since the “sack of Lawrence” occurred at about



NEBRASKA TERRITORY





 50 miles 50 kilometers

MISSOURI KANSAS TERRITORY K
an 
 o Miss sas R.

 uri R

.


Kansas City


Topeka
Lawrence
May 21, 1856
Osawatomie
Aug. 31, 1856
Pottawatomie Creek
 (led by John Brown) May 24, 1856

Marais des Cygnes
May 19, 1858


Attacks by
 free-state forces Attacks by pro-slavery forces

KANSAS”
One result of the KansasNebraska Act of 1854 was the border war that erupted between proslavery and antislavery forces in “bleeding” Kansas. 


 CHAPTER 14

THE SECTIONAL CRISIS

 the same time that Preston Brooks assaulted Charles Sumner on the Senate floor (see pp. 314–315), the Republicans launched their 1856 campaign under twin slogans “Bleeding Kansas” and “Bleeding Sumner.” The image of an evil and aggressive “slave power,” using violence to deny constitutional rights to its opponents, was a potent device for gaining northern sympathies and votes.

 alarming and raised grave doubts about the security of slavery within the Union. The continued success of a unified Democratic Party under southern control was widely viewed as the last hope for the maintenance of sectional balance and “southern rights.”

The House Divided, 1857–1860
Sectional Division in the Election
 of 1856 The Republican nominating convention revealed the strictly sectional nature of the new party. Only a handful of the delegates from the slave states attended, and all of these were from the upper South. The platform called for liberation of Kansas from the slave power and for congressional prohibition of slavery in all territories. The nominee was John C. Frémont, explorer of the West and participant in the conquest of California during the Mexican-American War. The Democratic convention dumped the ineffectual Pierce, passed over Stephen A. Douglas, and nominated James Buchanan of Pennsylvania, who had a long career in public service. The Democrats’ platform endorsed popular sovereignty in the territories. The American Party, a Know-Nothing remnant that survived mainly as the rallying point for anti-Democratic conservatives in the border states and parts of the South, chose ex-President Millard Fillmore as its standard-bearer and received the backing of those northern Whigs who refused to become Republicans and hoped to revive the tradition of sectional compromise. The election was really two separate races—one in the North between Frémont and Buchanan, and the other in the South, between Fillmore and Buchanan. The Pennsylvania Democrat emerged victorious because he outpolled Fillmore in all but one of the slave states (Maryland) and edged out Frémont in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Indiana, and Illinois. But the Republicans did remarkably well for a party that was scarcely more than a year old. Frémont won eleven of the sixteen free states, sweeping the upper North with substantial majorities and winning a larger proportion of the northern popular vote than either of his opponents. Since the free states had a substantial majority in the Electoral College, a future Republican candidate could win the presidency simply by overcoming a slim Democratic edge in the lower North.

 How did the institution of slavery go beyond political and economic debates? The sectional quarrel deepened and became virtually “irreconcilable” in the years between Buchanan’s election in 1856 and Lincoln’s victory in 1860. A series of incidents provoked one side or the other, heightened the tension, and ultimately brought the crisis to a head. Behind the panicky reaction to public events lay a growing sense that the North and South were so culturally different and so opposed in basic interests that they could no longer coexist. President Buchanan did little to halt the downward spiral. A series of scandals emerged in the second half of his presidency, and Buchanan’s unwillingness to deal with them revealed his

Watch the Video


Harriet Beecher Stowe
 and the Making of Uncle Tom’s Cabin

THE ELECTION OF 1856
Candidate Buchanan Frémont Fillmore 
Party
Democratic
Republican
American
(Know-Nothing)


Popular
Vote


Electoral
Vote


1,832,955
1,339,932
871,731




 In the South, where the possibility of a Frémont victory had revived talk of secession, the results of the election brought momentary relief tinged with deep anxiety about the future. The very existence of a sectional party committed to restricting the expansion of slavery constituted an insult to the Southerners’ way of life. That such a party was genuinely popular in the North was profoundly

 Harriet Beecher Stowe’s best known novel, Uncle Tom’s Cabin (1852), changed forever how Americans viewed slavery, the system that treated people as property.

The House Divided, 1857–1860


 weakness. For example, Secretary of War John Floyd sold land containing an Army fort in Minnesota for a suspiciously lowprice, while at the same time overpaying contractors for munitions. Buchanan rebuffed Congressional investigators in part because getting rid of Floyd, a fellow Southern Democrat, would have damaged his fragile political support. Buchanan hoped to keep the South in the Union by “maintaining the status quo,” according to his biographer, and hoped that the sectional crisis could be resolved by Congress or the Supreme Court, without his having to take action. But his passivity only hastened the descent into conflict.

Cultural Sectionalism
 Signs of cultural and intellectual cleavage had appeared well before the triumph of sectional politics. In the mid-1840s, a number of churches split into northern and southern denominations, officially as well as informally, because of differing attitudes toward slaveholding. Increasingly, northern preachers and congregations denounced slaveholding as a sin, while most southern church leaders rallied to a biblical defense of the peculiar institution and became influential apologists for the southern way of life. Prominent religious leaders were in the forefront of sectional mobilization. As men of God, they helped to turn political questions into moral issues and reduced the prospects for a compromise. American literature also became sectionalized during the 1840s and 1850s. Southern men of letters, including such notable figures as novelist William Gilmore Simms and Edgar Allan Poe, wrote proslavery polemics. Popular novelists produced a flood of “plantation romances” that seemed to glorify southern civilization and sneer at that of the North. The notion that planter “cavaliers” were superior to money-grubbing Yankees was the message that most Southerners derived from this homegrown literature. In the North, prominent men of letters—Emerson, Thoreau, James Russell Lowell, and Herman Melville—expressed strong antislavery sentiments in prose and poetry, particularly after the outbreak of the Mexican-American War. Literary abolitionism reached a climax in 1852 when Harriet Beecher Stowe published Uncle Tom’s Cabin, an enormously successful novel (it sold more than 300,000 copies in a single year) that fixed in the northern mind the image of the slaveholder as a brutal Simon Legree. Much of its emotional impact came from the book’s portrayal of slavery as a threat to the family and the cult of domesticity. When the saintly Uncle Tom was sold away from his adoring wife and children, Northerners shuddered with horror and some Southerners felt a painful twinge of conscience. Southern defensiveness gradually hardened into cultural and economic nationalism. Northern textbooks were banished from southern schools in favor of those with a prosouthern slant; young men of the planter class were induced to stay in the South for higher education rather than going North (as had been the custom), and a movement developed to encourage southern industry and commerce as a way of reducing dependence on the North. Almost without exception, prominent southern educators and intellectuals of the late 1850s rallied behind southern sectionalism, and many even endorsed the idea of an independent southern nation.



The Dred Scott Case
 When James Buchanan was inaugurated on March 4, 1857, the dispute over the legal status of slavery in the territories allowed sectional fears and hatreds to enter the political arena. Buchanan hoped to close that door by encouraging the Supreme Court to resolve the constitutional issue once and for all. The Court was then about to render its decision in the case of Dred Scott v. Sandford. (See the Law and Society essay, “The Case of Dred and Harriet Scott,” pp. 334–337.) The plaintiff in the case was a Missouri slave who sued for his freedom on the grounds that he had lived for many years in an area where slavery had been outlawed by the Missouri Compromise. The Supreme Court could have decided the issue on the narrow ground that a slave was not a citizen and therefore had no right to sue in federal courts. But President-elect Buchanan, in the days just before the inauguration, encouraged the Court to render a broader decision that would settle the slavery issue.

Watch the Video


Dred Scott and the Crises
 that Led to the Civil War

 Dred Scott’s legal battle to gain his freedom traveled all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court, where Justice Taney’s effort to settle once and for all the constitutional questions regarding slavery in a sweeping decision instead incited Northerners to vote for the Republican Party and hastened the coming of the Civil War.



 CHAPTER 14

THE SECTIONAL CRISIS

 On March 6, Chief Justice Roger B. Taney announced that the majority had ruled against Scott. Taney argued that no African American—slave or free—could be a citizen of the United States. But the real bombshell in the decision was the ruling that Dred Scott would not have won his case even if he had been a legal plaintiff. His residence in the Wisconsin Territory established no right to freedom because Congress had no power to prohibit slavery there. The Missouri Compromise was thus declared unconstitutional and so, implicitly, was the plank in the Republican platform that called for the exclusion of slavery from all federal territories. In the North, and especially among Republicans, the Court’s verdict was viewed as the latest diabolical act of the “slave-power conspiracy.” The charge that the decision was a political maneuver rather than a disinterested interpretation of the Constitution was supported by strong circumstantial evidence. Five of the six judges who voted in the majority were proslavery Southerners, and their resolution of the territorial issue was close to the extreme southern rights position long advocated by John C. Calhoun. Republicans denounced the decision as “a wicked and false judgment” and as “the greatest crime in the annals of the republic,” but they stopped short of openly defying the Court’s authority. The decision actually helped the Republicans build support; it lent credence to their claim that an aggressive slave power was dominating all branches of the federal government and attempting to use the Constitution to achieve its own ends.

Read the Document


Stephen A. Douglas,
Debate at Galesburg, Illinois (1858)


The Lecompton Controversy
 While the Dred Scott case was being decided, leaders of the proslavery faction in Kansas concluded that the time was ripe to draft a constitution and seek admission to the Union as a slave state. Since settlers with free-state views were now an overwhelming majority in the territory, supporters of slavery tried to rig the election for convention delegates. When it became clear the election was fixed, the free-staters boycotted it , and the proslavery forces won complete control. The resulting constitution, drawn up at Lecompton, was certain to be voted down if submitted to the voters in a fair election and sure to be rejected by Congress if no referendum of any kind was held. To resolve the dilemma, supporters of the Lecompton Constitution decided to permit a vote on the slavery provision alone, giving the electorate the narrow choice of allowing or forbidding the future importation of slaves. Since there was no way to vote for total abolition, the free-state majority again resorted to a boycott, thus allowing ratification of a constitution that protected existing slave property and did not restrict importations. Meanwhile, however, the free-staters had finally gained control of the territorial legislature, and they authorized a second referendum on the constitution as a whole. This time, the proslavery party boycotted the election, and the Lecompton Constitution was overwhelmingly rejected. The Lecompton Constitution was such an obvious perversion of popular sovereignty that Stephen A. Douglas spoke out against it. But the Buchanan administration, bowing to southern pressure, tried to push it through Congress in early 1858, despite overwhelming evidence that the people of Kansas did not want to enter the Union as a slave state. While Buchanan scored a victory in the Senate, a

 Stephen Douglas, the “Little Giant” from Illinois, won election to Congress when he was just thirty years old. Four years later, he was elected to the Senate. Source: Collection of The New-York Historical Society, neg. number 38219.

 coalition of Republicans and Douglas Democrats defeated the bill in the House. A face-saving compromise allowed resubmission of the constitution to the Kansas voters on the pretext that a change in the provisions for a federal land grant was required. Finally, in August 1858, the people of Kansas killed the Lecompton Constitution when they voted it down by a margin of 6 to 1. The Lecompton controversy aggravated the sectional quarrel and made it truly “irreconcilable.” For Republicans, the administration’s frantic efforts to admit Kansas as a slave state exposed southern dominance of the Democratic Party and the lengths to which proslavery conspirators would go to achieve their ends. Among Democrats, the affair opened a deep rift between the followers of Douglas and the backers of the Buchanan administration. Because of his anti-Lecompton stand, Douglas gained popularity in the North, and some Republicans even flirted with the idea of

The House Divided, 1857–1860


 joining forces with him against the “doughfaces”—prosouthern Democrats—who stood with Buchanan. For Douglas himself, however, the affair was a disaster; it destroyed his hopes of uniting the Democratic Party and defusing the slavery issue through the application of popular sovereignty. What had happened in Kansas suggested that popular sovereignty in practice was an invitation to civil war. For his stand against Lecompton, Douglas was denounced as a traitor in the South, and his hopes of being elected president were seriously diminished.



Read the Document


Abraham Lincoln, Debate
 at Galesburg, Illinois (1858)

Debating the Morality of Slavery
 Douglas’s more immediate problem was to win reelection to the Senate from Illinois in 1858. Here he faced surprisingly tough opposition from a Republican candidate who, in defiance of precedent, was nominated by a party convention. (At this time, senators were elected by state legislatures.) Douglas’s rival, former Whig Congressman Abraham Lincoln, set out to convince the voters that Douglas could not be relied on to oppose the extension of slavery, even though he had opposed the admission of Kansas under a proslavery constitution. In the famous speech that opened his campaign, Lincoln tried to distance himself from his opponent by taking a more radical position. He argued that the nation had reached the crisis point in the struggle between slavery and freedom: “‘A house divided against itself cannot stand.’ I believe this government cannot endure, permanently half slave and half free.” Lincoln then described the chain of events between the Kansas-Nebraska Act and the Dred Scott decision as evidence of a plot to extend and nationalize slavery. He called for defensive actions to stop the spread of slavery and place it “where the public mind shall rest in the belief that it is in the course of ultimate extinction.” He tried to link Douglas to this proslavery conspiracy by pointing to his rival’s unwillingness to take a stand on the morality of slavery and to his professed indifference about whether slavery was voted up or down in the territories. For Lincoln, the only security against the triumph of slavery and the slave power was moral opposition to human bondage. Neutrality on the moral issue would lull the public into accepting the expansion of slavery until it was legal everywhere. In the subsequent series of debates that focused national attention on the Illinois senatorial contest, Lincoln hammered away at the theme that Douglas was a covert defender of slavery because he was not a principled opponent of it. Douglas responded by accusing Lincoln of endangering the Union by his talk of putting slavery on the path to extinction. Denying that he was an abolitionist, Lincoln made a distinction between tolerating slavery in the South, where it was protected by the Constitution, and allowing it to expand to places where it could legally be prohibited. Restriction of slavery, he argued, had been the policy of the Founders, and it was Douglas and the Democrats who had departed from the great tradition of containing an evil that could not be immediately eliminated. In the debate at Freeport, Illinois, Lincoln questioned Douglas on how he could reconcile popular sovereignty with the Dred Scott decision. The Little Giant, as Douglas was called by his admirers, responded that slavery could not exist without supportive

 Abraham Lincoln, shown here in his first full-length portrait. Although Lincoln lost the contest for the Senate seat in 1858, the Lincoln–Douglas debates established his reputation as a rising star of the Republican Party.

 legislation to sustain it and that territorial legislatures could simply refrain from passing a slave code. Douglas’s most effective tactic was to charge that Lincoln’s moral opposition to slavery implied a belief in racial equality. Lincoln, facing an intensely racist electorate, vigorously denied this charge and affirmed his commitment to

 Complete the Assignment The Enigma of John Brown on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


O


 n December 2, 1859, an old man with a thick white beard, who might have stepped out of the pages of the Old Testament, stood on a scaffold in Virginia awaiting execution for attempting to start a slave insurrection. He was unrepentant and without fear. Defiantly facing the assembled militiamen and other onlookers, he handed one of his attendants a prophetic message claiming that he had acted under divine inspiration and that it was God’s will that “the crimes of this guilty, land: will never be purged away; but with Blood.” His abortive raid on the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry, Virginia, had sent a wave of fear through the slaveholding South, but the manner of his death and his strong antislavery sentiments made him a hero to many in the North. No single man did more to heighten the sectional crisis of the late 1850s and increase the probability of civil war. But who was this man and how did he come to play such an important role in the sectional drama? Controversy surrounded him during his lifetime and has continued to do so ever since. Many African Americans have revered him as the rare example of a white man willing to give his life for black freedom. Unlike most white Americans, he seems to have been totally free of racial prejudice and at times identified with blacks so completely that he—and they—could almost forget that he was not one of them. But the means that he used to pursue his ends—his willingness to resort to violence, even to terrorism—has troubled many of those who find his objectives praiseworthy.

The Enigma of
John Brown
 The obvious impracticality of the plan for a massive slave uprising that he tried to put into effect at Harpers Ferry also has raised questions about his soundness of mind. John Brown was born in Connecticut in 1800, the descendent of an old New England family that may have been represented on the Mayflower. He received little formal education and followed in his father’s occupation as a tanner of leather. Lured westward like so many New Englanders of the time, he pursued the tanning business first in western Pennsylvania and then in Ohio. But unsuccessful land speculations and the hard times following the Panic of 1837 drove him into bankruptcy in 1842. He then became a wool dealer but faced ruin again in 1849 when his attempt to cut out the usual middlemen and make a direct sale of 200,000 pounds of American wool to buyers in England resulted in a huge loss. Such risk taking and the resulting ups and downs were normal experiences for the businessmen of the time. Brown may have been unluckier than some others, but the notion that his antislavery zeal was somehow a compensation for business failure makes little sense. As early as 1834, at a time when his tannery was doing well, Brown proposed to raise a black boy in his own family as an experiment to show slaveholders that race was no obstacle to the building of character. He also considered opening a school for black children. By 1847, however, Brown had given up on the idea that education and example could end slavery. While still a successful wool merchant in Springfield, Massachusetts, he confided to the black abolitionist Frederick Douglass the germ of the

 plan he later tried to put into effect at Harpers Ferry: instigation of guerrilla war against slavery based in the mountains of the South. In 1851, Brown organized Springfield’s blacks into a secret militia to resist enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850. In 1854, he retired from the wool business with the intention of devoting the rest of his life to the cause of black freedom and equality. From a farm in North Elba, New York, he acted as patron of a struggling black agricultural colony and also served as a conductor on the Underground Railroad when fugitives heading for Canada came his way. By the fall of 1855 the front line of the struggle against slavery was in Kansas (see p. 323). Following in the wake of his five sons, Brown went west to join the fray in September. After proslavery ruffians sacked the Free State capital of Lawrence in the spring of 1856, Brown led a retaliatory raid on proslavery settlers living along Pottawatamie Creek. In what can only be described as an act of terrorism, Brown and his men executed five defenseless men who had been rousted from their beds. His apparent objective was to instill fear and panic among the proslavery forces, possibly driving them to commit outrages of their own and thus further polarize the nation on the slavery question. Perhaps Brown already had concluded that a civil war, or something like it, was the only way to end slavery, and he appeared committed to bringing it about by any means necessary. For the next two years Brown operated as a guerrilla fighter in Kansas, raising money from eastern supporters who were unaware of his role in the Pottawatamie massacre.

Read the Document


 John Brown’s Address Before Sentencing

 This painting, The Last Moments of John Brown, celebrates the passionate abolitionist as a hero and martyr to the antislavery cause. On his way to the gallows, he pauses to greet a slave mother and her child. Source: Detail from The Last Moments of John Brown. Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Carl Stoeckel, 1897. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Image copyright © The Metropolitan Museum of Art/Art Resource, NY.

 volunteers, eighteen of whom raided the federal arsenal. The plan was to seize the arms and distribute them to rebellious slaves. The raid turned into a debacle when the local militia trapped Brown and his men in a fire-engine house. Ten of Brown’s men, including two of his sons, died as a result of the shooting that ensued. The survivors, including Brown himself, were captured by a force of U.S. Marines sent from Washington and commanded by Colonel Robert E. Lee. Local slaves did not, as Brown had hoped, rise up spontaneously in rebellion once the violence had commenced. If Brown was certain that his attempt to ignite a slave uprising and a guerrilla war would succeed, he was clearly deluded and possibly deranged. Frederick Douglass, whom Brown had invited to join the raiders, decided that the plan had no reasonable chance of success and refused to participate. But the fact that Brown seemed to welcome his martyrdom, almost rejoicing in it, raises another intriguing possibility. Brown may have realized that the odds were against him and that he would probably fail. But he may also have calculated, quite correctly as it turned out, that the panic that even an abortive raid would evoke from the South and the sympathy that the punishment of its perpetrators might arouse in the North would push the nation closer to the civil war that he had come to believe was the only way to end slavery. If the voice he heard in his head was indeed that of an angry God ready to punish the nation for the sin of slavery, his logic was irrefutable.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION
In May 1858, when the threat of the admission of Kansas to the Union as a slave state had been averted, Brown started organizing his raid on Harpers Ferry. He began by assembling a convention of black fugitives and abolitionists in Canada to draw up the 
 constitution for the independent black state that he hoped to establish in the southern mountains as the base for a guerrilla war against the slaveholders. He then sought financial support from northern abolitionists and gathered a racially integrated force of twenty-two

 1. Why was John Brown’s attitude toward black people so unusual in antebellum America? 2. What did Brown hope to achieve by raiding Harper’s Ferry? 3. Why did the raid push the nation closer to civil war?





 CHAPTER 14

THE SECTIONAL CRISIS

 white supremacy. He would grant blacks the right to the fruits of their own labor while denying them the “privileges” of full citizenship. This was an inherently contradictory position, and Douglas made the most of it. Although Republican candidates for the state legislature won a majority of the popular votes, the Democrats carried enough counties to send Douglas back to the Senate. Lincoln lost an office, but he won respect in Republican circles. By emphasizing the moral dimension of the slavery question and undercutting any possibility of fusion between Republicans and Douglas Democrats, he sharpened his party’s ideological focus and stiffened its backbone against any temptation to compromise its Free-Soil position.

 The South’s Crisis of Fear After Kansas became a free territory in August 1858, the issue of slavery in the territories lost some of its immediacy. The remaining unorganized areas in the Rockies and northern Great Plains were unlikely to attract slaveholding settlers. Southern expansionists still dreamed of annexations in the Caribbean and Central America but had little hope of winning congressional approval. Nevertheless, Southerners continued to demand the “right” to take their slaves into the territories, and Republicans persisted in denying it to them. Although the Republicans repeatedly promised they would not interfere with slavery where it already existed, Southerners refused to believe them and interpreted their unyielding stand against the extension of slavery as a threat to southern rights and security. Events in late 1859 and early 1860 turned southern anxiety about northern attitudes and policies into a “crisis of fear.” The events alarmed slaveholders because they appeared to threaten their safety and dominance in a new and direct way. The first of these incidents was John Brown’s raid on Harpers Ferry, Virginia, in October 1859. (See the Feature Essay, “The Enigma of John Brown,” pp. 328–329.) Brown, who had the appearance and manner of an Old Testament prophet, thought of himself as God’s chosen instrument “to purge this land with blood” and eradicate the sin of slaveholding. On October 16, he led eighteen men from his band of twenty-two (which included five free blacks) across the Potomac River from his base in Maryland and seized the federal arsenal and armory in Harpers Ferry. While Brown hoped his revolt would spread, the neighboring slaves did not rise up to join him. Brown’s raiders were either killed or captured and put on trial for treason against the state of Virginia. The subsequent investigation produced evidence that several prominent northern abolitionists had approved of Brown’s plan— to the extent they understood it—and had raised money for his preparations. This seemed to confirm southern fears that abolitionists were actively engaged in fomenting slave insurrection. After Brown was sentenced to be hanged, Southerners were further stunned by the outpouring of sympathy and admiration that his impending fate aroused in the North. As Ralph Waldo Emerson expressed it, Brown “would make the gallows as glorious as the cross.” His actual execution on December 2 completed Brown’s elevation to the status of a martyred saint of the antislavery cause. The day of his death was marked in parts of the North

 by the tolling of bells, the firing of cannons, and the holding of memorial services. Although Republican politicians were quick to denounce John Brown for his violent methods, Southerners interpreted the wave of northern sympathy as an expression of the majority opinion and the Republicans’ “real” attitude. According to historian James McPherson, “They identified Brown with the abolitionists, the abolitionists with Republicans, and Republicans with the whole North.” Within the South, the raid and its aftermath incited fear, repression, and mobilization. Witch hunts searched for the agents of a vast imagined conspiracy to stir up slave rebellion; vigilance committees were organized in many localities to resist subversion and ensure control of slaves, and orators pointed increasingly to secession as the only way to protect southern interests. Brown was scarcely in his grave when another set of events put southern nerves on edge again. Next to abolitionist-abetted rebellions, the slaveholding South’s greatest fear was that the nonslaveholding majority would turn against the master class and the solidarity of southern whites behind the peculiar institution would crumble. Hinton R. Helper, a white Southerner, published The Impending Crisis of the South in 1859, calling on lower-class whites to resist planter dominance and abolish slavery in their own interest. Slaveholders regarded the book as even more seditious than Uncle Tom’s Cabin, and they feared the spread of “Helperism” among poor whites almost as much as they feared the effect of “John Brownism” on the slaves. Southern suspicion of the Republicans grew even more heated when the Republican candidate for Speaker of the House of Representatives, John Sherman of Ohio, used Helper’s book as a campaign manifesto. Southern congressmen threatened secession if Sherman was elected, and feelings became so heated that some representatives began to carry weapons on the floor of the House. It became clear that Sherman could not be elected, and his name was withdrawn in favor of a moderate Republican who had refrained from endorsing Helper’s book. The contest helped persuade Southerners that the Republicans were committed to stirring up class conflict among southern whites. Anxiety about the future allegiance of nonslaveholding whites had been growing during the 1850s because of changes in the pattern of slave ownership. A dramatic rise in the price of slaves meant that fewer whites could own slaves—slave ownership was down from 30 to 25 percent of all white households across the South and from 50 to 40 percent in the cotton belt of the lower South. Perceiving in this trend the seeds of class conflict, some proslavery extremists had called for the reopening of the Atlantic slave trade as a way to reduce the price of slaves and make them more widely available (others wanted to preserve the appreciated value of their human property). Either way, many planters became convinced that a Republican victory in the presidential election of 1860 would be intolerable.

The Election of 1860
 The Republicans, sniffing victory and generally insensitive to the depth of southern feeling against them, met in Chicago on May 16 to nominate a presidential candidate. The initial front-runner,

The House Divided, 1857–1860


Election of 1860
Electoral Vote by State


Popular Vote


REPUBLICAN
Abraham Lincoln 180 
1,865,593


DEMOCRATIC, SOUTHERN
John C. Breckinridge 


848,356


DEMOCRATIC, NORTHERN
Stephen A. Douglas 


1,382,713


CONSTITUTIONAL UNION
John Bell 


592,906




4,689,568






 TERR.

G.
OR UN

 WASH.





NEBRASKA TERR.



11 13
KANSAS TERR.



INDIAN TERR.

NEW MEXICO TERR.



























UTAH TERR.









 Senator William H. Seward of New York, had two strikes against him: he had a reputation for radicalism and a record of strong opposition to the nativist movement. The majority of the delegates wanted a less controversial nominee who could win two or three of the northern states that had been in the Democratic column in 1856. Abraham Lincoln met their specifications: He was from Illinois, a state the Republicans needed to win; he had a more moderate image than Seward, and he had kept his personal distaste for Know-Nothingism to himself. In addition, he was a selfmade man, whose rise from frontier poverty to legal and political prominence embodied the Republican ideal of equal opportunity for all. After trailing Seward by a large margin on the first ballot, Lincoln picked up enough strength on the second to pull virtually even and was nominated on the third. The platform, like the nominee, was meant to broaden the party’s appeal in the North. Although a commitment to halt the expansion of slavery remained, economic matters received more attention than they had in 1856. With an eye on Pennsylvania, the delegates called for a high protective tariff; other planks included endorsement of free homesteads, which was popular in the Midwest and among working people, and federal aid for internal improvements, especially a transcontinental railroad. The platform was cleverly designed to bring most ex-Whigs into the Republican camp while also accommodating enough renegade Democrats to give the party a solid majority in the northern states. The Democrats failed to present a united front. When the party first met in the sweltering heat of Charleston in late April, Douglas commanded a majority of the delegates but was unable to win the two-thirds required for nomination due to unyielding



 southern opposition. He did succeed in getting the convention to endorse popular sovereignty as its slavery platform, but the price was a walkout by Deep South delegates who favored a federal slave code for the territories. Unable to agree on a nominee, the convention adjourned to reconvene in Baltimore in June. The next time around, a fight developed over whether to seat newly selected pro-Douglas delegations from some Deep South states in place of the bolters from the first convention. When the Douglas forces won most of the contested seats, another and more massive southern walkout took place. The result was a fracture of the Democratic Party. The delegates who remained nominated Douglas and reaffirmed the party’s commitment to popular sovereignty, while the bolters convened elsewhere to nominate John Breckinridge of Kentucky on a platform of federal protection for slavery in the territories. By the time the campaign was under way, four parties were running presidential candidates: the Republicans, the Douglas Democrats, the “Southern Rights” Democrats, and a remnant of conservative Whigs and Know-Nothings known as the Constitutional Union Party. Taking no explicit stand on the issue of slavery in the territories, the Constitutional Unionists tried to represent the spirit of sectional accommodation that had led to compromise in 1820 and 1850. In effect, the race became a separate two-party contest in each section: In the North, the real choice was between Lincoln and Douglas; in the South, the only candidates with a fighting chance were Breckinridge and John Bell, the Constitutional Union candidate. Douglas alone tried to carry on a national campaign, gaining some support in every state, but actually winning only in Missouri. When the results came in, the Republicans had achieved a stunning victory. By gaining the electoral votes of all the free states, except those from three districts of New Jersey that voted for Douglas, Lincoln won a decisive majority—180 to 123 over his combined opponents. In the North, his 54 percent of the popular vote annihilated Douglas. In the South, where Lincoln was not even on the ballot, Breckinridge triumphed everywhere except in Virginia, Kentucky, and Tennessee, which went for Bell and the Constitutional Unionists. The Republican strategy of seeking power by trying to win decisively in the majority section was brilliantly successful. Although less than 40 percent of those who went to the polls throughout the nation actually voted for Lincoln, his support in the North was so solid that he would have won in the electoral college even if his opponents had been unified behind a single candidate. Most Southerners saw the result of the election as a catastrophe. A candidate and a party with no support in their own section had won the presidency on a platform viewed as insulting to southern honor and hostile to vital southern interests. Since the birth of the republic, Southerners had either sat in the White House or exerted considerable influence over those who did. Those days might now be gone forever. Rather than accepting permanent minority status in American politics and facing the resulting dangers to black slavery and white “liberty,” the political leaders of the lower South launched a movement for immediate secession from the Union.



 CHAPTER 14

THE SECTIONAL CRISIS

 In this cartoon from the 1860 election, candidates Lincoln and Douglas struggle for control of the country, while Breckinridge tears away the South. John Bell of the Constitutional Union Party futilely attempts to repair the damage to the torn nation.

Conclusion: Explaining the Crisis
 Generations of historians have searched for the underlying causes of the crisis leading to disruption of the Union but have failed to agree on exactly what they were. Some emphasize the clash of economic interests between agrarian and industrializing regions. But this interpretation does not reflect the way people at the time expressed their concerns. The main issues in the sectional debates of the 1850s were whether slavery was right or wrong and whether it should be extended or contained. Disagreements over protective tariffs and other economic measures benefiting one section or the other were clearly secondary. Furthermore, it has never been clear why the interests of northern industry and those of the South’s commercial agriculture were irreconcilable. Economically, there was no necessity for producers of raw materials to go to war with those who marketed or processed those raw materials. Another group of historians blame the crisis on “irresponsible” politicians and agitators on both sides of the Mason-Dixon line. Public opinion, they argue, was whipped into a frenzy over issues that competent statesmen could have resolved. But this viewpoint has been sharply criticized for failing to acknowledge the depths of feeling that could be aroused by the slavery question and for underestimating the obstacles to a peaceful solution.

 The predominating view is that the crisis was rooted in profound ideological differences over the morality and utility of slavery as an institution. Most interpreters now agree that the roots of the conflict lay in the fact that the South was a slave society and determined to stay that way, while the North was equally committed to a free-labor system. No other differences divided the regions in this decisive way, and it is hard to imagine that secessionism would have developed if the South had followed the North’s example and abolished slavery earlier. Nevertheless, slavery will not explain why the crisis came when it did and in the way that it did. Why did the conflict become “irreconcilable” in the 1850s and not earlier or later? Why did it take the form of a political struggle over the future of slavery in the territories? Adequate answers to both questions require an understanding of political developments that were not directly caused by tensions over slavery. By the 1850s, the established Whig and Democratic parties were in trouble partly because they no longer offered the voters clear-cut alternatives on economic issues that had been the bread and butter of politics during the second party system’s heyday. This situation created an opening for new parties and issues. After the Know-Nothings failed to use attitudes toward immigrants as the basis for a political realignment, the Republicans used the issue

Conclusion: Explaining the Crisis


 of slavery in the territories to build the first successful sectional party in American history. They were not abolitionists, calling for “free soil” rather than freedom for blacks. Indeed, the majority of Northerners were committed to white supremacy and to the original constitutional compromise establishing a hands-off policy toward slavery in the southern states. For Southerners, the Republican Party now became the main issue, and they fought against it from within the Democratic Party until it ceased to function as a national organization in 1860. Why did the slavery extension issue arouse such strong feelings in the two sections during the 1850s? The same issue had arisen earlier and had proved adjustable, even in 1820 when the second party system—with its vested interest in compromise—had not yet emerged. If the expansion of slavery had been as vital and emotional a question in 1820 as it was in the 1850s, the declining Federalist Party presumably would have revived in the form of a northern sectional Party adamantly opposed to the admission of slave states to the Union. Ultimately, therefore, the crisis of the 1850s must be understood as having a deep social and cultural dimension as well as a purely political one. In Uncle Tom’s Cabin, Harriet Beecher Stowe personified the cultural conflict in her depiction of two brothers with similar personalities, one of whom settled in Vermont “to rule over rocks and stones” and the other in Louisiana “to rule over men and women.” The first became a deacon in the church, a member of the local abolition society, and, despite his natural authoritarianism, the adherent of “a democratic theory.” The second became indifferent to religion, openly aristocratic, a staunch defender of slavery, and an extreme racist—“he considered the negro, through all possible gradations of color, as the intermediate link between man and animals.” Stowe’s comparison may have been biased, but she showed a good understanding of how the contrasting environments of slavery and freedom could lead very similar men to have sharply conflicting world views.



 This divergence in basic beliefs and values had widened and become less manageable between the 1820s and the 1850s. Both sections continued to profess allegiance to the traditional “republican” ideals of individual liberty and independence, and both were strongly influenced by evangelical religion. But differences in the economic and social development of each region transformed a common culture into two conflicting cultures. In the North, a rising middle class adapted to the new market economy with the help of an evangelical Christianity that sanctioned self-discipline and social reform (see Chapter 12). The South, on the other hand, embraced slavery as a foundation for the liberty and independence of whites. Its evangelicalism encouraged personal piety but not social reform and gave only limited attention to building the kind of personal character that made for commercial success. The notion that white liberty and equality depended on resistance to social and economic change and—to get to the heart of the matter—on continuing to have enslaved blacks to do menial labor became more deeply entrenched. When politicians appealed to sectionalism during the 1850s, therefore, they could evoke conflicting views of what constituted the good society. The South—with its allegedly idle masters, degraded unfree workers, and shiftless poor whites—seemed to a majority of Northerners to be in flagrant violation of the Protestant work ethic and the ideal of open competition in “the race of life.” From the dominant southern point of view, the North was a land of hypocritical money-grubbers who denied the obvious fact that the virtue, independence, and liberty of free citizens was possible only when dependent laboring classes—especially racially inferior ones—were kept under the kind of rigid control that only slavery could provide. According to the ideology of northern Republicans, the freedom of the individual depended on equality of opportunity for everyone; in the minds of southern sectionalists, it required that part of the population be enslaved. Once these contrary views of the world had become the main themes of political discourse, sectional compromise was no longer possible.

Complete the Assignment The Case of Dred and Harriet Scott: Blurring the Borders of Politics and
 Justice on myhistorylab

Law and
Society


The Case of Dred and
Harriet Scott
Blurring the Borders of Politics
 and Justice

I


 n 1856, a violent civil war in Kansas over the right to bring slaves into the territory, along with Preston Brooks’ near-fatal caning of abolitionist Senator Charles Sumner on the floor of the Senate, convinced free-soil Northerners that the “slave power” had grown impossibly aggressive. Likewise, Southerners had come to believe that the abolitionists’ tentacles were everywhere. It was in this overheated atmosphere that the Supreme Court decided the case of Dred Scott in 1857. Chief Justice Roger Taney apparently hoped that his opinion might settle the roiling constitutional controversies over the status of slavery in the territories, of fugitive slaves in free states, and of Congress’s power to regulate slavery. Instead, he probably hastened the resort to armed conflict. To understand the Dred Scott case, we must go back to the fall of 1832. With the Black Hawk War raging, a young physician named John Emerson accepted a temporary assignment as surgeon at Jefferson Barracks, an army post in Missouri, where he acquired his sole slave, Dred Scott. As the war drew to a close, he sought and secured a full-time commission at Fort Armstrong, Illinois, and headed north with Scott. After arriving in Illinois, Scott continued to attend to Emerson’s personal needs and performed most of the work on Emerson’s land claims. For two years, Scott functioned as a contradiction in terms—a slave laboring in a free state. Scott’s status grew even more complicated with Emerson’s

 next transfer, which took the two men farther north. The pair traveled to Fort Snelling, in what was then Wisconsin Territory—an area where the Missouri Compromise explicitly forbade the practice of slavery. While in Wisconsin Territory, Scott met and married another transported slave, Harriet Robinson. Their union would last for the remainder of Dred Scott’s

 life and produce four children, two of whom died in infancy. When John Emerson died in December 1843, Dred and Harriet Scott found themselves back in Missouri and under the authority of Emerson’s wife, Irene Sanford Emerson. Dred Scott attempted to purchase his family’s freedom, but Mrs. Emerson refused his offer. Then, in the spring of 1846,

 the Scotts took Mrs. Emerson to court, claiming Dr. Emerson had forfeited all rights of ownership a decade earlier when he transported them into free territory. This relatively common maneuver by the Scotts initiated a series of legal struggles that would eventually reach the Supreme Court of the United States. To avoid any direct challenge to the logic or legality of slavery, legal doctrine in Missouri required Dred and Harriet Scott to file a convoluted claim, which accused Mrs. Emerson of assault and false imprisonment. Such a claim did not directly argue the case for freedom, but in fact forced the court to decide on that very issue. If the Scotts were rightfully the slaves of Mrs. Emerson, her abusive behavior toward them would have been perfectly legitimate. If they were not her slaves, the claim of assault and false imprisonment would have been valid. Therefore, in order to consider the petitions of the Scotts, the court would first have to determine whether the Scotts were still slaves or whether their lengthy sojourn into free territory had automatically set them free. Suits such as that filed by the Scotts were quite commonplace in the 1840s, and the typical outcome was freedom for the slave. Missouri courts had repeatedly held that slaves transported into free territory were thereby emancipated. A decade before the Scotts’ suit came to trial, a Missouri court had ruled in the slaves’ favor in a case involving the specific issue of an army transfer. Given such precedents, the Scotts seemed to have a very strong case. The Scotts also had the misfortune, however, of bringing their case to court at a time when public opinion in Missouri was experiencing a profound shift. As slavery came under increasing attack from the North and slaveholding became a fundamental element of Missourians’ identity, judicial decisions grew steadily more hostile to the petitions of slaves. Missouri’s precarious position as a border state intensified its preoccupation with any threat to the institution of slavery.

 As the premier student of the Scotts’ case has commented, “the Scotts as suitors for freedom would become casualties of the sectional conflict.” When the trial finally began in June 1846, the Scotts’ attorney brought a series of witnesses before the jury, all of whom testified that Dred Scott had indeed been at Forts Armstrong and Snelling. All that remained to secure the Scotts’ freedom was the relatively simple task of proving what everyone already knew, that they were held as slaves by Mrs. Emerson. In a surprising legal move, Mrs. Emerson’s lawyers raised doubts as to whether Mrs. Emerson, her brother, or her father actually claimed ownership of the Scotts. With bizarre logic, the jury returned the Scotts to Mrs. Emerson because the trial had failed to establish her as their rightful owner. The peculiar institution required a peculiar brand of law. Undeterred, the Scotts moved for a retrial. After a series of complicated moves by both legal teams, the case came before the Missouri Supreme Court. The court handed down its decision in 1852, six years after the Scotts originally filed their petitions. During those six years, the slavery issue had reached a boiling point and no state felt its effects more than Missouri. Disputes over slavery had divided the state into two hostile factions. Relying heavily on a doctrine of states’ rights, the court held that laws prohibiting slavery in Wisconsin Territory had no binding effect on the State of Missouri. Therefore, the court determined, the Scotts remained slaves. The decision explicitly referred to the deteriorating political climate, arguing that, “Times are not now as they were when the former decisions on this subject were made. Since then . . . States have been possessed with a dark and fell spirit in relation to slavery . . . . Under such circumstances it does not behoove the state of Missouri to show the least countenance to any measure which might gratify this spirit . . . .” Always closely related, law and politics had become indistinguishable in the Scott case. Despite the ruling, neither the Scotts nor their supporters were

 prepared to give up the fight. The next step was to appeal to the nation’s highest court, but such a move did not seem very promising. Not only did the United States Supreme Court have a majority of justices from slave states, but one year earlier it had refused to hear a similar suit. In dismissing that case, Chief Justice Roger Taney followed the same logic that the Missouri Supreme Court had used in rejecting the Scotts’ claims. Laws of federal territories, he reasoned, could have no effect on the policies of any state. Fearful of appealing to the court that had so recently issued an unfavorable ruling, the Scotts stalled. Looking for a solution to the dilemma, the Scotts dropped the case of Scott v. Emerson and filed a new suit, Scott v. Sandford. John Sanford, the widow Emerson’s brother, agreed to bring a “collusive” suit in federal court. (In a misprint, the official court docket rendered his name as Sandford.) The terms of the new case would transform the Scotts’ initially modest petition for freedom into a test case on the citizenship status of free African Americans and on the extent of federal prerogative in limiting the expansion of slavery. Scott v. Sandford was tried in the small back room of a St. Louis store that served as the site of the United States Circuit Court for the District of Missouri. Neither side introduced new evidence or called witnesses; the case would be decided on the basis of evidence that had already been well established. The one new wrinkle was that a federal court could only have jurisdiction of the case if there were “diversity of citizenship” between the litigants—in other words, if the plaintiff and defendants were citizens of different states. But that raised a controversial question that had yet to be resolved in American law: To what extent were free blacks entitled to the rights of citizens? While some Northern states, such as Massachusetts, had gone so far as to grant men of color the right to vote, some Southern state courts had in the previous decade decided cases explicitly holding that even free blacks were not citizens. In May 1854, with

 the debate over the Kansas-Nebraska bill reaching a fevered pitch, the federal district court ratified the earlier Missouri decision, on relatively narrow grounds. With no other recourse, the Scotts’ attorney promptly made preparations to take their case to the U.S. Supreme Court. Both sides pulled out the big guns for this final battle. Friends of the Scotts hired Montgomery Blair, a former U.S. solicitor general and a prominent figure in Washington society. Yet even a character as illustrious as Blair was outshone by Sanford’s attorneys, among whom was Reverdy Johnson, a former U.S. attorney general, perhaps “the most respected constitutional lawyer in the country,” and—even more importantly—the close personal friend of Chief Justice Taney. Both legal teams pursued arguments that promoted their larger political objectives at the expense of their clients. Blair focused on the question of citizenship, which had already been de facto decided in Scott’s favor by the lower court and could have been left alone. Instead of employing the proven strategy of claiming that territorial laws could not affect the policies of a given state, Sanford’s attorneys used the more controversial but more consequential argument that federal antislavery laws were fundamentally unconstitutional. After four days of such arguments, the Court surprisingly postponed the remainder of the trial until the next term, seven months away. During the lengthy recess, tensions in the country continued to rise at a frightening rate. In November, James Buchanan won a tight and acrimonious presidential race in which the extension of slavery had emerged as the preeminent political issue. The following month, with the nation still reeling from the bitter campaign, the trial resumed. The case was now more politicized than ever, and the lawyers did not try to hide their respective agendas. Sanford’s attorneys, in particular, frequently indulged in extensive defenses of the southern way of life. Not surprisingly, the debate grew hostile. The Supreme

 Court had become the showcase for a nation coming apart at the seams. Following the closing arguments, the justices gathered in early February to consider the Scott case. In addition to the specific question of the Scotts’ freedom, the court debated the two weighty questions that had arisen from the trial: Were free African Americans citizens? Did Congress have the authority to prohibit slavery in the federal territories? The justices considered options that would have allowed them to decide on the Scotts’ fate and still avoid the controversial issues, but there was immense public and political pressure for the Court to answer the broader questions once and for all. Chief Justice Taney was determined to do just that. Roger Taney’s presence on the bench loomed as the greatest single obstacle to the Scotts’ freedom. In his late seventies when the Scott case was heard, Taney was a sickly man described by a colleague as “exceedingly feeble and broken.” He had a stark courtroom demeanor and, despite his age and ill health, presided over the court with firmness. Taney spent most of his life in Maryland, and his views on slavery—and on just about everything else—were shaped by his experiences in that border state. A staunch Democrat and an unapologetic Southerner, Taney doggedly defended states’ rights against all federal encroachments. As the friction between North and South grew, the aged chief justice had become personally and emotionally embroiled in the issue. By the time the Scott case came before the Court, Taney was a “bitter sectionalist,” anxious to put an end to “Northern insult and aggression.” On March 6, 1857, Taney addressed the packed courtroom and read the Court’s official opinion, which he himself had composed. From start to finish, Taney read for two full hours. As his tired voice concluded, the Scotts had lost their fight for freedom. In rejecting the Scotts’ claims, Taney tackled the issue of citizenship head on. The chief justice argued that the

 Constitution failed to afford blacks, slave or free, the rights of citizenship. Taney insisted that the framers of the Constitution considered people of African descent as a “subordinate and inferior class of beings, who had been subjugated by the dominant race, and, whether emancipated or not, yet remained subject to their authority, and had no rights or privileges but such as those who held the power . . . might choose to grant them.” Emancipation, therefore, did not confer the rights of citizenship on blacks. Their race constituted a permanent mark of civil inferiority. In making the claim, Taney conspicuously failed to note that four New England states had already offered African Americans basic citizenship rights. Yet, despite this omission, the chief justice had actually been fairly accurate in gauging the era’s prevailing mood. While Taney’s racial doctrine seems extreme and even obscene by today’s standards, it was representative of social attitudes of the time, even among many who opposed the institution of slavery. It would take a war of unprecedented carnage before the nation was prepared to accept the citizenship of black Americans. Having established that free blacks did not hold the rights of U.S. citizenship, Taney should have stopped. If Dred Scott was not entitled to bring a suit in federal court, the case was closed. But Taney was determined to issue an opinion on the second major question of the case, congressional authority to prohibit slavery in the territories. The second half of Taney’s ruling denied such congressional authority and declared the Missouri Compromise unconstitutional. Taney relied on two highly questionable arguments to support this position: first, that the Constitution allowed Congress to legislate only on issues relating to the disposal of land, not on those affecting the legal status of the people living on that land, and second, that Congress only held such authority for land already claimed when the Constitution was drafted, excluding all territory acquired after 1787. Such arguments contradicted years of

 policy and precedent, including some of Taney’s own rulings. The Supreme Court’s decision had four immediate effects. It outraged committed abolitionists, delighted apprehensive Southerners, invalidated the principal plank of the new Republican Party, and relieved worried moderates who believed the decision would lay the national controversy to rest. But despite the tremendous emotion the ruling evoked, many of its predicted effects proved illusory. It invited slavery to expand into the territories, but that never actually happened. It denied the Scotts their freedom, but they were shortly emancipated by new owners. And it claimed to answer fundamental questions of national importance, but those same questions continued to be debated until ultimately resolved by powder and shot. The ruling’s actual effects were quite different from those Taney expected. The emerging Republican Party, for instance, used the decision as a rallying point, decrying the slave power conspiracy that clearly controlled

 the highest court in the land. The party realized that it could overturn the decision only by changing the composition of the court and set its sights even more firmly on winning the presidency in 1860. By sparking intense political reactions and giving the Republican Party a needed boost, the decision catalyzed sectional tensions, speeding the nation along the path to war. Long after the Civil War had faded into history, Scott v. Sandford continued to leave its imprint on American law. The decision marked the first time the Supreme Court had actually struck down a major piece of federal legislation, paving the way for more aggressive judicial review in the future. It also signaled the development of a defining characteristic of American governance, a reliance on the courts to settle controversies that the normal processes of democracy cannot resolve. Ironically, Scott v. Sandford may have served as precedent for Brown v. Board of Education. Although the legacy of the decision lives to this day, the major figures of this story did not long survive the

 momentous events. John Sanford died in an asylum two months after the Court handed down its decision. Dred and Harriet Scott remained in St. Louis after their emancipation where they worked as a hotel porter and a laundress; both died shortly before the onset of the Civil War. Roger Taney continued to serve as chief justice during the war, but he faced bitter animosity from the northern public, who considered him a traitor to the very government he claimed to serve. Taney died in 1864, not living to see the conclusion of the conflict he had helped start. As one contemporary noted, “The Hon. Old Roger B. Taney has earned the gratitude of his country by dying at last. Better late than never.”

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
What made the Dred Scott decision so important in American history? 2. What does the decision tell us about the status of African Americans in the United States on the eve of the Civil War? 




 CHAPTER 14

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 14 The Sectional Crisis on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1846
David Wilmot introduces proviso banning slavery in 
 the Mexican cession Free-Soil Party is founded; Zachary Taylor (Whig) elected president, defeating Lewis Cass (Democrat) and Martin Van Buren (Free-Soil) California seeks admission to the Union as a free state Congress debates sectional issues and enacts Compromise of 1850

 1856 Preston Brooks assaults Charles Sumner on Senate

 floor; James Buchanan wins presidency despite strong challenge in the North from John C. Frémont Supreme Court decides Dred Scott case and legalizes slavery in all territories Congress refuses to admit Kansas to Union under the proslavery Lecompton constitution; Lincoln and Douglas debate slavery issue in Illinois

 1852 Harriet Beecher Stowe publishes Uncle Tom’s Cabin;

 1859 John Brown raids Harpers Ferry, is captured and

 Franklin Pierce (Democrat) elected president by a large majority over Winfield Scott (Whig) 1854 Congress passes Kansas-Nebraska Act, repealing Missouri Compromise; Republican Party founded in several northern states; Anti-Nebraska coalitions score victories in congressional elections in the North 1854–1855 Know-Nothing Party achieves stunning successes in state politics 1854–1856 Free-state and slave-state forces struggle for control of Kansas Territory

 executed 1859–1860 Fierce struggle takes place over election of a Republican as speaker of the House (December–February) 1860 Republicans nominate Abraham Lincoln for presidency (May); Democratic Party splits into northern and southern factions with separate candidates and platforms (June); Lincoln wins the presidency over Douglas, Breckinridge, and Bell

CHAPTER REVIEW
The Compromise of 1850 How did territorial expansion intensify the conflict over slavery? Manifest Destiny raised questions about states’ rights. The Constitution did not permit the federal government to override state slavery laws, but the Wilmot Proviso attempted and failed to ban slavery in the Mexican cession. Despite that defeat, California was admitted as a free state under the Compromise of 1850, while the Fugitive Slave Law appeased the South. (p. 315) 
Political Upheaval, 1852–1856
 How did the two-party system change during this period? The Whig candidate lost in 1852 for supporting the antislavery cause, while the Kansas-Nebraska Act sought to repeal

 the Missouri Compromise—a move most northerners and some southerners considered abominable. This gave rise to Republicanism, which adhered to native Protestant values while supporting development in the West and opposing slavery. The 1856 election was largely a choice between rivals, one northern and one southern. (p. 319)

The House Divided, 1857–1860
 How did the institution of slavery go beyond political and economic debates? Slavery divided American society culturally, legally, and morally. Religious congregations broke up, while literature expressed increasingly the sentiments surrounding slaveholding. The Dred Scott decision stripped American blacks—free and slave alike—of most legal rights. Finally, Lincoln chose to oppose slavery on moral grounds, making freedom a human (and not simply legal) right. (p. 324)

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Wilmot Proviso In 1846, shortly after outbreak of the MexicanAmerican War, Congressman David Wilmot of Pennsylvania introduced this amendment banning slavery in any lands won from Mexico. p. 316 
 Fugitive Slave Law Passed in 1850, this federal law made it easier for slaveowners to recapture runaway slaves; it also made it easier for kidnappers to take free blacks. The law became an object of hatred in the North. p. 319

 Popular sovereignty The concept that the settlers of a newly organized territory had the right to decide (through voting) whether to accept slavery. p. 318

 Kansas-Nebraska Act This 1854 act repealed the Missouri Compromise, split the Louisiana Purchase into two territories, and allowed its settlers to accept or reject slavery by popular sovereignty. p. 321

 Compromise of 1850 Five federal laws that temporarily calmed the sectional crisis. The compromise made California a free state, ended the slave trade in the District of Columbia, and strengthened the Fugitive Slave Law. p. 318

 Ostend Manifesto Written by American diplomats in 1854, this secret memorandum urged acquiring Cuba by any means necessary. When it became public, northerners claimed it was a plot to extend slavery, and the manifesto was disavowed. p. 322

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
How did “popular sovereignty” reemerge as a definitive concept in the debates on slavery in new and existing states? 
 3. How did cultural divisions affect the political compromises made over slavery?

 2. Which qualities did the Whig and Republican parties share? Which did they not?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 14 on MyHistoryLab The Compromise of 1850 ◾ ◾

Read the Document


View the Closer Look


Stephen A. Douglas, Debate at
Galesburg, Illinois (1858) p. 326


The Compromise of 1850 p. 318
Read the Document


Read the Document


The Fugitive Slave Act (1850)


 p. 319

Political Upheaval, 1852–1856
View the Map


The Compromise of 1850 and the
Kansas-Nebraska Act p. 320


Read the Document


Abraham Lincoln, Debate at
Galesburg, Illinois (1858) p. 327


John Gihon, Kansas Begins to Bleed


 p. 322

The House Divided, 1857–1860
◾


Watch the Video Harriet Beecher Stowe and the
 Making of Uncle Tom’s Cabin p. 324

◾


 Watch the Video Dred Scott and the Crises that Lead to the Civil War p. 325

◾


Complete the Assignment


The Enigma of John


Brown p. 328
Read the Document


 John Brown’s Address Before

Sentencing p. 329
Complete the Assignment


The Case of Dred and Harriet
Scott: Blurring the Borders of Politics and Justice p. 334


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




Secession and the Civil War


Contents and Learning Objectives
THE STORM GATHERS PG. 342

EFFECTS OF THE WAR PG. 360

 What developments and events drew the Union toward Civil War?

 How did the outcome of the war affect America socially and politically?

ADJUSTING TO TOTAL WAR PG. 346

FEATURE ESSAY
Soldiering in the Civil War 
 What challenges did “total war” bring for each side?

FIGHT TO THE FINISH PG. 353
How did the Union finally attain victory, and what role did emancipation play in it? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

