Chapter 24 The Nation at War


The Sinking of the Lusitania
 On the morning of May 1, 1915, the German government took out the following important advertisement in the New York World as a warning to Americans and other voyagers setting sail for England: NOTICE— Travellers intending to embark on the Atlantic voyage are reminded that a state of war exists between Germany and her allies and Great Britain and her allies; that the zone of war includes the waters adjacent to the British Isles; that, in accordance with formal notice given by the Imperial German Government, vessels flying the flag of Great Britain, or of any of her allies, are liable to destruction in those waters and that travelers sailing in the war zone on ships of Great Britain or her allies do so at their own risk. At 12:30 that afternoon, the British steamship Lusitania set sail from New York to Liverpool. Secretly, it carried a load of ammunition as well as passengers. The steamer was two hours late in leaving, but it held several speed records and could easily make up the time. The passenger list of 1,257 was the largest

 since the outbreak of war in Europe in 1914. Alfred G. Vanderbilt, the millionaire sportsman, was aboard; so were Charles Frohman, a famous New York theatrical producer, and Elbert Hubbard, a popular writer who jested that a submarine attack might help sell his new book. While some passengers chose the Lusitania for speed, others liked the modern staterooms, more comfortable than the older ships of the competing American Line. Six days later, the Lusitania, back on schedule, reached the coast of Ireland. German U-boats were known to patrol the dangerous waters. When the war began, Great Britain imposed a naval blockade of Germany. In return, Germany in February 1915 declared the area around the British Isles a war zone; all enemy vessels, armed or unarmed, were at risk. Germany had only a handful of U-boats, but the submarines were a new and frightening weapon. On behalf of the United States, President Woodrow Wilson protested the German action, and on February 10, he warned Germany of its “strict accountability” for any American losses resulting from U-boat attacks. Off Ireland, the passengers lounged on the deck of the Lusitania. As if it were peacetime, the ship sailed

 With the sinking of the Lusitania, the American people learned firsthand of the horrors of total war. President Wilson’s decision to protest the incident through diplomacy kept the United States out of the war—but only temporarily.



 CHAPTER 24

THE NATION AT WAR

 straight ahead, with no zigzag maneuvers to throw off pursuit. But the submarine U-20 was there, and its commander, seeing a large ship, fired a single torpedo. Seconds after it hit, a boiler exploded and blew a hole in the Lusitania’s side. The ship listed immediately, hindering the launching of lifeboats, and in eighteen minutes it sank. Nearly 1,200 people died, including 128 Americans. As the ship’s bow lifted and went under, the U-20 commander for the first time read the name: Lusitania. The sinking, the worst since the Titanic went down with 1,500 people in 1912, horrified Americans. Theodore Roosevelt called it “an act of piracy” and demanded war. Most Americans, however, wanted to stay out of war; like Wilson, they hoped negotiations could solve the problem. “There is such a thing,” Wilson said a few days after the sinking, “as a man being too proud to fight. There is such a thing as a nation being so right that it does not need to convince others by force.” In a series of diplomatic notes, Wilson demanded a change in German policy. The first Lusitania note (May 13, 1915) called on Germany to abandon unrestricted submarine warfare, disavow the sinking, and compensate for lost American lives. Germany sent an evasive reply, and Wilson drafted a second Lusitania note (June 9) insisting on specific pledges. Fearful the demand would lead to war, Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan resigned rather than sign the note. Wilson sent it anyway and followed with a third note (July 21)—almost an ultimatum—warning Germany that the United States would view similar sinkings as “deliberately unfriendly.” Unbeknownst to Wilson, Germany had already ordered U-boat commanders not to sink passenger liners without warning. In August 1915, a U-boat mistakenly torpedoed the British liner Arabic, killing two Americans. Wilson protested, and Germany, eager to keep the United States out of the war, backed down. The Arabic pledge (September 1) promised that U-boats would stop and warn liners, unless they tried to resist or escape. Germany also apologized for American deaths on the Arabic, and for the rest of 1915, U-boats hunted freighters, not passenger liners. lthough Wilson’s diplomacy had achieved his immediate goal, the Lusitania and Arabic crises contained the elements that led to war. Trade and travel tied the world together, and Americans no longer hid behind safe ocean barriers. New weapons, such as the submarine, strained old rules of international law. But while Americans sifted the conflicting claims of Great Britain and Germany, they hoped for peace. A generation of progressives, inspired with confidence in human progress, did not easily accept war.

A


 Wilson also hated war, but he found himself caught up in a worldwide crisis that demanded the best in American will and diplomacy. In the end, diplomacy failed, and in April 1917, the United States entered a war that changed the nation’s history. Building on several major trends in American foreign policy since the 1890s, the years around World War I firmly established the United States as a world power, confirmed the country’s dominance in Latin America, and ended with a war with Germany and her allies that had far-reaching results, including establishing the United States as one of the world’s foremost economic powers.

A
New World Power  What were the main events that showed the United States was becoming a world power? As they had in the late nineteenth century, Americans after 1900 continued to pay relatively little attention to foreign affairs. Newspapers and magazines ran stories every day about events abroad, but people paid closer attention to what was going on at home. Walter Lippmann, one of the twentieth century’s most outstanding political commentators, once said, “I cannot remember taking any interest whatever in foreign affairs until after the outbreak of the First World War.” For Americans at the time, foreign policy was something to be left to the president in office, an attitude the presidents themselves favored. Foreign affairs became an arena in which they could exert a free hand largely unchallenged by Congress or the courts, and Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson all took advantage of the opportunity to do so. The foreign policy they pursued from 1901 to 1920 was aggressive and nationalistic. During these years, the United States intervened in Europe, the Far East, and Latin America. It dominated the Caribbean. In 1898, the United States left the peace table possessing the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Guam. Holding distant possessions required a colonial policy; it also required a change in foreign policy, reflecting an outward approach. From the Caribbean to the Pacific, policy makers paid attention to issues and countries they had earlier ignored. Like other nations in these years, the United States built a large navy, protected its colonial empire, and became increasingly involved in international affairs. The nation also became more and more involved in economic ventures abroad. Turning out goods from textiles to steel, mass production industries sold products overseas, and financiers invested in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and Europe. During the years between the Spanish-American War and World War I, investments abroad rose from $445 million to $2.5 billion. While investments and trade never wholly dictated American foreign policy, they fostered greater involvement in foreign lands.

“I Took the Canal Zone”
 Convinced the United States should take a more active international role, Theodore Roosevelt spent his presidency preparing the nation for world power. Working with Secretary of War Elihu Root, he modernized the army, using lessons learned from the war with Spain. Roosevelt and Root established the Army War College,

A
New World Power 

Caribbean Sea


 PANAMA

 Colón Cristobal

 a gr Ch

Panama
Canal
Zone


Gatun
Locks


 es R

.


Gatun
Lake
Pedro Miguel
Locks


Miraflores
Locks


 5 miles



 5 kilometers

 PANAMA

Panamá


Balboa


 NICARAGUA

Panama
Canal


Panama Canal


PACIFIC OCEAN

Caribbean Sea
Panama
Canal
Zone


COSTA RICA

Locks


 PANAMA

Railroad


COLOMBIA PACIFIC OCEAN

THE PANAMA CANAL ZONE

 Construction of the canal began in 1904, and despite landslides, steamy weather, and yellow fever, work was completed in 1914.

 imposed stiff tests for the promotion of officers, and in 1903 created a general staff to oversee military planning and mobilization. Determined to end dependence on the British fleet, Roosevelt doubled the strength of the navy during his term in office. Stretching his authority to the limits, Roosevelt took steps to consolidate the country’s new position in the Caribbean and Central America. European powers, which had long resisted American initiatives there, now accepted American supremacy. Preoccupied with problems in Europe and Africa, Great Britain agreed to U.S. plans for an Isthmian canal in Central America and withdrew much of its military force from the area. Roosevelt wanted a canal to link the Atlantic and Pacific oceans across the isthmus connecting North and South America. When the war with Spain started in 1898, the battleship Oregon took seventy-one days to sail from San Francisco around Cape Horn to its battle station in the Atlantic; years later, naval experts still shuddered at the memory. Secretary of State John Hay negotiated with Britain the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty of 1901 that permitted the United States to construct and control an Isthmian canal, providing it would be free and open to ships of all nations. Delighted, Roosevelt began selecting the route. One route, fifty miles long, wandered through the rough, swampy terrain of the Panama region of Colombia. A French company had recently tried and failed to dig a canal there. To the northwest, another route ran through mountainous Nicaragua. Although two hundred miles in length, it followed natural water ways, a factor that would make construction easier. An Isthmian Canal Commission investigated both routes in 1899 and recommended the shorter route through Panama. Roosevelt backed the idea, and he authorized Hay to negotiate an agreement with the Colombian chargé d’affaires, Thomas Herrán.



 The Hay-Herrán Convention (1903) gave the United States a 99-year lease, with option for renewal, on a canal zone six miles in width. In exchange, the United States agreed to pay Colombia a one-time fee of $10 million and an annual rental of $250,000. To Roosevelt’s dismay, the Colombian Senate rejected the treaty, in part because it infringed on Colombian sovereignty. The Colombians also wanted more money. Calling them “jack rabbits” and “contemptible little creatures,” Roosevelt considered seizing Panama, then hinted he would welcome a Panamanian revolt from Colombia. In November 1903, the Panamanians took the hint, and Roosevelt moved quickly to support them. Sending the cruiser Nashville to prevent Colombian troops from putting down the revolt, he promptly recognized the new Republic of Panama. Two weeks later, the Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty with Panama granted the United States control of a canal zone ten miles wide across the isthmus of Panama. In return, the United States guaranteed the independence of Panama and agreed to pay the same fees offered Colombia. Using giant steam shovels and thousands of laborers from Jamaica, engineers cut their way across the isthmus. On August 15, 1914, the first ocean steamer sailed through the completed canal, which had cost $375 million to build. Roosevelt’s actions angered many Latin Americans. Trying to soothe feelings, Wilson agreed in 1914 to pay Colombia $25 million in cash, give it preferential treatment in using the canal, and express “sincere regret” over American actions. Roosevelt was furious, and his friends in the Senate blocked the agreement. Colombian–American relations remained strained until 1921, when the two countries signed a treaty that included Wilson’s first two provisions but omitted the apology. For his part, Roosevelt took great pride in the canal, calling it “by far the most important action in foreign affairs.” Defending his methods, he said in 1911, “If I had followed traditional conservative methods, I would have submitted a dignified state paper of two hundred pages to Congress and the debate on it would have been going on yet; but I took the Canal Zone and let Congress debate; and while the debate goes on the Canal does also.”

The Roosevelt Corollary
 With interests in Puerto Rico, Cuba, and the canal, the United States developed a Caribbean policy to ensure its dominance in the region. It established protectorates over some countries and subsidized others to keep them dependent. When necessary, the United States purchased islands to keep them out of the hands of other powers, as in the case of the Danish West Indies (now the Virgin Islands), bought in 1917 to prevent the Germans from acquiring them. From 1903 to 1920, the United States intervened often in Latin America to protect the canal, promote regional stability, and exclude foreign influence. One problem worrying American policy makers was the scale of Latin American debts to European powers. Many countries in the Western Hemisphere owed money to European governments and banks, and often these nations were poor, prone to revolution, and unable to pay. The situation invited European intervention. In 1902, Venezuela defaulted on debts; England, Germany, and Italy sent Venezuela an ultimatum and blockaded its ports. American pressure forced a settlement of the issue, but the general problem remained.



 CHAPTER 24

THE NATION AT WAR

 Roosevelt was concerned about it, and in 1904, when the Dominican Republic defaulted on its debts, he was ready with a major announcement. Known as the Roosevelt Corollary of the Monroe Doctrine, the policy warned Latin American nations to keep their affairs in order or face American intervention. Applying the new policy immediately, Roosevelt in 1905 took charge of the Dominican Republic’s revenue system. American officials collected customs and saw to the payment of debt. Within two years, Roosevelt also established protectorates in Cuba and Panama. In 1912, the U.S. Senate added the Lodge Corollary, which warned foreign corporations not to purchase harbors and other sites of military significance in Latin America. Continued by Taft, Wilson, and other presidents, the Roosevelt Corollary guided American policy in Latin America until the 1930s, when Franklin D. Roosevelt’s Good Neighbor policy replaced it.

Ventures in the Far East
 The Open Door policy toward China and possession of the Philippine Islands shaped American actions in the Far East. Congress refused to arm the Philippines, and the islands were vulnerable to the growing power of Japan. Roosevelt wanted to balance Russian and Japanese power, and he was not unhappy at first when war broke out between them in 1904. As Japan won victory after victory, however, Roosevelt grew worried. Acting on a request from Japan, he offered to mediate the conflict, and both Russia and Japan accepted: Russia because it was losing, and Japan because it was financially drained. In August 1905, Roosevelt convened a peace conference at Portsmouth, New Hampshire. The conference ended the war, but Japan emerged as the dominant force in the Far East. Adjusting policy, Roosevelt sent Secretary of War Taft to Tokyo to negotiate the Taft-Katsura Agreement (1905), which recognized Japan’s dominance over Korea in return for its promise not to invade the Philippines. Giving Japan a free hand in Korea violated the Open Door policy, but Roosevelt argued that he had little choice. Relations between Japan and the United States were again strained in 1906 when the San Francisco school board ordered the segregation of Japanese, Chinese, and Korean children into a separate Oriental school. A year later, the California legislature considered a bill limiting the immigration of Japanese laborers into the state. As resentment mounted in Japan, Roosevelt intervened to persuade the school board to rescind its order, while at the same time he obtained from Japan the “Gentlemen’s Agreement” (1907) promising to stop the flow of Japanese agricultural laborers into the United States. In case Japan viewed his policy as a sign of weakness, Roosevelt sent sixteen battleships of the new American fleet around the world, including a stop in Tokyo in October 1908. Critics at home predicted dire consequences, and European naval experts felt certain Japan would attack the fleet. Instead, the Japanese welcomed it, even posting ads to sell the sailors Mitsukoshi washing powder to “rid yourselves of the seven blemishes on the way home.” For the moment, Japanese-American relations improved, and in 1908 the two nations, in an exchange of diplomatic notes, reached the comprehensive Root-Takahira Agreement in which they promised to maintain the status quo in the Pacific, uphold the Open Door, and support Chinese independence.

 In later years, tensions again grew in the Far East. Anger mounted in Japan in 1913 when the California legislature prohibited Japanese residents from owning property in the state. At the start of World War I, Japan seized some German colonies, and in 1915 it issued the Twenty-One Demands insisting on authority over China. Coveting an Asian empire, Japan eyed American possessions in the Pacific.

Taft and Dollar Diplomacy
 In foreign as well as domestic affairs, President Taft tried to continue Roosevelt’s policies. For secretary of state he chose Philander C. Knox, Roosevelt’s attorney general, and together they pursued a policy of “ dollar diplomacy” to promote American financial and business interests abroad. The policy had profit-seeking motives, but it also aimed to substitute economic ties for military alliances with the idea of increasing American influence and bringing lasting peace. Intent, like Roosevelt, on supremacy in the Caribbean, Taft worked to replace European loans with American ones, thereby reducing the danger of outside meddling. In 1909, he asked American bankers to assume the Honduran debt in order to fend off English bondholders. A year later, he persuaded them to take over the assets of the National Bank of Haiti, and in 1911 he helped Nicaragua secure a large loan in return for American control of Nicaragua’s National Bank. When Nicaraguans revolted against the agreement, Taft sent marines to put them down. A marine detachment was stationed in the country intermittently until the 1930s. In the Far East, Knox worked closely with Willard Straight, an agent of American bankers, who argued that dollar diplomacy was the financial arm of the Open Door. Straight had close ties to Edward H. Harriman, the railroad magnate, who wanted to build railroads in Manchuria in northern China. Roosevelt had tacitly promised Japan he would keep American investors out of the area, and Knox’s plan reversed the policy. Trying to organize an international syndicate to loan China money to purchase the Manchurian railroads, Knox approached England, Japan, and Russia. In January 1910, all three turned him down. The outcome was a blow to American policy and prestige in Asia. Russia and Japan found reasons to cooperate with each other and staked out spheres of influence in violation of the Open Door. Japan resented Taft’s initiatives in Manchuria, and China’s distrust of the United States deepened. Instead of cultivating friendship, as Roosevelt had envisioned, Taft had started an intense rivalry with Japan for commercial advantage in China.

Foreign Policy Under Wilson
 What did Woodrow Wilson mean by “moral diplomacy”? When he took office in 1913, Woodrow Wilson knew little about foreign policy. As a Princeton professor, he had studied Congress and the presidency, but his books made only passing reference to foreign issues, and during the 1912 campaign he mentioned foreign policy only when it affected domestic concerns. “It would be the irony of fate if my administration had to deal chiefly with

Foreign Policy Under Wilson


 foreign affairs,” he said to a friend before becoming president. And so it was. During his two terms, Wilson faced crisis after crisis in foreign affairs, including the outbreak of World War I. The idealistic Wilson believed in a principled, ethical world in which militarism, colonialism, and war were brought under control. He emphasized moral purposes over material interests and said during one crisis, “The force of America is the force of moral principle.” Rejecting the policy of dollar diplomacy, Wilson initially chose a course of moral diplomacy, designed to bring right to the world, preserve peace, and extend to other peoples the blessings of democracy.

 investigation ended, usually within one year. The idea drew on the era’s confidence in commissions and the sense that human reason, given time for emotions to fade, could settle problems without war. Bryan negotiated cooling-off treaties with thirty nations, including Great Britain, France, and Italy. Germany refused to sign one. Based on a generous idea, the treaties were naive, and they did not work. Wilson and Bryan promised a dramatic new approach in Latin America, concerned not with the “pursuit of material interest” but with “human rights” and “national integrity.” Signaling the change, in 1913 they negotiated the treaty with Colombia apologizing for Roosevelt’s Panamanian policy. Yet in the end, Wilson, distracted by other problems and impatient with the results of his idealistic approach, continued the Roosevelt–Taft policies. He defended the Monroe Doctrine, gave unspoken support to the Roosevelt Corollary, and intervened in Latin America more than had either Roosevelt or Taft. In 1914, Wilson negotiated a treaty with Nicaragua to grant the United States exclusive rights to build a canal and lease sites for naval bases. This treaty made Nicaragua an American satellite. In 1915, he sent marines into Haiti to quell a revolution; they stayed until 1934. In 1916, he occupied the Dominican Republic, establishing a protectorate that lasted until 1924. By 1917, American troops “protected” Nicaragua, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, and Cuba—four nations that were U.S. dependencies in all but name.

Conducting Moral Diplomacy
 William Jennings Bryan, whom Wilson appointed as secretary of state, was also an amateur in foreign relations. Trusting in the common people, Bryan was skeptical of experts in the State Department. To key posts abroad he appointed “deserving Democrats,” believing they could do the job as well as career diplomats. Bryan was a fervent pacifist, and like Wilson, he believed in the American duty to “help” less favored nations. In 1913 and 1914, he embarked on an idealistic campaign to negotiate treaties of arbitration throughout the world. Known as “cooling-off ” treaties, they provided for submitting all international disputes to permanent commissions of investigation. Neither party could declare war or increase armaments until the

 U.S. protectorates

UNITED STATES



 U.S. military expeditions

Columbus, New Mexico


CANAL ZONE U.S.
possessions labeled in red 


Parral






 500 miles



B


AH A

Gulf of Mexico


M
 AS

 MEXICO 1. Villa’s raid, March 9, 1916

 Bahía Honda



Tampico




9. Leased, 1903–1912
 10. U.S. occupation, 1898–1902, 1906–1909, 1912 and 1917

 HAITI

BRITISH HONDURAS

5. Seized by U.S. Navy,
April 1914


 JAMAICA (Br.)



 12. U.S. occupation, 1915–1934 13. U.S. occupation, 1916–1924

VIRGIN ISLANDS

Caribbean Sea


EL SALVADOR

PUERTO RICO



GUATEMALA HONDURAS

 11. U.S. naval base leased,

VIRGIN ISLANDS
(Br.) 
 Guantánamo Bay





 4. American sailors arrested, April 1914

8. Leased, 1903


DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

 CUBA

 3. Skirmish with Carranza’s troops, April 12, 1916

 7. U.S. occupation, 1912–1925, 1927–1933

.)




Veracruz


 500 kilometers

Havana


 2. Pershing’s expedition, 1916–1917

 6. U.S. occupation, 1912–1919, 1924–1925

(B
 r



 NICARAGUA

CANAL ZONE
Panama Canal 
Proposed
 canal COSTA RICA



 VENEZUELA

 PANAMA

 14. Purchased from Denmark, 1917

ACTIVITIES OF THE UNITED STATES IN THE CARIBBEAN, 1898–1930

 COLOMBIA

 During the first three decades of the twentieth century, the United States policed the Caribbean, claiming the right to take action when it judged Latin American countries were doing a bad job of running their affairs.



 CHAPTER 24

THE NATION AT WAR

Troubles Across the Border
 Wilson’s moral diplomacy encountered one of its greatest challenges across the border in Mexico. Porfirio Dáaz, president of Mexico for thirty-seven years, was overthrown in 1911. Dáaz had encouraged foreign investments in Mexican mines, railroads, oil, and land; by 1913, Americans had invested more than $1 billion. But most Mexicans remained poor and uneducated, and Dáaz’s overthrow led to a decade of violence that tested Wilson’s policies and brought the United States close to war with Mexico. A liberal reformer, Francisco I. Madero, followed Dáaz as president in 1911. But Madero could not keep order in the troubled country, and opponents of his reforms undermined him. With support from wealthy landowners, the army, and the Catholic Church, General Victoriano Huerta ousted Madero in 1913, threw him in jail, and arranged his murder. Most European nations immediately recognized Huerta, but Wilson, calling him a “butcher,” refused to do so. Instead, he announced a new policy toward revolutionary regimes in Latin America. To win American recognition, they must not only exercise power but reflect “a just government based upon law, not upon arbitrary or irregular force.” On that basis, Wilson withheld recognition from Huerta and maneuvered to oust him. Early in 1914, he stationed naval units off Mexico’s ports to cut off arms shipments to the Huerta regime. The action produced trouble. On April 9, 1914, several American sailors, who had gone ashore in Tampico to purchase supplies, were arrested. They were promptly released, but the American admiral demanded an apology and a 21-gun salute to the American flag. Huerta agreed—if the Americans also saluted the Mexican flag. Wilson asked Congress for authority to use military force if needed; then, just as Congress acted, he learned that a German ship was landing arms at Veracruz on Mexico’s eastern coast. With Wilson’s approval, American warships shelled the harbor, and marines went ashore. Against heavy resistance, they took the city. Outraged, Mexicans of all factions denounced the invasion, and for a time the two countries hovered on the edge of war. Retreating hastily, Wilson explained that he desired only to help Mexico. Argentina, Brazil, and Chile came to his aid with an offer to mediate the dispute, and tensions eased. In July 1914, weakened by an armed rebellion, Huerta resigned. Wilson recognized the new government, headed by Venustiano Carranza, an associate of Madero. Early in 1916, Francisco (“Pancho”) Villa, one of Carranza’s generals, revolted. Hoping to goad the United States into an action that would help him seize power, he raided border towns, injuring American civilians. In January, he removed seventeen Americans from a train in Mexico and murdered them. Two months later he invaded Columbus, New Mexico, killing sixteen Americans and burning the town. Stationing militia along the border, Wilson ordered General John J. Pershing on a punitive expedition to seize Villa in Mexico. Pershing led six thousand troops deep into Mexican territory. At first, Carranza agreed to the drive, but as the Americans pushed farther and farther into his country, he changed his mind. As the wily Villa eluded Pershing, Carranza protested bitterly, and Wilson, worried about events in Europe, ordered Pershing home. Wilson’s policy had laudable goals; he wanted to help the Mexicans achieve political and agrarian reform. But his motives and methods were condescending. Wilson tried to impose gradual progressive reform on a society sharply divided along class

 and other lines. With little forethought, he interfered in the affairs of another country, and in doing so he revealed the themes— moralism, combined with pragmatic self-interest and a desire for peace—that also shaped his policies in Europe.

Toward War
 What were the reasons behind and dangers of Wilson’s neutrality policy? In May 1914, Colonel Edward M. House, Wilson’s close friend and adviser, sailed to Europe on a fact-finding mission. Tensions there were rising. “The situation is extraordinary,” he reported to Wilson. “It is jingoism [extreme nationalism] run stark mad. . . . There is too much hatred, too many jealousies.” Large armies dominated the European continent. A web of alliances entangled nations, maximizing the risk that a local conflict could produce a wider war. In Germany, the ambitious Kaiser Wilhelm II coveted a world empire to match those of Britain and France. Germany had military treaties with Turkey and Austria-Hungary, a sprawling central European country of many

Watch the Video


The Outbreak of World War I


 Franz Ferdinand (1863–1914) was born in Graz, Austria. As the heir to the Austro-Hungarian empire, his assassination on June 28, 1914 sparked the First World War.

Toward War


 nationalities. Linked in another alliance, England, France, and Russia agreed to aid each other in case of attack. On June 28, 1914, a Bosnian assassin linked to Serbia murdered Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne. Within weeks, Germany, Turkey, and Austria-Hungary (the Central Powers) were at war with England, France, and Russia (the Allied Powers). Americans were shocked at the events. “I had a feeling that the end of things had come,” one of Wilson’s cabinet members said. “I stopped in my tracks, dazed and horrorstricken.” Wilson immediately proclaimed neutrality and asked Americans to remain “impartial in thought as well as in action.” The war, he said, was one “with which we have nothing to do, whose causes cannot touch us.” In private, Wilson was stunned. A man who loved peace, he had long admired the British parliamentary system, and he respected the leaders of the British Liberal party, who supported social programs akin to his own. “Everything I love most in the world,” he said, “is at stake.”

The Neutrality Policy
 In general, Americans accepted neutrality. They saw no need to enter the conflict, especially after the Allies in September 1914 halted the first German drive toward Paris. America resisted involvement in other countries’ problems, with the notable exception of Latin America, and had a tradition of freedom from foreign entanglements. Many of the nation’s large number of progressives saw additional reasons to resist. War, they thought, violated the very spirit of progressive reform. Why demand safer factories in which people could work and then kill them by the millions in war? To many progressives, moreover, England represented international finance, an institution they detested. Germany, on the other hand, had pioneered some of their favorite social reforms. Furthermore, progressives and others tended to put the blame for war on the greed of “munition manufacturers, stockbrokers, and bond dealers” eager for wartime profits. “Do you want to know the cause of the war?” Henry Ford, who was no progressive, asked. “It is capitalism, greed, the dirty hunger for dollars.” Above all, progressives were sure that war would end reform. It consumed money and attention; it inflamed emotions. As a result, Jane Addams, Florence Kelley, Frederic C. Howe, Lillian Wald, and other progressives fought to keep the United States out of war. In late 1915, they formed the American Union Against Militarism, to throw, they said, “a monkey wrench into the machinery” of war. Throughout 1915 and 1916, La Follette’s Magazine, the voice of the progressive leader, railed against the Morgans, Rockefellers, Du Ponts, and “the thirty-eight corporations most benefited by war orders.” The war’s outbreak also tugged at the emotions of millions of immigrant Americans. Those who came from the British Isles tended to support the Allies; those from Ireland tended to support Germany, hoping Britain’s wartime troubles might free their homeland from British domination. The large population of German Americans often sympathized with the Central Powers. But many people thought that, in a nation of immigrants, a policy of neutrality would be wise from a domestic point of view as well as from the viewpoint of foreign policy.



 At the deepest level, a majority in the country, bound by common language and institutions, sympathized with the Allies and blamed Germany for the war. Like Wilson, many Americans admired English literature, customs, and law; they remembered Lafayette and the times when France had helped the United States in its early years. Germany, on the other hand, seemed arrogant and militaristic. When the war began, it invaded Belgium to strike at France and violated a treaty that the German chancellor called “just a scrap of paper.” Many Americans resented the violation, and they liked it even less when German troops executed Belgian civilians who resisted. Both sides sought to sway American opinion, and fierce propaganda campaigns flourished. The German Literary Defense Committee distributed more than a million pamphlets during the first year of the war. German propaganda tended to emphasize strength and will; Allied propaganda called on historical ties and took advantage of German atrocities, both real and alleged. In the end, the propaganda probably made little difference. Ties of heritage and the course of the war, not propaganda, decided the American position. At the outset, no matter which side they cheered for, Americans of all persuasions preferred simply to remain at peace.

Freedom of the Seas
 The demands of trade tested American neutrality and confronted Wilson with difficult choices. Under international law, neutral countries were permitted to trade in nonmilitary goods with all belligerent countries. But Great Britain controlled the seas, and it intended to cut off shipments of war materials to the Central Powers. As soon as war broke out, Britain blockaded German ports and limited the goods Americans could sell to Germany. American ships had to carry cargoes to neutral ports from which, after examination, they could be carried to Germany. As time passed, Britain stepped up the economic sanctions by forbidding the shipment to Germany of all foodstuffs and most raw materials, seizing and censoring mail, and “blacklisting” American firms that dealt directly with the Central Powers. British ships often stopped American ships and confiscated cargoes. Again and again, Wilson protested against such infringements on neutral rights. Sometimes Britain complied, sometimes not, and Wilson often grew angry. But needing American support and supplies, Britain pursued a careful strategy to disrupt German–American trade without disrupting Anglo–American relations. After forbidding cotton shipments to Germany in 1915, it agreed to buy enough cotton to make up for the losses. When necessary, it also promised to reimburse American businesses after the war’s end. Other than the German U-boats, there were no constraints on trade with the Allies, and a flood of Allied war orders fueled the American economy. England and France bought huge amounts of arms, grain, cotton, and clothing. To finance the purchases, the Allies turned to American bankers for loans. By 1917, loans to Allied governments exceeded $2 billion; loans to Germany came to only $27 million. In a development that influenced Wilson’s policy, the war produced the greatest economic boom in the nation’s history. Loans and trade drew the United States ever closer to the Allied cause. And even though Wilson often protested English maritime policy, the



 CHAPTER 24

THE NATION AT WAR

 protests involved American goods and money, whereas Germany’s submarine policy threatened American lives.

The U-Boat Threat


 sent an ultimatum to Germany, stating that unless the Germans immediately called off attacks on cargo and passenger ships, the United States would sever relations. The kaiser, convinced he did not yet have enough submarines to risk war, yielded. In the Sussex pledge of May 4, 1916, he agreed to Wilson’s demands and promised to shoot on sight only ships of the enemy’s navy. But he attached the condition that the United States compel the Allies to end their blockade and comply with international law. Wilson accepted the pledge but turned down the condition. The Sussex pledge marked the beginning of a short period of friendly relations between Germany and the United States. The agreement applied not only to passenger liners but to all merchant ships, belligerent or not. There was one problem: Wilson had taken such a strong position that if Germany renewed submarine warfare on merchant shipping, war was likely. Most Americans, however, viewed the agreement as a diplomatic stroke for peace by Wilson, and the issues of peace and preparedness dominated the presidential election of 1916.

 A relatively new weapon, the Unterseeboot, or submarine, strained the guidelines of international law. Traditional law required a submarine to surface, warn the target to stop, send a boarding party to check papers and cargo, then allow time for passengers and crew to board lifeboats before sinking the vessel. Flimsy and slow, submarines could ill afford to surface while the prey radioed for help. If they did surface, they might be rammed or blown up by deck guns. When Germany announced the submarine campaign in February 1915, Wilson protested sharply, calling the sinking of merchant ships without checking cargo “a wanton act.” The Germans promised not to sink American ships—an agreement that lasted until 1917—and thereafter the issue became the right of Americans to sail on the ships of belligerent nations. In March, an American citizen aboard the British liner Falaba perished when the ship was torpedoed off the Irish coast. Bryan urged “He Kept Us Out of War” Wilson to forbid Americans to travel in the war zones, but the president, determined to stand by the principles of international The “preparedness” issue pitted antiwar groups against those law, refused. who wanted to prepare for war. Bellicose as always, Teddy Wilson reacted more harshly in May and August of 1915 when Roosevelt led the preparedness campaign. He called Wilson U-boats sank the Lusitania and the Arabic. He demanded that the “yellow” for not pressing Germany harder and scoffed at the Germans protect passenger vessels and pay for American losses. At popular song “I Didn’t Raise My Boy to Be a Soldier,” which he odds with Wilson’s understanding of neutrality, Bryan resigned as secretary of state and was Read the Document Adolf K. G. E. von Spiegel, U-boat 202 (1919) replaced by Robert Lansing, a lawyer and counselor in the State Department. Lansing brought a very different spirit to the job. He favored the Allies and believed that democracy was threatened in a world dominated by Germany. He urged strong stands against German violations of American neutrality. In Februar y 1916, Germany declared unrestricted submarine warfare against all armed ships. Lansing protested and told Germany it would be held strictly accountable for American losses. A month later, a U-boat torpedoed the unarmed French channel steamer Sussex without warning, injuring several Americans. Arguing that the sinking violated the Arabic pledge, Lansing urged Wilson to break relations with Germany. Wilson rejected the advice, but on April 18 he Adolf K.G.E. von Spiegel commanded a German U-boat during World War I. He published his memoirs in 1919.

Toward War


 compared to singing “I Didn’t Raise My Girl to Be a Mother.” Defending the military’s state of readiness, Wilson refused to be stampeded just because “some amongst us are nervous and excited.” In fact, when government revenue dropped in 1915, he cut military appropriations. Wilson’s position was attacked from both sides as preparedness advocates charged cowardice, while pacifists denounced any attempt at military readiness. The difficulty of his situation, plus the growing U-boat crisis, soon changed Wilson’s mind. In mid-1915, he asked the War Department to increase military planning, and he quietly notified congressional leaders of a switch in policy. Later that year, Wilson approved large increases in the army and navy, a move that upset many peace-minded progressives. In January 1916, he toured the country to promote preparedness, and in June, with an American flag draped over his shoulder, he marched in a giant preparedness parade in Washington. For their standard-bearer in the presidential election of 1916, the Republicans nominated Charles Evans Hughes, a moderate justice of the Supreme Court. Hughes seemed to have all the qualifications for victory. A former reform governor of New York, he could lure back the Roosevelt progressives while at the same time appealing to the Republican conservatives. To woo the Roosevelt wing, Hughes called for a tougher line against Germany, thus allowing the Democrats to label him the “war” candidate. Even so, Roosevelt and others considered Hughes a “bearded iceberg,” a dull campaigner who wavered on important issues. The Democrats renominated Wilson in a convention marked by spontaneous demonstrations for peace. Determined to outdo Republican patriotism, Wilson himself had ordered the convention’s theme to be “Americanism.” The delegates were to sing “America” and “The Star-Spangled Banner” and to cheer any mention of America and the flag. They did it all dutifully but then broke into spontaneous applause at the mention of Wilson’s careful diplomatic moves. As the keynote speaker reviewed them, the delegates shouted, “What did we do? What did we do?” The speaker shouted back, “We didn’t go to war! We didn’t go to war!” Picking up the theme, perhaps with reservations, Wilson said in October, “I am not expecting this country to get into war.” The campaign slogan “He kept us out of war” was repeated again and again, and just before the election, the Democrats took full-page ads in leading newspapers:



 and progressive vote. Women—who were then allowed to vote in presidential elections in twelve states—also voted heavily for Wilson.

The Final Months of Peace
 Just before election day, Great Britain further limited neutral trade, and there were reports from Germany of a renewal of unrestricted submarine warfare. Fresh from his victory, Wilson redoubled his efforts for peace. Aware that time was running out, he hoped to start negotiations to end the bloodshed and create a peaceful postwar world. In December 1916, he sent messages to both sides asking them to state their war aims. Should they do so, he pledged the “whole force” of the United States to end the war. The Allies refused, although they promised privately to negotiate if the German terms were reasonable. The Germans replied evasively and in January 1917 revealed their real objectives. Close to forcing Russia out of the war, Germany sensed victory and wanted territory in eastern Europe, Africa, Belgium, and France. On January 22, in an eloquent speech before the Senate, Wilson called for a “peace without victory.” Outlining his own ambitious aims, he urged respect for all nations, freedom of the seas, arms limitations, and a League of Nations to keep the peace. “Only a peace between equals can last, only a peace the very principle of which is equality and a common participation in a common benefit.” The speech made a great impression on many Europeans, but it was too late. The Germans had decided a few weeks before

Read the Document


 President Wilson’s War Message to Congress (1917)

You Are Working—Not Fighting!
Alive and Happy—Not Cannon Fodder!
 Wilson and Peace with Honor? or Hughes with Roosevelt and War? On election night, Hughes had swept most of the East, and Wilson retired at 10 p.m. thinking he had lost. During the night, the results came in from California, New Mexico, and North Dakota; all supported Wilson—California by a mere 3773 votes. Wilson won with 9.1 million votes against 8.5 million for Hughes. Holding the Democratic South, he carried key states in the Midwest and West and took large portions of the labor

 Wilson’s re-election in 1916 owed a great deal to the campaign slogan, “He kept us out of war.” But the resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare by Germany in 1917 significantly changed the international situation. Several U.S. merchant ships were sunk in March by German U-boats. That April, Wilson called Congress into extraordinary session to ask for a declaration of war against Germany.



 CHAPTER 24

THE NATION AT WAR

Watch the Video


 American Entry into

World War I


 merchant ships armed on his own authority. Three days later, he announced the arming, and on March 13, the navy instructed all vessels to fire on submarines. Between March 12 and March 21, U-boats sank five American ships, and Wilson decided to wait no longer. He called Congress into special session and at 8:30 in the evening on April 2, 1917, asked for a declaration of war. “It is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war, into the most terrible and disastrous of all wars, civilization itself seeming to be in the balance. But the right is more precious than peace, and we shall fight for the things which we have always carried nearest our hearts—for democracy, . . . for the rights and liberties of small nations, for a universal dominion of right by such a concert of free peoples as shall bring peace and safety to all nations and make the world itself at last free.” Congressmen broke into applause and crowded the aisles to congratulate Wilson. “My message today was a message of death for our young men,” he said afterward. “How strange it seems to applaud that.” Pacifists in Congress continued to hold out, and for four days they managed to postpone action. Finally, on April 6, the declaration of war passed, with fifty members of the House and six senators voting against it. Even then, the country was divided over entry into the war.

Over There
 In 1914, Europe explodes into war, and Woodrow Wilson has to make a decision about what America is going to do. And his decision is to ask the American public to remain neutral in word as well as deed.

 to unleash the submarines and gamble on a quick end to the war. Even as Wilson spoke, U-boats were in the Atlantic west of Ireland, preparing to attack. On January 31, the German ambassador in Washington informed Lansing that beginning February 1, U-boats would sink on sight all ships—passenger or merchant, neutral or belligerent, armed or unarmed—in the waters around England and France. Staking everything on a last effort, the Germans calculated that if they could sink 600,000 tons of shipping a month, they could defeat England in six months. As he had pledged in 1916, Wilson broke off relations with Germany, although he still hoped for peace. On February 25, the British government privately gave Wilson a telegram intercepted from Arthur Zimmermann, the German foreign minister, to the German ambassador in Mexico. A day later, Wilson asked Congress for authority to arm merchant ships to deter U-boat attacks. When La Follette and a handful of others threatened to filibuster, Wilson divulged the contents of the Zimmermann telegram. It proposed an alliance with Mexico in case of war with the United States, offering financial support and recovery of Mexico’s “lost territory” in New Mexico, Texas, and Arizona. Spurred by a wave of public indignation toward the Germans, the House passed Wilson’s measure, but La Follette and others still blocked action in the Senate. On March 9, 1917, Wilson ordered

 How did the United States’ entry affect the course of World War I? With a burst of patriotism, the United States entered a war its new allies were in danger of losing. That same month, the Germans sank 881,000 tons of Allied shipping, the highest amount for any one month during the war. There were mutinies in the French army; a costly British drive in Flanders stalled. In November, the Bolsheviks seized power in Russia, and, led by V. I. Lenin, they soon signed a separate peace treaty with Germany, freeing German troops to fight in the West. German and Austrian forces routed the Italian army on the southern flank, and the Allies braced for a spring 1918 offensive.

Mobilization
 The United States was not prepared for war. Some Americans hoped the declaration of war itself might daunt the Germans; there were those who thought that naval escorts of Allied shipping would be enough. Others hoped money and arms supplied to the Allies would be suffi cient to produce victory without sending troops. Bypassing older generals, Wilson named John J. (“Black Jack”) Pershing, leader of the Mexican campaign, to head the American Expeditionary Force (AEF). Pershing inherited an army unready for war. In April 1917, it had 200,000 officers and men, equipped with 300,000 old rifles, 1500 machine guns, 55 out-of-date airplanes, and 2 field radio sets. Its most recent battle experience had been chasing Pancho Villa around northern Mexico. It had not caught him.

Over There


Listen to the Audio File






“Over There”


 500 miles

 NORWAY

 500 kilometers

SWEDEN
Moscow 
GR EAT BRITAIN

Se


 a

North
Sea


 lt i c Ba

 DENMARK

RUSSIA
Tannenberg Aug. 26–31, 1914 
London


ATLANTIC OCEAN

Berlin


NETH. BELG.

EASTERN FRONT

 BrestLitovsk

GERMAN EMPIRE

Armistice Line
Dec. 1917


LUX.
Paris 
Somme
July 1–
Nov. 18, 1916


Verdun
Feb. 21–
Dec. 18, 1916


WESTERN FRONT

 FRANCE

 AUSTRIA-HUNGARY

 SWITZ.

Caporetto
Oct. 24–25, 1917


SOUTHERN FLANK

PORT. SPAIN

Corsica
(Fr.)


Vienna


 ROMANIA

 ITALY

Mallorca (Sp.)


Sardinia
(It.)


 BULGARIA

Rome
 MONTENEGRO

Allied Powers


OTTOMAN EMPIRE

 ALB.

 GREECE

Mediterranean Sea
SP. MOROCCO

Central Powers
 Neutral nations

Gallipoli
Apr. 25, 1915–
Jan. 9, 1916


Sicily
 ALGERIA (Fr.)

 TUNISIA (Fr.)

Crete


EUROPEAN ALLIANCES AND BATTLEFRONTS, 1914–1917
Allied forces suffered early defeats on the eastern front (Tannenberg) and in the Dardanelles (Gallipoli). In 1917, the Allies were routed on the southern flank (Caporetto); the western front then became the critical theater of the war. 
U.S. LOSSES TO THE GERMAN SUBMARINE CAMPAIGN, 1916–1918
Tonnage of vessels sunk (thousands) American Declaration of War (April 1917) 










Black Sea


 SERBIA





Cyprus
(Br.)




 Complete the Assignment Measuring the Mind on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


F


 rom 1870 to 1920, scientists and physicians explored new ideas about the mind. In Europe, the Viennese psychiatrist Sigmund Freud studied the unconscious, which, he thought, shaped human behavior. Russia’s Ivan Pavlov tested the conditioned reflex in mental activity (Pavlov’s dogs), and in the United States William James, the psychologist and philosopher, examined emotions and linked psychology to everyday problems. As one way of understanding the mind, psychologists studied the mental processes of a great many minds, a task to which the relatively new science of statistics lent a hand. Testing large samples of subjects, they developed the concept of the “normal” and “average,” helpful boundaries used to determine an individual’s place in the population. In 1890, the psychologist James McKeen Cattell tested one hundred first-year students at the University of Pennsylvania for vision and hearing, sensitivity to pain, reaction time, and memory. He called these examinations by a new name— mental tests—and the idea spread. In 1895, the American Psychological Association (APA) set up a special committee to promote the nationwide collection of mental statistics. Work was under way on both sides of the ocean, and in 1905 Alfred Binet and Theodore Simon, two French psychologists, devised a metric intelligence scale. Seizing on the idea that intelligence increases with age until maturity, they tested children to find an average level of performance for different ages. Once they had determined the average, they could compare any child’s test performance to



Measuring the Mind


 it and thus distinguish between the child’s “mental age” and chronological age. In 1912, William Stein, a German psychologist, introduced the “intelligence quotient,” found by dividing a person’s mental age by the chronological age. In 1916, Lewis M. Terman of Stanford University improved Binet’s test, and the term IQ became part of the American vocabulary. Employers and educators, however, remained skeptical of measuring intelligence. Thus, when the United States entered World War I, psychologists at once saw the opportunity to overcome the doubts and prove their theories. Huge numbers of men needed to be recruited, classified, and assigned to units quickly. Why not use the new mental tests? APA leaders formed twelve committees, including one on the Psychological Examination of Recruits, to explore the military uses of psychology. Preferring to issue promotions on the basis of seniority, the army resisted the “mental meddlers,” but the APA persuaded the War Department to use the tests. In early 1918, psychological examiners were posted at all training camps to administer the Alpha Test to literates and the Beta Test (with instructions given in pantomime) to illiterates and recruits who did not understand English. At the start of each Alpha Test, the examiners put the men at ease by explaining that the army was “not looking for crazy people. The aim is to help find out what we are best fitted to do.” On the Beta Test, which was made up largely of pictures, the examiners were reminded that Beta men “sometimes sulk and refuse to work.” On the basis of the tests, the examiners classified recruits as “superior,”

 Questions from one portion of the U.S. Army Intelligence Alpha Test.

 “average,” or “inferior.” From the “superior” category, they selected men for officer training, a helpful winnowing process in an army that expanded quickly from nine thousand officers to two hundred thousand. They then distributed the remaining “superior,” “average,” and “inferior” men among each military unit. In all, the examiners tested 1.7 million men—by far the largest testing program in human history to that time. To some degree, the tests served their purpose, but they also seemed to raise questions about the education and mental ability of many American men. For one thing, there was the extent of illiteracy—nearly one-quarter of the draft-age men in 1918 could neither read nor write. (One-third, incidentally, were physically unfit for service.) There was also the limited schooling

 of the recruits, most of whom had left school between the fifth and seventh grades. More alarming, according to the test results, 47 percent of the white draftees and 89 percent of the black draftees had a “mental age” of twelve years or under, which classified them as “feebleminded.” Did that mean half or more of the American population was feebleminded? The tests also turned up racial and national distinctions—or so some of the examiners concluded. Men of “native” backgrounds and “old” immigrant stock (from northern Europe and the British Isles) tended to score well and fell in the “superior” category; “new” immigrants (from central and southern Europe) tended to score less well and were ranked as “inferior.” Among Russian, Polish, and Italian draftees, more than half were classified as “inferior.” Such results came as no surprise to those who had long doubted the intelligence of the “new” immigrants, nor did the fact that 80 percent of the African American men taking the Alpha Test scored in the “inferior” range. Some observers, however, wondered what the tests really measured.

 The APA examiners claimed they measured “native intelligence,” but questions about Edgar Allan Poe’s poem “The Raven” or the paintings of Rosa Bonheur, a French artist of the mid-nineteenth century, required answers that native intelligence alone could not supply. When blacks and whites scored comparably on the early Beta Test, the examiners decided that something must be wrong with the test, so they changed the questions until the scores showed the expected racial differences. Most of those taking the Beta Test had never taken a written test before; many had probably never held a pencil. Still skeptical, the army discontinued the tests the moment the war ended, but what the army rejected, the nation adopted. Businesses, government, and above all, educational institutions found more and more uses for intelligence testing. In 1926, the College Entrance Examination Board (CEEB) administered the first Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT), designed to test “intelligence” and predict performance in college. In 1935, it established scoring ranges from 200 to 800, with the average score set at 500. During World

 War II, SAT tests were widely used. In 1947, the CEEB became part of a new Educational Testing Service that spurred an educational revolution by making “intelligence” instead of social or economic standing the main criterion of college admissions. Before long, intelligence testing— the measuring of minds—touched every aspect of American life. Shaping lives and careers, it pushed some people forward and held others back, in the military, industry, the civil service, and higher education. “Intelligence tests . . . ,” an expert said in 1971, “have more and more become society’s instrument for the selection of human resources.”

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
What arguments did advocates and opponents of intelligence testing use to support and attack these tests? 2. Why were the intelligence tests the army administered during World War I so problematic? 3. What were the positive and negative results of intelligence tests? 




 CHAPTER 24

THE NATION AT WAR

War in the Trenches




 30 miles

 World War I may have been the most terrible war of all time, more terrible even than World NETHERLANDS War II and its vast devastation. After the early offensives, the European armies dug themselves into trenches only hundreds of s r yards apart in places. Artillery, e d an Fl poison gas, hand grenades, and a . Lys dt R Brussels Ypres Offensive Schel new weapon—rapid-fire machine guns—kept them pinned down. BELGIUM Lys R. . R Even in moments of respite, u se So Me Armistice Line the mud, rats, cold, fear, and disease m Stabilized Front Nov. 11, 1918 m GERMAN e 1914 –1917 R. took a heavy toll. Deafening bomEMPIRE bardments shook the earth, and there was a high incidence of shell Amiens shock. From time to time, troops Somme Offensive went “over the top” of the trenches R. LUX. lle Ca ntigny in an effort to break through the e Aisne-Marne os May 28, 1918 Aisne M Offensive enemy’s lines, but the costs were R . R. Second Battle FRANCE e enormous. The German offensive of the Marne is O Verdun July 18–Aug. 6, 1918 at Verdun in 1916 killed six hunFeb. 21–Dec. 18, 1918 Meuse-Argonne dred thousand men; the British lost Belleau Wood Sept. 26 –Nov. 11, 1918 June 6–25, 1918 twenty thousand on the first day of Marn eR . o Paris . ne R r an offensive on the Somme. Sei St.-Mihiel r Sept. 12–16, 1918 a i n Château-Thierry The first American soldiers May 31–June 4, 1918 e reached France in June 1917. By March of the following year, three hundred thousand Americans were German spring Allied victories Allied Powers offensive, 1918 there, and by war’s end, two milLimit of German Deadlocked Central Powers lion men had crossed the Atlantic. advance, 1918 battle No troop ships were sunk, a credit U.S. troop Neutral nations movements to the British and American navies. In the summer of 1917, THE WESTERN FRONT: U.S. PARTICIPATION, 1918 The turning point of the war came in Admiral William S. Sims, a brilJuly, when the German advance was halted at the Marne. The “Yanks,” now a fighting force, were thrown into the liant American strategist, pushed breach. They played a dramatic role in stemming the tide and mounting the counteroffensives that ended the war. through a convoy plan that used Allied destroyers to escort merchant vessels across the ocean. At first resisted by English captains Although some in Congress preferred a voluntary army of the who liked to sail alone, the plan soon cut shipping losses in half. kind that had fought in the Spanish-American War, Wilson turned As expected, on March 21, 1918, the Germans launched a masto conscription, which he believed was both efficient and demosive assault in western Europe. Troops from the Russian front added to cratic. In May 1917, Congress passed the Selective Service Act, the force, and by May they had driven Allied forces back to the Marne providing for the registration of all men between the ages of 21 and River, just fifty miles from Paris. There, the Americans saw their 30 (later changed to 18 and 45). Early in June, 9.5 million men regfirst action. The American forces blocked the Germans at the town istered for the draft. By the end of the war, the act had registered of Château-Thierry and four weeks later forced them out of Belleau 24.2 million men, about 2.8 million of whom were inducted into Wood, a crucial stronghold. On July 15, the Germans threw everythe army. Defending the draft, Wilson said it was not really a draft thing into a last drive for Paris, but they were halted at the Marne, and at all, but a “selection from a nation which has volunteered in mass.” in three days of battle they were finished. “On the 18th,” the German Newly devised intelligence tests became part of the selection prochancellor said, “even the most optimistic among us knew that all was cess. (See the Feature Essay, “Measuring the Mind,” pp. 574–575.) lost. The history of the world was played out in three days.” The draft included black men as well as white, and four African With the German drive stalled, the Allies counterattacked American regiments were among the first sent into action. Despite along the entire front. On September 12, 1918, a half million their contributions, however, no black soldiers were allowed to Americans and a smaller contingent of French drove the Germans march in the victory celebrations that eventually took place in from the St. Mihiel salient, twelve miles south of Verdun. Two Paris. Nor were they included in a French mural of the different weeks later, 896,000 American soldiers attacked between the Meuse races in the war, even though black servicemen from English and River and the Argonne Forest. Focusing their efforts on a main French colonies were represented.

 30 kilometers

North
Sea


 ine Rh

R.


L


A l
 s a c e



Over Here


 railroad supply line for the German army in the West, American troops broke through in early November, cut the line, and drove the Germans back along the whole front. The German high command knew that the war was lost. On October 6, 1918, Germany appealed to Wilson for an armistice, and by the end of the month, Turkey, Bulgaria, and Austria-Hungary were out of the war. At 4 a.m. on November 11, Germany signed the armistice. The AEF lost 48,909 dead and 230,000 wounded; losses to disease brought the total of dead to more than 112,000. The American contribution, although small in comparison to the enormous costs to European nations, was vital. Fresh, enthusiastic American troops raised Allied morale; they helped turn the tide at a crucial point in the war.

Over Here
 What programs and changes did World War I bring at home? Victory at the front depended on economic and emotional mobilization at home. Consolidating federal authority, Wilson moved quickly in 1917 and 1918 to organize war production and

Read the Document




 distribution. An idealist who knew how to sway public opinion, he also recognized the need to enlist American emotions. To him, the war for people’s minds, the “conquest of their convictions,” was as vital as events on the battlefield.

The Conquest of Convictions
 A week after war was declared, Wilson formed the Committee on Public Information (CPI) and asked George Creel, an outspoken progressive journalist, to head it. Creel hired progressives such as Ida Tarbell and Ray Stannard Baker and recruited thousands of people in the arts, advertising, and film industries to publicize the war. He worked out a system of voluntary censorship with the press, plastered walls with colorful posters, and issued more than seventy-five million pamphlets. Creel also enlisted seventy-five thousand “four-minute men” to give quick speeches at public gatherings and places of entertainment on “Why We Are Fighting” and “The Meaning of America.” At first, they were instructed to emphasize facts and stay away from emotions, particularly hatred, but by the beginning of 1918, the instructions shifted; the Germans were to be depicted as bloodthirsty Huns bent on world conquest. Exploiting a new medium,

Espionage Act (1917)


 Anti-German sentiment spread in America during World War I, escalating dramatically after the United States entered the war in April 1917. A wave of verbal and physical attacks on German Americans was accompanied by a campaign to repress German culture. In this photograph from 1917, a group of children stand in front of an anti-German sign posted in the Edison Park community of Chicago, Illinois. As the sign suggests, some Americans questioned the loyalty of their German American neighbors.



 CHAPTER 24

THE NATION AT WAR

 the CPI promoted films such as The Prussian Cur and The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin. Helped along by the propaganda campaign, anti-German sentiment spread rapidly. Many schools stopped offering instruction in the German language—California’s state education board called it a language “of autocracy, brutality, and hatred.” Sauerkraut became “liberty cabbage”; saloonkeepers removed pretzels from the bar. Orchestral works by Bach, Beethoven, and Brahms vanished from some symphonic programs, and the New York Philharmonic agreed not to perform the music of living German composers. Government agents harassed Karl Muck, the German conductor of the Boston Symphony, imprisoned him for more than a year, and then, after the war ended, deported him. German Americans and antiwar figures were badgered, beaten, and in some cases killed. Vigilantism, sparked often by superpatriotism of a ruthless sort, flourished. Frequently, it focused on radical antiwar figures such as Frank Little, an official of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) in Butte, Montana, who was taken from his boardinghouse in August 1917, tied to the rear of an automobile, and dragged through the streets until his kneecaps were scraped off. Little was then hanged from a railroad trestle. In April 1918, a Missouri mob seized Robert Prager, a young man whose sole crime was being born in Germany. They bound him with an American flag, paraded him through town, and then lynched him. A jury acquitted the mob’s members—who wore red, white, and blue ribbons to court—as one juror shouted, “Well, I guess nobody can say we aren’t loyal now.” Rather than curbing the repression, Wilson encouraged it. “Woe be to the man or group of men that seeks to stand in our way,” he told peace advocates soon after the war began. At his request, Congress passed the Espionage Act of 1917, which imposed sentences of up to twenty years in prison for persons found guilty of aiding the enemy, obstructing recruitment of soldiers, or encouraging disloyalty. It allowed the postmaster general to remove from the mails materials that incited treason or insurrection. The Trading-with-the-Enemy Act of 1917 authorized the government to censor the foreign language press. In 1918, Congress passed the Sedition Act, imposing harsh penalties on anyone using “disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive language” about the government, flag, or armed forces uniforms. In all, more than fifteen hundred persons were arrested under the new laws. People indicted or imprisoned included a Californian who laughed at rookies drilling at an army camp, a woman who greeted a Red Cross solicitor in a “hostile” way, and an editor who printed this sentence: “We must make the world safe for democracy even if we have to ‘bean’ the Goddess of Liberty to do it.” The sedition laws clearly went beyond any clear or present danger. There were, to be sure, German spies in the country, Germans who wanted to encourage strikes in American arms factories. Moreover, the U.S. government and other national leaders were painfully aware of how divided Americans had been about entering the war. They set out to promote unity—by force, if necessary—in order to convince Germany that the nation was united behind the war. But none of these matters warranted a nationwide program of repression. Conservatives took advantage of wartime feelings to try to stamp out American socialists, who in fact were vulnerable because, unlike their European counterparts, they continued to oppose the war even after their country had entered it. Using the sedition laws, conservatives harried the Socialist party and another favorite target,

 the Industrial Workers of the World. In 1921, ill and facing imprisonment, “Big Bill” Haywood, one of the IWW’s best known members, fled to the Soviet Union, where he died a few years later. Wilson’s postmaster general banned from the mails more than a dozen socialist publications, including the Appeal to Reason, which went to more than half a million people weekly. In 1918, Eugene V. Debs, the Socialist party leader, delivered a speech denouncing capitalism and the war. He was convicted for violation of the Espionage Act and spent the war in a penitentiary in Atlanta. Nominated as the Socialist party candidate in the presidential election of 1920, Debs—prisoner 9653—won nearly a million votes, but the Socialist movement never fully recovered from the repression of the war. In fostering hostility toward anything that smacked of dissent, the war also gave rise to the great “Red Scare” that began in 1919. Pleased at first with the Russian revolution, Americans in general turned quickly against it, especially after Lenin and the Bolsheviks seized control late in 1917. The Americans feared Lenin’s anticapitalist program, and they denounced his decision in early 1918 to make peace with Germany because it freed German troops to fight in France. Once again, Wilson himself played a prominent role in the development of anti-Bolshevik sentiment. In the summer of 1918, he sent fifteen thousand American troops into the Soviet Union, where they joined other Allied soldiers. Ostensibly, the troops were there to protect Allied supplies from the Germans and to rescue a large number of Czechs who wanted to return home to fight Germany. But the underlying reason for their presence was that Wilson and others hoped to bring down the fledgling Bolshevik government, fearful it would spread revolution around the world. Besides sending troops, Wilson joined in an economic blockade of Russia, sent weapons to anti-Bolshevik insurgents, and refused to recognize Lenin’s government. He also blocked Russian participation in the peace conference that ended the war. American troops remained in Russia until April 1920, and on the whole, American willingness to interfere soured Russian–American relations for decades to come.

A
Bureaucratic War  Quick, effective action was needed to win the war. To meet the need, Wilson and Congress set up an array of new federal agencies, nearly five thousand in all. Staffed largely by businessmen, the agencies drew on funds and powers of a hitherto unknown scope. At night, the secretary of the treasury sat in bed, a yellow pad on his knees, adding up the money needed to finance the war. “The noughts attached to the many millions were so boisterous and prolific,” he later said, “that, at times, they would run clear over the edge of the paper.” By the time the war was over, the “noughts” had boisterously added up to $32 billion in direct war expense—in an era when the entire federal budget rarely exceeded $1 billion. To raise the money, the administration sold about $23 billion in “Liberty Bonds,” and, using the new Sixteenth Amendment, boosted taxes on corporations and personal incomes. The taxes brought in another $10 billion to help pay for the war. At first, Wilson tried to organize the wartime economy along decentralized lines, almost in the fashion of his early New

Over Here


View the Closer Look Mobilizing the Home Front


 Many Americans identified with the Allies. British propaganda bolstered those sympathies with exaggerated stories of German atrocities.

 Freedom thinking. But that proved unworkable, and he moved instead to a series of highly centralized planning boards, each with broad authority over a specific area of the economy. There were boards to control virtually every aspect of transportation, agriculture, and manufacturing. Though only a few of them were as effective as Wilson had hoped, they did coordinate the war effort to some degree. The War Industries Board (WIB), one of the most powerful of the new agencies, oversaw the production of all American factories. Headed by millionaire Bernard M. Baruch, a Wall Street broker and speculator, it determined priorities, allocated raw materials, and fixed prices. It told manufacturers what they could and could not make. The WIB set the output of steel and regulated



 the number of stops on elevators. Working closely with business, Baruch for a time acted as the dictator of the American economy. Herbert Hoover, the hero of a campaign to feed starving Belgians, headed a new Food Administration , and he set out with customary energy to supply food to the armies overseas. Appealing to the “spirit of self-sacrifice,” Hoover convinced people to save food by observing “meatless” and “wheatless” days. He fixed prices to boost production, bought and distributed wheat, and encouraged people to plant “victory gardens” behind homes, churches, and schools. He sent a half million campaigners door to door to get housewives to sign cards pledging their cooperation. One householder— Wilson—set an example by grazing sheep on the White House lawn. At another new agency, the Fuel Administration, Harry A. Garfield, the president of Williams College, introduced daylight saving time, rationed coal and oil, and imposed gasless days when motorists could not drive. To save coal, he shut down nonessential factories one day a week, and in January 1918, he closed all factories east of the Mississippi for four days to divert coal to munitions ships stranded in New York harbor. A fourth agency, the Railroad Administration, dictated rail traffic over nearly four hundred thousand miles of track—standardizing rates, limiting passenger travel, and speeding arms shipments. The War Shipping Board coordinated shipping, the Emergency Fleet Corporation supervised shipbuilding, and the War Trade Board oversaw foreign trade. As never before, the government intervened in American life. When strikes threatened the telephone and telegraph companies, the government simply seized and ran them. Businessmen, paid a nominal dollar a year, flocked to Washington to run the new agencies, and the partnership between government and business grew closer. As government expanded, business expanded as well, responding to wartime contracts. Industries such as steel, aluminum, and cigarettes boomed, and corporate profits increased threefold between 1914 and 1919.

Labor in the War
 The war also brought organized labor into the partnership with government, although the results were more limited than in the business-government alliance. Samuel Gompers, president of the AFL, served on Wilson’s Council of National Defense, an advisory group formed to unify business, labor, and government. Gompers hoped to trade labor peace for labor advances, and he formed a War Committee on Labor to enlist workers’ support for the war. With the blessing of the Wilson administration, membership in the AFL and other unions grew from about 2.7 million in 1916 to more than 4 million in 1919. Hoping to encourage production and avoid strikes, Wilson adopted many of the objectives of the social-justice reformers.



 CHAPTER 24

THE NATION AT WAR

 He supported an eight-hour day in war-related industries and improved wages and working conditions. In May 1918, he named Felix Frankfurter, a brilliant young law professor, to head a new War Labor Board (WLB). The agency standardized wages and hours, and at Wilson’s direction, it protected the right of labor to organize and bargain collectively. Although it did not forbid strikes, it used various tactics to discourage them. It enforced decisions in well-publicized cases; when the Smith and Wesson arms factory in Massachusetts and the Western Union telegraph company disobeyed the WLB’s union rules, the agency took them over. The WLB also ordered that women be paid equal wages for equal work in war industries. In 1914, the flow of European immigrants suddenly stopped because of the war, and in 1917, the draft began to take large numbers of American men. The result was a labor shortage, filled by women, African Americans, and Mexican Americans. One million women worked in war industries. Some of them took jobs previously held by men, but for the most part, they moved from one set of “women’s jobs” into another. From the beginning of the war to the end, the number of women in the workforce held steady at about eight million, and unlike the experience in World War II, large numbers of housewives did not leave the home for machine shops and arms plants. Still, there were some new opportunities and in some cases higher pay. In food, airplane, and electrical plants, women made up one-fifth or more of the workforce. As their wages increased, so did

 their expectations; some became more militant, and conflict grew between them and male co-workers. To set standards for female employment, a Women’s Bureau was established in the Department of Labor, but the government’s influence varied. In the federally run railroad industry, women often made wages equal to those of men; in the federally run telephone industry, they did not. Looking for more people to fill wartime jobs, corporations found another major source among southern blacks. Beginning in 1916, northern labor agents traveled across the South, promising jobs, high wages, and free transportation. Soon the word spread, and the movement northward became a flood. Between 1916 and 1918, more than 450,000 African Americans left the Old South for the booming industrial cities of St. Louis, Chicago, Detroit, and Cleveland. In the decade before 1920, Detroit’s black population grew by more than 600 percent, Cleveland’s by more than 300 percent, and Chicago’s by 150 percent. Most of the newcomers were young, unmarried, and skilled or semiskilled. The men found jobs in factories, railroad yards, steel mills, packinghouses, and coal mines; black women worked in textile factories, department stores, and restaurants. In their new homes, African Americans found greater racial freedom but also different living conditions. If the South was often hostile, the North could be impersonal and lonely. Accustomed to the pace of the farm—ruled by the seasons and the sun—those blacks who were able to enter the industrial sector now worked for hourly wages in

AFRICAN AMERICAN MIGRATION NORTHWARD, 1910–1920
The massive migration of African Americans from the South to the North during World War I changed the dynamics of race relations in the United States. 
CANADA MAINE

WASHINGTON NORTH DAKOTA

 MONTANA

VT. N.H.

 MINN.

NEW YORK

OREGON WIS.

SOUTH DAKOTA

 IDAHO

 MICH.

New York


Detroit


 WYOMING

RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT
Philadelphia 
PENN. NEBRASKA

Chicago


 IOWA

Baltimore


OHIO IND.

 ILL.

NEVADA KANSAS

NEW JERSEY MARYLAND

W.V.
 COLORADO

 DEL.

Washington, D.C.


UTAH CALIFORNIA

 MASS.

St. Louis


 VIRGINIA

 KY.

 MISSOURI

N.C.
 TENN.

 ARIZONA

 OKLAHOMA

NEW MEXICO

 ARK.

S.C.


Memphis
Atlanta


Birmingham


ALA. PACIFIC OCEAN

 TEXAS

 LA.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 GEORGIA

 MISS.

New Orleans


FLORIDA
States with greatest increase in population States with greatest decrease in population 
 MEXICO



 African American migration



 400 miles 400 kilometers

Over Here


 mass production industries, where time clocks and line supervisors dictated the daily routine. Racial tensions increased, resulting in part from growing competition for housing and jobs. In mid-1917, a race war in East St. Louis, Illinois, killed nine whites and about forty blacks. In July 1919, the month President Wilson returned from the peace conference in Paris, a race riot in Washington, D.C., killed six people. Riots in Chicago that month killed thirtyeight—fifteen whites and twenty-three blacks—and there were later outbreaks in New York City and Omaha. Lynch mobs killed forty-eight blacks in 1917, sixty-three in 1918, and seventy-eight in 1919. Ten of the victims in 1919 were war veterans, several still in uniform. Blacks were more and more inclined to fight back. Two hundred thousand blacks served in France—forty-two thousand as combat troops. Returning home, they expected better treatment. “I’m glad I went,” a black veteran said. “I done my part, and I’m going to fight right here till Uncle Sam does his.” Roscoe Jameson, Claude McKay, and other black poets wrote biting poetry, some of it—such as Fenton Johnson’s “The New Day”— drawn from the war experience:

Watch the Video




 For we have been with thee in No Man’s Land, Through lake of fire and down to Hell itself; And now we ask of thee our liberty, Our freedom in the land of Stars and Stripes. “Lift Ev’ry Voice and Sing,” composed in 1900, became known as the “Negro National Anthem.” Parents bought black dolls for their children, and W. E. B. Du Bois spoke of a “New Negro,” proud and more militant: “We return. We return from fighting. We return fighting.” Eager for cheap labor, farmers and ranchers in the Southwest persuaded the federal government to relax immigration restrictions, and between 1917 and 1920, more than 100,000 Mexicans migrated into Texas, Arizona, New Mexico, and California. The Mexican American population grew from 385,000 in 1910 to 740,000 in 1920. Tens of thousands of Mexican Americans moved to Chicago, St. Louis, Omaha, and other northern cities to take wartime jobs. Often scorned and insecure, they created urban barrios similar to the Chinatowns and Little Italys around them. Like most wars, World War I affected patterns at home as much as abroad. Business profits grew, factories expanded, and industries

The Great Migration


 The Great Migration, over a series of decades, witnessed the relocation of approximately 1.5 million African Americans from their southern homes to northern metropolises. It took a long time for that many people to move. But it was the single most dramatic, most powerful example or evidence of an African American agency in the twentieth century because this was not an organized movement.



 CHAPTER 24

THE NATION AT WAR

The Treaty of Versailles


 divide up Germany’s colonies. To try to place the war on a higher plane, he appeared before Congress on January 8, 1918, and outlined terms for a far-reaching, nonpunitive settlement. Wilson’s Fourteen Points were generous and farsighted, but they failed to satisfy wartime emotions that sought vindication. England and France distrusted Wilsonian idealism as the basis for peace. They wanted Germany disarmed and crippled; they wanted its colonies; and they were skeptical of the principle of selfdetermination. As the end of the war neared, the Allies, who had in fact made secret commitments with one another, balked at making the Fourteen Points the basis of peace. When Wilson threatened to negotiate a separate treaty with Germany, however, they accepted. Wilson had won an important victory, but difficulties lay ahead. As Georges Clemenceau, the 78-year-old French premier, said, “God gave us the Ten Commandments, and we broke them. Wilson gives us the Fourteen Points. We shall see.”

 What mistakes did Wilson make in negotiating the Treaty of Versailles?

A
Peace at Paris 

 Long before the fighting ended, Wilson began to formulate plans for the peace. Like many others, he was disconcerted when the new Bolshevik government in Russia began revealing the terms of secret agreements among Britain, France, and czarist Russia to

 Unfortunately, Wilson made a grave error just before the peace conference began. He appealed to voters to elect a Democratic Congress in the November 1918 elections, saying that any other result would be “interpreted on the other side of the water as a repudiation

 turned out huge amounts of war goods. Government authority swelled, and people came to expect different things of their government. Labor made some gains, as did women and blacks. Society assimilated some of the shifts, but social and economic tensions grew, and when the war ended, they spilled over in the strikes and violence of the Red Scare that followed. The United States emerged from the war the strongest economic power in the world. In 1914, it was a debtor nation, and American citizens owed foreign investors about $3 billion. Five years later, the United States had become a creditor nation. Foreign governments owed more than $10 billion, and foreign citizens owed American investors nearly $3 billion. The war marked a shift in economic power rarely equaled in history.

Read the Document


 President Wilson’s Fourteen Points

 On January 8, 1918, U.S. President Woodrow Wilson, speaking before a joint session of Congress, put forth his Fourteen Points proposal for ending the war. In this speech, he established the basis of a peace treaty and the foundation of a League of Nations.

The Treaty of Versailles


 of my leadership.” Many Republicans were furious, especially those who had supported the Fourteen Points; Wilson’s problems deepened when the Democrats went on to lose both the House and Senate. Wilson’s opponents immediately announced that voters had rejected his policies, as he had suggested they could. In fact, the Democratic losses stemmed largely from domestic problems, such as the price of wheat and cotton. But they hurt Wilson, who had alienated some important Republican party leaders. Soon, he would be negotiating with European leaders buoyed by rousing victories at their own polls. Two weeks after the elections, Wilson announced he would attend the peace conference. This was a dramatic break from tradition, and his personal involvement drew attacks from Republicans. They renewed criticism when he named the rest of the delegation: Secretary of State Lansing; Colonel House; General Tasker H. Bliss, a military expert; and Henry White, a career diplomat. Wilson named no member of the Senate, and the only Republican in the group was White. In selecting the delegation, Wilson passed over Henry Cabot Lodge, the powerful Republican senator from Massachusetts who opposed the Fourteen Points and who would soon head the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. He also decided not to appoint Elihu Root or ex-President Taft, both of them enthusiastic internationalists. Never good at accepting criticism or delegating authority, Wilson wanted a delegation he could control—an advantage at the peace table but not in any battle over the treaty at home. Upon his arrival, Wilson received a tumultuous welcome in England, France, and Italy. Never before had such crowds acclaimed a democratic political figure. In Paris, two million people lined the Champs-Elysées, threw flowers at him, and shouted, “Wilson le Juste [the just]” as his carriage drove by. Overwhelmed, Wilson was sure that the people of Europe shared his goals and would force their leaders to accept his peace. He was wrong. Like their leaders,



 many people on the Allied side hated Germany and wanted victory unmistakably reflected in the peace. Opening in January 1919, the Peace Conference at Paris continued until May. Although twenty-seven nations were represented, the “Big Four” dominated it: Wilson; Clemenceau of France, tired and stubborn, determined to end the German threat forever; David Lloyd George, the crafty British prime minister who had pledged to squeeze Germany “until the pips squeak”; and the Italian prime minister, Vittorio Orlando. A clever negotiator, Wilson traded various “small” concessions for his major goals—national self-determination, a reduction in tensions, and a League of Nations to enforce the peace. Wilson had to surrender some important principles. Departing from the Fourteen Points by violating the principle of self-determination, the treaty created two new independent nations—Poland and Czechoslovakia—with large German-speaking populations. It divided up the German colonies in Asia and Africa. Instead of a peace without victory, it made Germany accept responsibility for the war and demanded enormous reparations—which eventually totaled $33 billion. It made no mention of disarmament, free trade, or freedom of the seas. Instead of an open covenant openly arrived at, the treaty was drafted behind closed doors. But Wilson deflected some of the most extreme Allied demands, and he won his coveted Point 14, a League of Nations, designed “to achieve international peace and security.” The League included a general assembly; a smaller council composed of the United States, Great Britain, France, Italy, Japan, and four nations to be elected by the assembly; and a court of international justice. League members pledged to submit to arbitration every dispute threatening peace and to enjoin military and economic sanctions against nations resorting to war. Article X, for Wilson the heart of the League, obliged members to look out for one another’s independence and territorial integrity.

WOODROW WILSON’S FOURTEEN POINTS, 1918: SUCCESS AND FAILURE IN IMPLEMENTATION 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.

 Open covenants of peace openly arrived at Absolute freedom of navigation on the seas in peace and war Removal of all economic barriers to the equality of trade among nations Reduction of armaments to the level needed only for domestic safety Impartial adjustments of colonial claims Evacuation of all Russian territory; Russia to be welcomed into the society of free nations Evacuation and restoration of Belgium Evacuation and restoration of all French lands; return of Alsace-Lorraine to France Readjustment of Italy’s frontiers along lines of Italian nationality Self-determination for the former subjects of the Austro-Hungarian Empire Evacuation of Romania, Serbia, and Montenegro; free access to the sea for Serbia Self-determination for the former subjects of the Ottoman Empire; secure sovereignty for Turkish portion Establishment of an independent Poland, with free and secure access to the sea Establishment of a League of Nations affording mutual guarantees of independence and territorial integrity

 Not fulfilled Not fulfilled Not fulfilled Not fulfilled Not fulfilled Not fulfilled Fulfilled Fulfilled Compromised Compromised Compromised Compromised Fulfilled Not fulfilled

 Sources: Data from G. M. Gathorne-Hardy, The Fourteen Points and the Treaty of Versailles (Oxford Pamphlets on World Affairs, no. 6, 1939), pp. 8–34; Thomas G. Paterson et al., American Foreign Policy: A History Since 1900, 2nd ed., vol. 2, pp. 282–293.



 CHAPTER 24

THE NATION AT WAR

New and
 reconstituted nations

FINLAND NORWAY SWEDEN
North Sea 
ESTONIA LATVIA

 DENMARK

Danzig
(Free City)


GREAT BRITAIN

LITHUANIA SOVIET UNION

GER. NETH. GERMANY BELG.

 FRANCE

 POLAND

CZ EC HO S

 LUX.

LOVAKI A

 AUSTRIA

 SWITZ.

HUNGARY ROMANIA YUGOSLAVIA

 SPAIN

Corsica
(Fr.)
Mallorca
(Sp.)


 ITALY

BULGARIA ALBANIA

Sardinia
(It.)


 GREECE

Mediterranean Sea
 ALGERIA (Fr.)

 TUNISIA (Fr.)

Sicily
Crete


EUROPE AFTER THE TREATY OF VERSAILLES, 1919
The treaty changed the map of Europe, creating a number of new and reconstituted nations. (Note the boundary changes from the map on p. 573.) 
 The draft treaty in hand, Wilson returned home in February 1919 to discuss it with Congress and the people. Most Americans, the polls showed, favored the League; thirty-three governors endorsed it. But over dinner with the Senate and House Foreign Relations Committees, Wilson learned of the strength of congressional opposition to it. On March 3, Senator Lodge produced a “round robin” signed by thirty-seven senators declaring they would not vote for the treaty without amendment. Should the numbers hold, Lodge had enough votes to defeat it. Returning to Paris, Wilson attacked his critics, while he worked privately for changes to improve the chances of Senate approval. In return for major concessions, the Allies amended the League draft treaty, agreeing that domestic affairs remained outside League jurisdiction (exempting the Monroe Doctrine) and allowing nations to withdraw after two years’ notice. On June 28, 1919, they signed the treaty in the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles, and Wilson started home for his most difficult fight.

Rejection in the Senate
 There were ninety-six senators in 1919, forty-nine of them Republicans. Fourteen Republicans, led by William E. Borah of Idaho, were the “irreconcilables” who opposed the League on any grounds. “If the Savior of man,” Borah said, “would revisit the earth and declare for a League of Nations, I would be opposed to it.”

 Frank B. Kellogg of Minnesota led a group of twelve “mild reservationists” who accepted the treaty but wanted to insert several reservations that would not greatly weaken it. Finally, there were the Lodge-led “strong reservationists,” twenty-three of them in all, who wanted major changes that the Allies would have to approve. With only four Democratic senators opposed to the treaty, the Democrats and Republicans willing to compromise had enough votes to ratify it, once a few reservations were inserted. Bidding for time to allow public opposition to grow, Lodge scheduled lengthy hearings and spent two weeks reading the 268-page treaty aloud. Democratic leaders urged Wilson to appeal to the Republican “mild reservationists,” but he refused: “Anyone who opposes me in that I’ll crush!” Fed up with Lodge’s tactics, Wilson set out in early September to take the case directly to the people. Crossing the Midwest, his speeches aroused little emotion, but on the Pacific Coast he won ovations, which heartened him. On his way back to Washington, he stopped in Pueblo, Colorado, where he delivered one of the most eloquent speeches of his career. People wept as he talked of Americans who died in battle and the hope that they would never fight again in foreign lands. That night Wilson felt ill, returned to Washington, and on October 2, Mrs. Wilson found him lying unconscious on the floor of the White House, the victim of a stroke that paralyzed his left side. After the stroke, Wilson could not work more than an hour or two at a time. No one was allowed to see him except family members, his secretary, and his physician. For more than seven months, he did not meet with the cabinet. Secretary of State Lansing convened cabinet meetings, but when Wilson learned of them, he ordered Lansing to stop and then cruelly forced Lansing to resign. Focusing his remaining energy on the fight over the treaty, Wilson lost touch with other issues, and critics charged that his wife, Edith Bolling Wilson, ran the government. On November 6, 1919, while Wilson convalesced, Lodge finally reported the treaty out of committee, along with “Fourteen Reservations,” one for each of Wilson’s points. The most important reservation stipulated that implementation of Article X, Wilson’s key article, required the action of Congress before any American intervention abroad. The next day, the president’s floor leader in the Senate told him that the Democrats could not pass the treaty without reservations. “Is it possible?” Wilson asked sadly. “It might be wise to compromise,” the senator said. “Let Lodge compromise!” Wilson replied. When Mrs. Wilson urged her husband to accept the Lodge reservations, he said, “Better a thousand times to go down fighting than to dip your colors to dishonorable compromise.” On November 19, the treaty—with the Lodge reservations— failed, 39 to 55. Following Wilson’s instructions, the Democrats voted against it. A motion to approve without the reservations lost 38 to 53, with only one Republican voting in favor. The defeat brought pleas for compromise, but neither Wilson nor Lodge would back down. When the treaty with reservations again came up for vote on March 19, 1920, Wilson ordered the Democrats to hold firm against it. Although twenty-one of them defied him, enough obeyed his orders to defeat it, 49 to 35, seven votes short of the necessary two-thirds majority.

STUDY RESOURCES

 To Wilson, walking now with the help of a cane, one chance remained: the presidential election of 1920. For a time, he thought of running for a third term himself, but his party shunted him aside. The Democrats nominated Governor James M. Cox of Ohio, along with the young and popular Franklin D. Roosevelt, assistant secretary of the navy, for vice president. Wilson called for “a great and solemn referendum” on the treaty. The Democratic platform endorsed the treaty but agreed to accept reservations that clarified the American role in the League.

THE ELECTION OF 1920
Candidate Harding Cox Debs 
Party
Republican
Democrat
Socialist


Popular
Vote
16,152,200
9,147,353
917,799


Electoral
Vote


 On the Republican side, Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio, who had nominated Taft in 1912, won the presidential nomination. Harding waffled on the treaty, but that issue made little difference. Voters wanted a change. Harding won in a landslide, taking 61 percent of the vote and beating Cox by seven million votes. Without a peace treaty, the United States remained technically at war, and it was not until July 1921,



 almost three years after the last shot was fired, that Congress passed a joint resolution ending the war.

Conclusion: Postwar
Disillusionment
 After 1919, there was disillusionment. World War I was feared before it started, popular while it lasted, and hated when it ended. To a whole generation that followed, it appeared futile, killing without cause, sacrificing without benefit. Books, plays, and movies—Hemingway’s A Farewell to Arms (1929), John Dos Passos’s Three Soldiers (1921), Laurence Stallings and Maxwell Anderson’s What Price Glory? (1924), among others—showed it as waste, horror, and death. The war and its aftermath damaged the humanitarian, progressive spirit of the early years of the century. It killed “something precious and perhaps irretrievable in the hearts of thinking men and women.” Progressivism survived well into the 1920s and the New Deal, but it no longer had the old conviction and broad popular support. Bruising fights over the war and the League drained people’s energy and enthusiasm. Confined to bed, Woodrow Wilson died in Washington in 1924, three years after Harding, the new president, promised “not heroics but healing; not nostrums but normalcy; not revolution but restoration.” Nonetheless, the “war to end all wars” and the spirit of Woodrow Wilson left an indelible imprint on the country.

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 24 The Nation at War on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1901
Hay-Pauncefote Treaty with Great Britain empowers United States to build Isthmian canal 
 1904 Theodore Roosevelt introduces corollary to Monroe Doctrine



1904–1905 Russo-Japanese War
 1905 Taft-Katsura Agreement recognizes Japanese power in Korea

 1908 Root-Takahira Agreement vows to maintain status



 quo in the Pacific; Roosevelt sends the fleet around the world

 1911 Revolution begins in Mexico 1913–1914 Bryan negotiates “cooling-off” treaties to end war



 1914 World War I begins; U.S. Marines take Veracruz; Panama Canal completed

 1915 Japan issues Twenty-one Demands to China (January); Germany declares water around British Isles a war zone (February); Lusitania torpedoed



 (May); Bryan resigns; Robert Lansing becomes secretary of state (June); Arabic pledge restricts submarine warfare (September) Germany issues Sussex pledge (March); General John J. Pershing leads unsuccessful punitive expedition into Mexico to seize Pancho Villa (April); Wilson wins reelection Wilson calls for “peace without victory” (January); Germany resumes unrestricted U-boat warfare (February); United States enters World War I (April); Congress passes Selective Service Act (May); First American troops reach France (June); War Industries Board established (July) Wilson outlines Fourteen Points for peace (January); Germany asks for peace (October); Armistice ends the war (November) Peace negotiations in Paris (January); Treaty of Versailles defeated in Senate Warren G. Harding elected president



 CHAPTER 24

CHAPTER REVIEW

CHAPTER REVIEW PANAMA

 Colón Cristobal

 a gr Ch

Panama
Canal
Zone


Gatun
Locks


 What were the main events that showed the United States was becoming a world power?

NORWAY SWEDEN
Moscow 
North
Sea


RUSSIA
Tannenberg Aug. 26–31, 1914 
Berlin


 NETH.

EASTERN FRONT

 BrestLitovsk

GERMAN EMPIRE

Armistice Line
Dec. 1917


 LUX.

Gatun
Lake


 ris

Pedro Miguel
Locks


 5 miles

 PANAMA

PAC OC

 5 kilometers

Panama
Canal


Vienna


 AUSTRIA-HUNGARY

 SWITZ.

Caporetto
Oct. 24–25, 1917


SOUTHERN FLANK

Corsica
(Fr.)
 rca (Sp.)

Sardinia
(It.)


Caribbean


 NICARAGUA

Panama
Canal
Zone


COSTA RICA

Locks


 RANCE

 ROMANIA

Pana


Balboa


Panama Canal


Verdun
Feb. 21–
Dec. 18, 1916


WESTERN FRONT

 After winning the Spanish-American War, American presidents began to exert more influence in the world. Roosevelt took extraordinary steps to build the Panama Canal. He enlarged the country’s role in the Western Hemisphere and tried to deal with the growing power of Japan. Taft focused on protecting American economic interests abroad. (p. 564) Miraflores Locks



 l ti c Ba

 DENMARK

 BELG.



 ITALY

 MONTENEGRO

Black Sea


 SERBIA

 BULGARIA

Rome


OTTOMAN EMPIRE

 ALB.

 GREECE

 editerranean Sea

Gallipoli
Apr. 25, 1915–
Jan. 9, 1916


Sicily
(Fr.)


 TUNISIA (Fr.)

Crete


Cyprus
(Br.)


 What did Woodrow Wilson mean by “moral diplomacy”?

UNITED STATES
Columbus, New Mexico 


Parral




Gulf of Mexico


 MEXICO 1. Villa’s raid, March 9, 1916

 Bahía Ho



Tampico




 2. Pershing’s expedition, 1916–1917 Veracruz

 Wilson hoped to focus on domestic affairs but was soon involved in crises abroad. He first tried what he called “moral diplomacy,” asking the United States and other countries to treat each other in a moral manner, especially in Europe and Mexico. In Mexico, he had praiseworthy aims but misjudged the country. (p. 566) 3. Skirmish with Carranza’s troops, April 12, 1916



 4. American sailors arrested, April 1914

BRITISH HONDURA

5. Seized by U.S. Navy,
April 1914


 6. U.S. occupation, 1912–1919, 1924–1925 7. U.S. occupation, 1912–1925, 1927–1933 8. Leased, 1903

9. Leased, 1903–1912


 0. U.S. occupation, 1898–1902, 1906–1909, 1912 and 1917

GUATEMALA HONDURA



 11. U.S. naval base leased, 12. U.S. occupation, 1915–1934 13. U.S. occupation, 1916–1924

EL SALVADOR

 NICARA

Proposed
 canal

COS RI

 14. Purchased from Denmark, 1917

 What programs and changes did World War I bring at home? American participation in World War I drew on many of the techniques of progressive reformers, including using people with expertise and exploiting bureaucracy. The War Industries Board oversaw the production of all American factories; the Food Administration Board looked after food for the armies overseas. The government played a larger role in American life than ever before. (p. 577)

The Treaty of Versailles


Toward War
 What were the reasons behind and dangers of Wilson’s neutrality policy? With the outbreak of war in Europe in 1914, Wilson proclaimed neutrality, which was difficult to maintain. Neutrality, he hoped, would favor neither side and keep the United States out of war. Progressives knew that war would distract attention from reform. Submarine warfare offered new threats, which Wilson tried to control but could not. On April 6, 1917, the United States joined the war. (p. 568)

 The United States entered the war at a crucial time for the Allies. American troops helped stop the last German offensive in 1918. Entry into the war gave the United States a stake in the peace treaty. (p. 572)

Over Here


Foreign Policy Under Wilson


 How did the United States’ entry affect World War I?

 a

Caribbean Sea


Over There
Se


A
New World Power 

 What mistakes did Wilson make in negotiating the Treaty of Versailles? Wilson’s Fourteen Points sought to reduce armaments, lower trade barriers, provide for self determination, and establish a League of Nations to prevent further wars. He was forced to compromise at Versailles, but the Senate refused to ratify the peace treaty when he would not compromise on issues such as the League of Nations. (p. 582)

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Hay–Bunau–Varilla Treaty This 1903 treaty with Panama granted the United States control over a canal zone ten miles wide across the Isthmus of Panama. p. 565 Roosevelt Corollary A corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, which asserted that the United States would intervene in Latin American affairs if those countries could not keep their affairs in order. p. 566 “Dollar diplomacy” The Taft administration’s policy in the early 1900s to promote U.S. financial and business interests abroad, especially in Latin America. p. 566 “Moral diplomacy” Policy of President Woodrow Wilson that rejected “dollar diplomacy.” Rather than focusing mainly on economic ties with other nations, Wilson sought to practice morality in international relations, preserve peace, and extend to other peoples the blessings of democracy. p. 567 Selective Service Act: This 1917 law required all American men between the ages of 21 and 30 to register for a military draft. The age limits were later changed to 18 and 45. p. 576 Committee on Public Information (CPI) Created in 1917 by President Wilson and headed by progressive journalist George Creel, this organization rallied support for American involvement in World War I through art, advertising, and film. 
 Creel worked out a system of voluntary censorship with the press and distributed posters and pamphlets. p. 577 Espionage Act of 1917 This law, passed after the United States entered World War I, imposed sentences of up to 20 years on anyone found guilty of aiding the enemy, obstructing recruitment of soldiers, or encouraging disloyalty. It allowed the postmaster general to remove from the mail any materials that incited treason or insurrection. p. 578 Sedition Act A World War I law that imposed harsh penalties on anyone using “disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive language about the U.S. government, flag, or armed forces.” p. 578 War Industries Board (WIB) This government agency oversaw the production of American factories during World War I. p. 579 Food Administration A government agency that encouraged Americans to save food during World War I. p. 579 Fourteen Points In January 1918, President Woodrow Wilson presented these terms for a far-reaching, nonpunitive settlement of World War I and the establishment of a League of Nations. While generous and optimistic, the Points did not satisfy wartime hunger for revenge and were largely rejected by European nations. p. 582

STUDY RESOURCES



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
What role did the United States’ becoming a world power play in shaping the foreign policy of Roosevelt and Wilson? 
 2. What events and influences led the United States toward entry into World War I?

 3. What were the main events of America’s involvement in the war in Europe, and how did these events affect the treaty ending the war?

 4. How might Wilson have handled the Versailles treaty negotiations differently?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 24 on MyHistoryLab Toward War ◾

Over Here


Watch the Video


Read the Document


The Outbreak of World War I p. 568


Read the Document


 Adolf K.G.E. von Spiegel, U-boat 202

◾


(1919) p. 570


Espionage Act (1917) p. 577


View the Closer Look


Mobilizing the Home


Front p. 579


Read the Document


Watch the Video


 President Wilson’s War Message to

The Great Migration p. 581


Congress (1917) p. 571


The Treaty of Versailles
◾


Watch the Video


 American Entry into World War I p. 572

Listen to the Audio File


◾


◾


Read the Document


 President Wilson’s Fourteen

Points p. 582


Over There
“Over There” p. 573


Complete the Assignment


Measuring the Mind p. 574


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




Transition to Modern
America


Contents and Learning Objectives
THE SECOND INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION PG. 589

POLITICS OF THE 1920S PG. 603

 What was new about the American economy in the 1920s?

FEATURE ESSAY
Marcus Garvey: Racial Redemption and Black Nationalism 
CITY LIFE IN THE JAZZ AGE PG. 592
How did life in the cities change after World War I? 
THE RURAL COUNTERATTACK PG. 598
How did conservatives resist the changes of the decade? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

 How did the politics of the 1920s reflect changes in the economy and in American society?

LAW AND SOCIETY
The Scopes “Monkey” Trial: Contesting Cultural Differences 
