 For one group of dissenters, democracy took on a more radical meaning. Working men’s parties and trade unions emerged in eastern cities during the late 1820s and early 1830s. Their leaders condemned the growing gap between the rich and the poor. They argued that an expansion of low-paying labor was putting working people under the dominance of their employers to such an extent that the American tradition of “equal rights” was in grave danger. Society, in their view, was divided between “producers”—laborers, artisans, farmers, and small-business owners who ran their own enterprises—and nonproducing “parasites”—bankers, speculators, and merchant capitalists. Working men’s parties aimed to give the producers greater control over the fruits of their labor. These radicals called for a number of reforms to achieve equal rights. Thomas Skidmore, a founder of the New York Working Men’s Party, advocated the abolition of inheritance and a redistribution of property. Champions of the rights of labor also demanded greatly extended and improved systems of public education. But education reform, however radical or extensive, could provide equal opportunities only to future generations. To relieve the plight of adult artisans and craftspeople at a time when their economic and social status was deteriorating, labor reformers and trade unionists experimented with cooperative production and called for a ten-hour workday, abolition of imprisonment for debt, and a currency system based exclusively on hard money so workers could no longer be paid in depreciated banknotes. During the 1830s, federated unions and working men’s political parties emerged in several cities. Through mass action these groups were able to achieve better working conditions and shorter workdays. But the depression that began in 1837 wiped out most of these gains. In the 1830s and 1840s, northern abolitionists and early proponents of women’s rights made other efforts to extend the meaning and scope of democracy. But Jacksonian America was too permeated with racism and sexism to give much heed to claims that the equal rights prescribed by the Declaration of Independence should be extended to blacks and women. Most of those who advocated democratization explicitly limited its application to white males. In some ways, the civil and political status of blacks and women actually deteriorated during “the age of the common man.” (See Chapter 12 for a discussion of these movements.)



Jackson and the Politics
 of Democracy What political conflicts did President Andrew Jackson face and how did he resolve them? The public figure who came to symbolize the triumph of democracy was Andrew Jackson, who came out a loser in the presidential election of 1824. His victory four years later, his actions as president, and the great political party that formed around him refashioned national politics in a more democratic mold. No wonder historians have called the spirit of the age Jacksonian Democracy.

 The Election of 1824 and J. Q. Adams’s Administration As Monroe’s second term ended, the ruling Republican Party was in disarray and could not agree on who should succeed to the presidency. The party’s congressional caucus chose William Crawford of Georgia, an old-line Jeffersonian. But a majority of congressmen showed their disapproval of this outmoded method of nominating candidates by refusing to attend the caucus. Monroe himself favored John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts. This gave the New England statesman an important boost but did not discourage others from entering the contest. Supporters of Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun mounted campaigns for their favorites, and a group of local leaders in his home state of Tennessee tossed Jackson’s hat into the ring. Initially, Jackson was not given much of a chance. Unlike other aspirants, he had not played a conspicuous role in national politics; his sole claim to fame was as a military hero, and not even his original supporters believed this would be sufficient to catapult him into the White House. But after testing the waters, Calhoun withdrew and chose instead to run for vice president. Then Crawford suffered a debilitating stroke that weakened his chances. With one Southerner out of the race and another disabled, Jackson began to pick up support in slaveholding states. He also found favor among those in the North and West who were disenchanted with the economic nationalism of Clay and Adams. In the election, Jackson won a plurality of the electoral votes, but he lacked the necessary majority. The contest was thrown into the House of Representatives, where the legislators were to choose from among the three top candidates. Adams emerged victorious over Jackson and Crawford. Clay, who had just missed making the final three, provided the winning margin by persuading his supporters to vote for Adams. When Adams proceeded to appoint Clay as his secretary of state, the Jacksonians charged that a “corrupt bargain” had deprived their favorite of the presidency. Although there was no evidence that Clay had bartered votes for the promise of a high office, the charge was widely believed. As a result, Adams assumed office under a cloud of suspicion. Adams had a difficult and frustrating presidency. Adams sought to encourage industrial development, improvements in transportation, and centralized credit. Among the reforms he urged on Congress were federal bankruptcy legislation, debt reduction, road construction, geographical and astronomical exploration, and the creation of a new national university and naval academy. However, the political winds were blowing against nationalistic programs, partly because the country was just recovering from a depression that many thought



 CHAPTER 10

THE TRIUMPH OF WHITE MEN’S DEMOCRACY

 had been caused or exacerbated by federal banking and tariff policies. Adams refused to bow to public opinion and called for an expansion of federal activity. He had a special interest in government support for science, to which end he advocated the establishment of a national university in Washington. Advocates of states’ rights and a strict construction of the Constitution were aghast at such proposals, and the opposition that developed in Congress turned the administration’s domestic program into a pipe dream. In foreign affairs, as well, Adams found himself stymied. International commerce, to Adams, was the cornerstone of foreign policy, and he believed that expanded trade and shipping would strengthen the new nation. While he did not oppose all tariffs, the tariff became the rallying cry of those hostile to his administration. The new Congress elected in 1826 was dominated by men favorable to Andrew Jackson’s presidential aspirations. The tariff issue was the main business on their agenda. Pressure for greater protection came not only from manufacturers but also from many farmers, especially wool and hemp growers, who would supply critical votes in the upcoming presidential election. The cotton-growing South—the only section where tariffs of all kinds were unpopular—was assumed to be safely in the general’s camp regardless of his stand on the tariff. Therefore, promoters of Jackson’s candidacy felt safe in supporting a high tariff to swing critical votes in Jackson’s direction. Jackson himself had never categorically opposed protective tariffs so long as they were “judicious.”

THE ELECTION OF 1824
Candidate J. Q. Adams Jackson Clay Crawford 
Party
 No party designations

Popular
Vote
108,740


Electoral
Vote*


153,544
47,136
46,618




 *No candidate received a majority of the electoral votes. Adams was elected by the House of Representatives.

 As it turned out, the resulting tariff law was anything but judicious. Congress had operated on a give-and-take principle, trying to provide something for everybody. Those favoring protection for farmers agreed to protection for manufacturers and vice versa. The substantial across-the-board increase in duties that resulted, however, angered southern free traders and became known as the tariff of abominations. Historians long erred in explaining the 1828 tariff as a complex Jacksonian plot that backfired; it was in fact an early example of how special-interest groups can achieve their goals in democratic politics by trading votes in the legislative bargaining process known as logrolling.

Jackson Comes to Power
 The campaign of 1828 actually began with Adams’s election in 1824. Rallying around the charge of a corrupt bargain between Adams and Clay, Jackson’s supporters began to organize on the

 state and local level with an eye to reversing the outcome of the election. By late 1827, a Jackson committee was functioning in virtually every county, town, or city in the nation. Influential state or regional leaders who had supported other candidates in 1824 now rallied behind the Tennessean. The most significant of these were Vice President Calhoun, who now spoke for the militant states’ rights sentiment of the South; Senator Martin Van Buren, who dominated New York politics through the political machine known as the Albany Regency; and two Kentucky editors, Francis P. Blair and Amos Kendall, who worked in the West to mobilize opposition to Henry Clay and his “American System,” which advocated government encouragement of economic development through such measures as protective tariffs and federally funded internal improvements. As they prepared themselves for the canvass of 1828, these leaders and their many local followers laid the foundations for the first modern American political party—the Democrats. The fact that the Democratic Party was founded to promote the cause of a particular presidential candidate revealed a central characteristic of the emerging two-party system. From this time on, according to historian Richard P. McCormick, national parties existed primarily “to engage in a contest for the presidency.” Without this great prize, there would have been less incentive to create national organizations out of the parties and factions developing in the several states. The election of 1828 saw the birth of a new era of mass democracy. The mighty effort on behalf of Jackson featured the widespread use of such electioneering techniques as huge public rallies, torchlight parades, and lavish barbecues or picnics paid for by the candidate’s supporters. Many historians believe that the massive turnout at such events during much of the rest of the nineteenth century revealed a deeper popular engagement with politics than at other times in American history. But it is also possible, as others have argued, that it merely showed that politicians had learned that providing entertainment and treats could lure people to the polls. Personalities and mudslinging dominated the 1828 campaign. The Democratic Party press and a legion of pamphleteers bombarded the public with vicious personal attacks on Adams and praise of “Old Hickory,” as Jackson was called. The supporters of Adams responded in kind; they even sank to the level of accusing Jackson’s wife, Rachel, of bigamy and adultery because she had unwittingly married Jackson before being officially divorced from her first husband. The Democrats then came up with the utterly false charge that Adams’s wife was born out of wedlock! What gave Jacksonians the edge was their success in portraying their candidate as an authentic man of the people, despite his substantial fortune in land and slaves. His backwoods upbringing, his record as a popular military hero and Indian fighter, and even his lack of education were touted as evidence that he was a true representative of the common people, especially the plain folk of the South and the West. In the words of one of his supporters, Jackson had “a judgment unclouded by the visionary speculations of the academician.” Adams, according to Democratic propagandists, was the exact opposite—an overeducated aristocrat, more at home in the salon than among plain people. Nature’s nobleman was pitted against the aloof New England intellectual, and Adams never really had a chance. Jackson won by a popular vote margin of one hundred fifty thousand and by more than 2 to 1 in the Electoral College. Clearly,

Jackson and the Politics of Democracy


Election of 1828
Popular Vote


Electoral Vote by State
DEMOCRATIC
Andrew Jackson 


647,286


NATIONAL REPUBLICAN
John Q. Adams 


508,064




1,155,350




OREGON COUNTRY

MICH. TERR. UNORGANIZED TERR.







 NR 6 D 5

 Midway through his first administration, Jackson completely reorganized his cabinet, replacing almost all of his original appointees. At the root of this upheaval was a growing feud between Jackson and Vice President Calhoun, but the incident that brought it to a head was the Peggy Eaton affair. Peggy O’Neale Eaton, the daughter of a Washington tavern owner, married Secretary of War John Eaton in 1829. Because of gossip about her moral character, the wives of other cabinet members refused to receive her socially. Jackson became her fervent champion, partly because he found the charges against her reminiscent of the slanders against his late wife, who had died in 1828. When he raised the issue of Mrs. Eaton’s social status at a cabinet meeting, only Secretary of State Van Buren, a widower, supported his stand. This seemingly trivial incident led to the resignation of all but one of the cabinet members, and the president was able to begin again with a fresh slate. Although Van Buren resigned with





Read the Document


A.


 FL

Andrew Jackson, First Annual
Message to Congress (1829)


.


 RR

 TE

Bo
 und ary



ARK. TERR.

F ut
 ure







PART OF MEXICO





 Jackson’s organization had been more effective and his popular appeal substantially greater. He had piled up massive majorities in the Deep South, but the voters elsewhere divided fairly evenly. Adams, in fact, won a majority of the electoral vote in the northern states. Furthermore, it was not clear what kind of mandate Jackson had won. Most of the politicians in his camp favored states’ rights and limited government as against the nationalism of Adams and Clay, but the general himself had never taken a clear public stand on such issues as banks, tariffs, and internal improvements. He did, however, stand for the removal of Indians from the Gulf states, and this was a key to his immense popularity in that region. Jackson turned out to be one of the most forceful and domineering of American presidents. His most striking character traits were an indomitable will, an intolerance of opposition, and a prickly pride that would not permit him to forgive or forget an insult or supposed act of betrayal. It is sometimes hard to determine whether his political actions were motivated by principle or personal spite. As a young man on his own in a frontier environment, he had learned to fight his own battles. Somewhat violent in temper and action, he fought a number of duels and served in wars against the British, the Spanish, and the Indians with a zeal his critics found excessive. His experiences had made him tough and resourceful but had also deprived him of the flexibility normally associated with successful politicians. Jackson’s presidency commenced with his open endorsement of rotation of officeholders or what his critics called “the spoils system.” Although he did not actually depart radically from his predecessors in the extent to which he removed federal officeholders and replaced them with his supporters, he was the first president to defend this practice as a legitimate application of democratic doctrine. He proclaimed in his first annual message that “the duties of all public officers are . . . so plain and simple that men of intelligence may readily qualify themselves for their performance” and that “no man has any more intrinsic claim to office than another.”

 Jackson’s resigning cabinet members were, according to this cartoon, rats deserting a falling house. Jackson is seated on a collapsing chair, while the “altar of reform” and “public confidence in the stability of this administration” pillars topple to his left, and several “resignations” flutter behind him. The president’s foot is on the tail of the Secretary of State Martin Van Buren rat.

 Complete the Assignment Racial Identity in a White Man’s Democracy on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


I


 n mid-nineteenth-century Georgia, like most American states, racial identity was defined by statute: a “negro” was a person with at least one grandparent of African origin. But in practice, statutory rules about ancestry could not decide whether a person was black or white. Across the American South (and occasionally in the North as well), trials were held in which a person’s race was determined according to how he appeared and behaved, with whom he associated, and whether he performed acts of citizenship. The Jacksonian movement revolutionized Southern life by extending full rights of citizenship to all white men—voting, holding public office, participating in party politics. These political acts were reserved for white men and also became the emblems and markers of white manhood. Honor, which had once been seen as the exclusive concern of the gentleman, was democratized. Southern politics increasingly depended on a belief that all white men were equals, that only blacks constituted the “mudsill” class. This “white man’s democracy” helped to mobilize ordinary white people under the planters’ banner, and white supremacy helped to justify slavery in a free republic. Bryan v. Walton (1864) was a case that became somewhat famous for the Georgia Supreme Court’s pronouncements on the “social and civil degradation” of black people, and the idea that “the prejudice . . . of caste, is unconquerable,” so that black people could never be citizens. The case went to trial three times between 1848 and 1863, and those trials turned on the prior question



Racial Identity in a White
 Man’s Democracy of whether the men of the Nuñez family were in fact black or white. Joseph Nuñez was the son of Lucy, a white woman. Before he died, he sold six slaves to Seaborn Bryan. The administrator of his estate, Hughes Walton, sued Bryan to recover the human property, claiming that Nuñez was a man of color and so was legally barred from selling slaves. The first trial in 1848 was decided on technical grounds, but as the case went forward, there was no doubt that only as a white man did Joseph Nuñez have the right to do what he would with his property. So the second and third trials focused on the racial identity of Joseph and his father James. Dozens of their neighbors testified about them—and remarkably, they could agree on very little. Bryan’s witnesses agreed that James had a dark complexion—some thought he might be Indian; others considered him Portuguese. Mary Rogers described James: “straight long nose, thin lips, straight and very black hair, rather a narrow, long face and of a red complexion; he was not a large man, walked trim and nice.” She went on to report that “Jim was always among respectable white people in the neighborhood in their dances, parties, &c. and was received by them as on a footing with whites.” Stephen Newman and Mary Harrel testified that Jim Nuñez looked more Indian than “negro,” and that “his action and movements were as genteel as any man witnesses have known; there was no clumsiness about him.” They “well remembered Jim Nuñez’s dancing, which was very graceful; many persons tried to catch his step, and nearly all admired its style.” (Contrary to modern stereotypes, this evidence

 of good dancing style went to prove Jim’s whiteness.) Mary Harrel testified that Jim Nuñez “never kept low, trifling, or rakish company” and went “where no free negro was allowed to associate with the whites, and dined with the whites just the same as any gentleman would have done.” Bryan had offered a persuasive explanation of the Nuñez men’s appearance and had amassed a great deal of testimony about their behavior as white men. There was only one hole in his argument: No one presented any evidence of either Nuñez exercising political or legal rights. Indeed, Harriet Kilpatrick testified that as far as she knew, “neither Jim [n]or Joe Nuñez ever voted or exercised any of the rights of citizenship.” At the third trial, William C. Bates, testified that James Nuñez “was treated by his neighbors as a gentleman, recognized as a gentleman, and enjoyed the privileges of a gentleman and a free citizen.” Yet on cross-examination, Bates explained that he “was too young, when I knew James Nuñez, to answer whether he voted, mustered, or served on juries.” James Nuñez had never been seen performing the specific acts of white manhood—a serious omission. Only one witness gave testimony alleging James Nuñez’s exercise of his civic rights. The deposition of South Carolinian Matthew Alexander suggested that before James had moved to Georgia, he had a “fine dancer— quite a gentleman in manners and appearance,” with long straight black hair. More importantly, “he enjoyed all the privileges of a free man . . . James Nuñez voted, mustered, and did jury duty, and exercised the usual privileges and duties of free white citizens.” But he could give none of the details.

 An attorney in a nineteenth-century trial addresses an all white jury in the jury box.

 On the opposite side of the courtroom, Walton’s witnesses testified exactly the opposite. Charles Cosnahan believed Nuñez was a mulatto based on appearance (“tolerable kinky hair . . . did not have a fair complexion”), reputation (“they passed in the neighborhood as free colored persons”), and the fact that neither Jim nor Joseph “voted or performed military duty; they exercised no other rights than those of free negroes.” Joseph Cosnahan explained that he “never knew of [James and Joseph] exercising the usual rights of white citizens,” although “James Nuñez was an educated man and mixed sometimes with white men; they were regarded in the neighborhood as mulattoes; the white citizens associated with them and regarded them as mulattoes.” Several other witnesses corroborated this version of Joseph and James’s racial identity, and the jury gave a verdict to Walton, ratifying the view that Nuñez was not white. At the end of the third trial, juries had heard conflicting testimony on every aspect of Joseph Nuñez’s white identity: appearance, self-presentation, reputation and acceptance among

 blacks and whites, white ancestry, white conduct, white character—and on his failure to exercise the rights and privileges of whiteness. While no one could agree whether James and Joseph had straight or curly hair, almost everyone agreed on this latter point: they had not performed the civic duties of white manhood. The jury was persuaded: they found for Hughes Walton. Judge Lumpkin, for the Supreme Court of Georgia, sought to set the matter to rest at the case’s final disposition in 1864. Lumpkin disparaged all testimony in favor of Nuñez’s whiteness as given by dupes who had been fooled by appearances, and found that Joseph was a man of color who had no right to sell slaves. Yet despite the community’s disagreement over the Nuñezes’ identity, they did agree on one point: the Nuñezes’ race could be known through their performances. Race was not only something Joseph and James were, it was something they did. Who was a white man? A civic being who voted, served on juries, and mustered in the militia. Degraded black men were not capable of such things, while honorable

 white men could not keep from doing them. In racial identity trials across the South, judges made clear that, as one South Carolina judge put it, a man could be found white “although of a dark complexion,” if he “had been recognized as a white man, received into society, and exercised political privileges as such.” The law was involved not only in recognizing racial identity, but in creating it; the state itself—through its legal and military institutions—helped make people white. In allowing men of low social status to participate in white men’s democracy by voting, serving on juries, and mustering in the militia, the state welcomed every white man into symbolic equality with the wealthy Southern slaveholder.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why did political changes emphasize the social importance of slavery? 2. How did the circumstances of Joseph and James Nuñez lives decide what rights they should have? 




 CHAPTER 10

THE TRIUMPH OF WHITE MEN’S DEMOCRACY

 the rest to promote a thorough reorganization, his loyalty was rewarded by his appointment as minister to England and strong prospects of future favor.

Indian Removal
 The first major policy question facing the Jackson administration concerned the fate of Native Americans. Jackson had long favored removing eastern Indians to lands beyond the Mississippi. In his military service on the southern frontier, he had been directly involved in persuading and coercing tribal groups to emigrate. Jackson’s support of removal was no different from the policy of previous administrations. The only real issues to be determined were how rapidly and thoroughly the process should be carried out and by what means. At the time of Jackson’s election, the states of Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi, distressed by the federal government’s failure to eliminate the substantial Indian enclaves remaining within their boundaries, were clamoring for quick action. Since Adams seemed to have dragged his feet on the issue, voters in these states turned overwhelmingly to Jackson, who promised to expel the Indians without delay. Immediately after Jackson’s election, Georgia extended its state laws over the Cherokee within its borders. Georgia declared that all Cherokee laws and customs were null and void, made all white people living in the Cherokee Nation subject to Georgia’s laws, declared the Cherokee mere tenants at will on their land, and made it a crime for any Cherokee to try to influence another Cherokee to stay in Georgia. At the same time, state officials authorized the Georgia militia to conduct a campaign of violence against the Cherokee to increase pressure on them to give up their land and move west. Before Jackson’s inauguration, Alabama and Mississippi took similar action, abolishing the sovereignty of the Creeks and Choctaw, and declaring state control of the tribes. This legislation defied both the Constitutional provisions giving the federal government exclusive jurisdiction over Indian affairs and specific treaties. Jackson endorsed the state actions. He regarded Indians as that they were children when they did the white man’s bidding and savage beasts when they resisted. He was also aware of his political debt to the land-hungry states of the South. Consequently, in December 1829, he advocated a new and more coercive removal policy. Denying Cherokee autonomy, he asserted the primacy of states’ rights over Indian rights, and called for the speedy and thorough removal of all eastern Indians to designated areas beyond the Mississippi. Chief John Ross warned his people that “the object of the President is . . . to create divisions among ourselves.” President Jackson rejected Ross’s appeal against Georgia’s violation of federal treaty, and in 1830, the president’s congressional supporters introduced a bill to implement the removal policy. Opponents charged that the president had defied the Constitution by removing federal protection from the southeastern tribes. But Jackson and his supporters were determined to ride roughshod over humanitarian or constitutional objections to Indian dispossession. With strong support from the South and the western border states, the removal bill passed the Senate by a vote of 28 to 19 and the House by the narrow margin of 102 to 97. Jackson then moved quickly to conclude the necessary treaties, using the threat of unilateral state action to bludgeon the tribes

 into submission. The treaty for Cherokee removal was negotiated with 75 out of 17,000 Cherokees, and none of the tribal officers was present. By 1833, all the southeastern tribes except the Cherokee had agreed to evacuate their ancestral homelands. Choctaw Chief David Folsom wrote, “We are exceedingly tired. We have just heard of the ratification of the Choctaw Treaty. Our doom is sealed. There is no course for us but to turn our faces to our new homes in the setting sun.” Alexis de Tocqueville, the French author of Democracy in America, watched the troops driving the Choctaws across the Mississippi River in the winter of 1831. He wrote that Americans had deprived Indians of their rights “with singular felicity, tranquilly, legally, philanthropically . . . It is impossible to destroy men with more respect for the laws of humanity.” Yet President Jackson was not always concerned with respect for the law. In 1832, he condoned Georgia’s defiance of a Supreme Court decision (Worcester v. Georgia) that denied a state’s right to extend its jurisdiction over tribal lands. Georgia had arrested and sentenced to four years’ hard labor a missionary who violated state law by going on tribal land without Georgia’s permission; the Supreme Court declared the law unconstitutional. Jackson’s legendary declaration that Chief Justice Marshall had “made his decision, now let him enforce it,” is almost certainly apocryphal, as there was nothing for either Jackson or Marshall to “enforce”; the decision only required the state of Georgia to release Worcester from custody, which it did several months later. But the story reflects Jackson’s general attitude towards the Court’s decisions on federal jurisdiction. He would not protect Indians from state action, no matter how violent or coercive, and he put the weight of the federal government behind removal policy. By 1833, all the southeastern tribes except the Cherokee had agreed to evacuate their ancestral homes. A stubbornly resisting majority faction of the Cherokee held out until 1838 when military pressure forced them to march to Oklahoma. This trek—known as the Trail of Tears—was made under such harsh conditions that almost four thousand of approximately sixteen thousand marchers died on the way. The final chapter of Indian Removal was the Second Seminole War, which lasted from 1834 to 1841. Although the government had convinced a small group of Seminoles to sign a treaty in 1834 agreeing to removal, most Seminoles renounced the treaty and resisted for years, making the bloody conflict the most expensive Indian war in U.S. history. The removal of the southeastern Indians exposed the prejudiced and greedy side of Jacksonian democracy. (See the discussion of the background of Indian Removal in Chapter 9.)

The Nullification Crisis
 During the 1820s, Southerners became increasingly fearful of federal encroachment on the rights of the states. Behind this concern, in South Carolina at least, was a strengthened commitment to the preservation of slavery and a resulting anxiety about possible uses of federal power to strike at the “peculiar institution.” Hoping to keep the explosive slavery issue out of the political limelight, South Carolinians seized on another genuine grievance—the protective tariff—as the issue on which to take their stand in favor of a state veto power over federal actions they viewed as contrary to their interests. As a staple-producing and exporting region, the

Jackson and the Politics of Democracy


View the Closer Look




The Trail of Tears


 Robert Lindneux, The Trail of Tears (1942). Cherokee Indians, carrying their few possessions, are prodded along by U.S. soldiers on the Trail of Tears. Several thousand Native Americans died on the ruthless forced march from their homelands in the East to the newly established Indian Territory in Oklahoma.

 South had sound economic reasons for favoring free trade. Tariffs increased the prices that southern agriculturists paid for manufactured goods and threatened to undermine their foreign markets by inciting counterprotection. An economic crisis in the South Carolina upcountry during the 1820s made that state particularly receptive to extreme positions on the tariff and states’ rights. Vice President John C. Calhoun emerged as the leader of the states’ rights insurgency in South Carolina, abandoning his earlier support of nationalism and the American system. After the passage of the tariff of abominations in 1828, the state legislature declared the new duties unconstitutional and endorsed a lengthy statement—written anonymously by Calhoun—that affirmed nullification, or the right of an individual state to set aside federal law. Calhoun supported Jackson in 1828 and planned to serve amicably as his vice president, expecting Jackson to support his native region on questions involving the tariff and states’ rights. He also entertained hopes of succeeding Jackson as president. Early in his administration, Jackson appeared well attuned to the southern slaveholding position on state versus federal authority. Besides acquiescing in Georgia’s de facto nullification of federal treaties upholding Indian tribal rights, he vetoed a major internal improvements bill in 1830, invoking a strict construction of the

 Constitution to deny federal funds for the building of the Maysville Road in Kentucky. Meanwhile, a bitter personal feud developed between Jackson and Calhoun. Jackson viewed the vice president and his wife as prime movers in the ostracism of Peggy Eaton. Furthermore, evidence came to light that Calhoun, as secretary of war in Monroe’s cabinet in 1818, had privately advocated punishing Jackson for his incursion into Florida. As Calhoun lost favor with Jackson, it became clear that Van Buren, rather than the vice president, would be Jackson’s designated successor. The personal breach between Jackson and Calhoun colored and intensified their confrontation over nullification and the tariff. The two men differed on matters of principle as well. Although generally a defender of states’ rights and strict construction of the Constitution, Jackson opposed the theory of nullification as a threat to the survival of the Union. In his view, federal power should be held in check, but this did not mean the states were truly sovereign. His nationalism was that of a military man who had fought for the country against foreign enemies, and he was not about to permit the nation’s disintegration at the hands of domestic dissidents. The differences between Jackson and Calhoun came into the open at the Jefferson Day dinner in 1830, when Jackson offered the toast



 CHAPTER 10

THE TRIUMPH OF WHITE MEN’S DEMOCRACY

 “Our Union: It must be preserved,” to which Calhoun responded, “The Union. Next to Liberty, the most dear. May we always remember that it can only be preserved by distributing equally the benefits and the burdens of the Union.” In 1830 and 1831, the movement against the tariff gained strength in South Carolina. Calhoun openly took the lead, elaborating further on his view that states had the right to set aside federal laws. In 1832, Congress passed a new tariff that lowered the rates slightly but retained the principle of protection. Supporters of nullification argued that the new law simply demonstrated that no genuine relief could be expected from Washington. They then succeeded in persuading the South Carolina state legislature to call a special convention. When the convention met in November 1832, the

 members voted overwhelmingly to nullify the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 and to forbid the collection of customs duties within the state. Jackson reacted with characteristic decisiveness. He alerted the secretary of war to prepare for possible military action, issued a proclamation denouncing nullification as treasonous, and asked Congress to vote him the authority to use the army to enforce the tariff. At the same time, he sought to pacify the nullifiers somewhat by recommending a lower tariff. Congress responded by enacting the Force Bill—which gave the president the military powers he sought—and the compromise tariff of 1833. The latter was primarily the work of Jackson’s political enemy Henry Clay, but the president signed it anyway. Faced with Jackson’s clear intention to use force if necessary and somewhat appeased by the prospect of a lower tariff, South Carolina suspended

View the Closer Look Indian Removal


UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

OHIO INDIANA ILLINOIS

VIRGINIA MISSOURI KENTUCKY
Springfield 
CHEROKEE
Nashville 
NORTH CAROLINA

CREEK SEMINOLE

 CHICKASAW

Fort
Coffee


 TENNESSEE

ARKANSAS TERRITORY

New Echota


 CHICKASAW

 CHOCTAW

 ALABAMA

CH CHOCT TA CHOCTAW

SOUTH CAROLINA

 CHEROKEE 1835,*1838

 CREEK

 GEORGIA

Vicksburg


MEXICO MISSISSIPPI

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Mobile


LOUISIANA FLORIDA TERRITORY

New Orleans


Gulf of Mexico
 Ceded lands and dates of cessions

Routes of
 Indian removal

 Indian reservations

Cherokees’
Trail of Tears




 200 miles

Boundaries of 1830




 200 kilometers

INDIAN REMOVAL
Because so many Native Americans, uprooted from their lands in the East, died on the forced march to Oklahoma, the route they followed became known as the Trail of Tears. *Treaty signed in 1835 by a minority faction was met with defiance from the majority, but removal was forced in 1838. 
 SEMINOLE

The Bank War and the Second Party System




 the nullification ordinance in late January 1833 and formally rescinded it in March, after the new Read the Document South Carolina’s Ordinance of Nullification tariff had been enacted. To demonstrate that they had not conceded their constitutional position, the convention delegates concluded their deliberations by nullifying the Force Bill. The nullification crisis revealed that South Carolinians would not tolerate any federal action that seemed contrary to their interests or raised doubts about the institution of slavery. The nullifiers’ philosophy implied the right of secession as well as the right to declare laws of Congress null and void. A fear of northern meddling with slavery was the main spur to the growth of a militant doctrine of state sovereignty in the South. At the time of the nullification crisis, the other slave states had not yet developed such strong anxieties about the future of the “peculiar institution” and had not embraced South Carolina’s radical conception of state sovereignty. Jackson was himself a Southerner and a slaveholder, a man who detested abolitionists. In general, he was a proslavery president; later he would use his executive power to stop antislavery literature from being carried by the U.S. mail. Some farsighted southern loyalists, however, were alarmed by the Unionist doctrines that Jackson propounded in his proclamation Vice President John C. Calhoun emerged as a champion of states’ rights during the nullification against nullification. More strongly than any crisis, when cartoons such as this example depicted the emaciated South burdened by tariffs while previous president, he had asserted that the the North grew fat at the southerners’ expense. federal government was supreme over the states and that the Union was indivisible. He had further justified the use of force against states that denied federal authority. for the subsequent depression. But after Nicholas Biddle took over the Bank’s presidency in 1823, the institution regained public confidence. Biddle was an able manager who probably understood the The Bank War and the Second mysteries of banking and currency better than any other American Party System of his generation. A Philadelphia gentleman of broad culture, extensive education, and some political experience, he was also arrogant What were the arguments for and against the Bank and vain. He was inclined to rely too much on his own judgment of the United States? and refused to admit his mistakes. But his record prior to the conJackson’s most important and controversial use of executive power frontation with Jackson was a good one. In 1825 and again in 1828, was his successful attack on the Bank of the United States. The Bank he acted decisively to curb an overextension of credit by state banks war revealed some of the deepest concerns of Jackson and his supand helped avert a recurrence of the boom-and-bust cycle. porters and dramatically expressed their concept of democracy. It The actual performance of the Bank was not the only target also aroused intense opposition to the president and his policies, an of criticism about it. Old-line Jeffersonians had always opposed it opposition that crystallized in a new national party—the Whigs. The on principle, both because they viewed its establishment as uncondestruction of the Bank and the economic disruption that followed stitutional and because it placed too much power in the hands of brought to the forefront the issue of the government’s relationship a small, privileged group. The Bank was a chartered monopoly, to the nation’s financial system. Differences on this question helped an essentially private corporation that performed public services to sustain and strengthen the new two-party system. in return for exclusive economic rights. Because of its great influence, the Bank tended to be blamed for any economic problems. For those who had misgivings about the rise of the national marMr. Biddle’s Bank ket, the Bank epitomized the forces threatening the independence The Bank of the United States had long been embroiled in puband prosperity of small producers. In an era of rising white men’s lic controversy. Its role in precipitating the Panic of 1819 by first democracy, an obvious and telling objection to the Bank was simply extending credit freely and then suddenly calling in its loans had that it possessed great power and privilege without being under led many, especially in the South and the West, to blame the Bank popular control.



 CHAPTER 10

THE TRIUMPH OF WHITE MEN’S DEMOCRACY

The Bank Veto and the Election of 1832
 Jackson came into office with strong reservations about banking and paper money in general—in part as a result of his own brushes with bankruptcy after accepting promissory notes that depreciated in value. He also harbored suspicions that branches of the Bank of the United States had illicitly used their influence on behalf of his opponent in the presidential election. In his annual messages in 1829 and 1830, Jackson called on Congress to begin discussing “possible modification of a system which cannot continue to exist in its present form without . . . perpetual apprehensions and discontent on the part of the States and the People.” Biddle began to worry about the fate of the Bank’s charter when it came up for renewal in 1836. At the same time, Jackson was listening to the advice of close friends and unofficial advisers— members of his “Kitchen Cabinet”—especially Amos Kendall and Francis P. Blair, who thought an attack on the Bank would provide a good party issue for the election of 1832. Biddle then made a fateful blunder. Panicked by the presidential messages and the anti-Bank oratory of congressional Jacksonians such as Senator Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri, he determined to seek recharter by Congress in 1832, four years early. Senator Henry Clay, leader of the antiadministration forces on Capitol Hill, encouraged this move because he was convinced that Jackson had chosen the unpopular side of the issue and would be embarrassed or even discredited by a congressional endorsement of the Bank. The bill to recharter, introduced in the House and Senate in early 1832, aroused Jackson and unified his administration and party against renewal. The bill found many supporters in Congress, however. A number of legislators had received loans from the Bank, and the economy seemed to be prospering under the Bank’s guidance. As a result, the bill to recharter passed Congress with ease.

THE ELECTION OF 1832
Candidate Jackson Clay Wirt Floyd 
Party
Democratic
National Republican
Anti-Masonic
Independent
Democratic


Popular
Vote
688,242
473,462
101,051
*


Electoral
Vote


 *Delegates chosen by South Carolina legislature

 The next move was Jackson’s, and he made the most of the opportunity by vetoing the bill. After repeating his opinion that the Bank was unconstitutional, notwithstanding the Supreme Court’s ruling on the issue, he went on to argue that it violated the fundamental rights of the people in a democratic society: “In the full enjoyment of the gifts of Heaven and the fruits of superior industry, economy, and virtue, every man is equally entitled to protection by law; but when the laws undertake to add to those natural and just advantages artificial distinctions, to grant . . . exclusive privileges, the humble members of society—the farmers, mechanics, and laborers—who have neither the time nor the means of securing like

 favors to themselves, have a right to complain of the injustice of their government.” Government, he added, should “confine itself to equal protection.” Jackson thus called on the common people to join him in fighting the “monster” corporation. His veto message was the first ever to use more than strictly constitutional arguments and to deal directly with social and economic issues. Congressional attempts to override the veto failed, and Jackson resolved to take the entire issue to the people in the upcoming presidential election. The 1832 election, the first in which candidates were chosen by national nominating conventions, pitted Jackson against Henry Clay, standard-bearer of the National Republicans. Although the Democrats did not adopt a formal platform, the party stood firmly behind Jackson in his opposition to rechartering the Bank. Clay and the National Republicans attempted to marshal the pro-Bank sentiment that was strong in many parts of the country. But Jackson won a great personal triumph, garnering 219 electoral votes to 49 for Clay. His share of the popular vote was not quite as high as it had been in 1828, but it was substantial enough to be interpreted as a mandate for continuing the war against the Bank.

Killing the Bank
 Not content with preventing the Bank from getting a new charter, the victorious Jackson now resolved to attack it directly by removing federal deposits from Biddle’s vaults. Jackson told Van Buren, “The bank . . . is trying to kill me, but I will kill it.” The Bank had indeed used all the political influence it could muster in an attempt to prevent Jackson’s reelection, in an act of self-defense. Old Hickory regarded Biddle’s actions as a personal attack, part of a devious plot to destroy the president’s reputation and deny him the popular approval he deserved. Although he presided over the first modern American political party, Jackson did not really share Van Buren’s belief in the legitimacy of a competitive party system. In his view, his opponents were not merely wrong; they were evil and deserved to be destroyed. Furthermore, the election results convinced him that he was the people’s chosen instrument in the struggle against corruption and privilege, the only man who could save the pure republicanism of Jefferson and the Founders from the “monster bank.” To remove the deposits from the Bank, Jackson had to overcome strong resistance in his own cabinet. When one secretary of the treasury refused to support the policy, he was shifted to another cabinet post. When a second balked at carrying out removal, he was replaced by Roger B. Taney, a Jackson loyalist and dedicated opponent of the Bank. Beginning in late September 1833, Taney ceased depositing government money in the Bank of the United States and began to withdraw the funds already there. Although Jackson had earlier suggested that the government keep its money in some kind of public bank, he had never worked out the details or made a specific proposal to Congress. The problem of how to dispose of the funds was therefore resolved by an ill-advised decision to place them in selected state banks. By the end of 1833, twenty-three state banks had been chosen as depositories. Opponents charged that the banks had been selected for political rather than fiscal reasons and dubbed them Jackson’s

The Bank War and the Second Party System


 “pet banks.” Since Congress refused to approve administration proposals to regulate the credit policies of these banks, Jackson’s effort to shift to a hard-money economy was quickly nullified by the use the state banks made of the new deposits. They extended credit more recklessly than before and increased the amount of paper money in circulation. The Bank of the United States counterattacked by calling in outstanding loans and instituting a policy of credit contraction that helped bring on an economic recession. Biddle hoped to win support for recharter by demonstrating that weakening the Bank’s position would be disastrous for the economy. With some justification, the president’s supporters accused Biddle of deliberately and unnecessarily causing economic distress out of personal resentment and a desire to maintain his unchecked powers and privileges. The Bank never regained its charter. Strong opposition to Jackson’s fiscal policies developed in Congress. Henry Clay and his supporters contended that the president had violated the Bank’s charter and exceeded his constitutional authority when he removed the deposits. They eventually persuaded the Senate to approve a motion of censure. Jacksonians in the House were able to block such action, but the president was further humiliated when the Senate refused to confirm Taney as secretary of the treasury. Not all of the criticism and obstructionism



 can be attributed to bitterness on the part of pro-Bank politicians. Some congressmen who originally defended Jackson’s veto became disenchanted with the president because they thought he had gone too far in asserting the powers of his office.

The Emergence of the Whigs


 The coalition that passed the censure resolution in the Senate provided the nucleus for a new national party—the Whigs. The leadership of the new party and a majority of its support came from National Republicans associated with Clay and New England ex-Federalists led by Senator Daniel Webster of Massachusetts. The Whigs also picked up critical support from southern proponents of states’ rights who had been upset by Jackson’s stand on nullification and then saw an unconstitutional abuse of power in his withdrawal of federal deposits from the Bank of the United States. Even Calhoun and his nullifiers occasionally cooperated with the Whig camp. The initial rallying cry for this diverse antiJackson coalition was “executive usurpation.” The Whig label was chosen because of its associations with both English and American revolutionary opposition to royal power and prerogatives. In their propaganda, the Whigs portrayed the tyrannical designs of “King Andrew” and his court. The Whigs also gradually absorbed the Anti-Masonic Party, a surprisingly strong political movement that had arisen in the northeastern states in the late 1820s Read the Document Andrew Jackson, Veto of the Bank Bill and early 1830s. Capitalizing on the hysteria aroused by the 1826 disappearance and apparent murder of a New Yorker who had threatened to reveal the secrets of the Masonic order, the Anti-Masons exploited traditional American fears of secret societies and conspiracies. They also appealed successfully to the moral concerns of the northern middle class under the sway of an emerging evangelical Protestantism. Anti-Masons detested Jacksonianism mainly because it stood for a toleration of diverse lifestyles. Democrats did not think government should be concerned about people who drank, gambled, or found better things to do than go to church on Sundays. Their opponents from the Anti-Masonic tradition believed government should restrict such “sinful” behavior. This desire for moral and religious uniformity contributed an important cultural dimension to northern Whiggery. As the election of 1836 approached, the government’s fiscal policies also provoked a localized rebellion among the urban working-class elements of the Democratic coalition. In New York Aided by Van Buren (center), Jackson wields his veto rod against the Bank of the United States, whose City, a dissident faction broke with the heads represent the directors of the state branches. Bank president Nicholas Biddle is wearing the top hat. regular Democratic organization mainly Source: Collection of The New-York Historical Society, Negative 42459.



 CHAPTER 10

THE TRIUMPH OF WHITE MEN’S DEMOCRACY

Listen to the Audio File


Van Buren


 mania he had inadvertently helped to create, Jackson pricked the bubble on July 11, 1836. He issued his specie circular, requiring that after August 15 only gold and silver would be accepted in payment for public lands. The action served to curb inflation and land speculation but did so in such a sudden and drastic way that it helped precipitate the financial panic of 1837.

The Rise and Fall of Van Buren


 Martin Van Buren, only five feet six inches tall, was known as the “Little Magician” when he became president in 1836. He was unlucky to preside over the country during the Panic of 1837, and his deflationary policies were unsuccessful in alleviating the economic crisis. He served only one term in office.

 over issues involving banking and currency. These radicals favored a strict hard-money policy and condemned Jackson’s transfer of federal deposits to the state banks as inflationary. Because they wanted working people to be paid in specie rather than banknotes, they went beyond opposition to the Bank of the United States and attacked state banks as well. Seeing no basis for cooperation with the Whigs, they established the independent Equal Rights Party and nominated a separate state ticket for 1836. Jackson himself had hard-money sentiments and regarded the “pet bank” solution as a stopgap measure rather than a final solution to the money problem. He reluctantly surrendered to congressional pressure in early 1836 and signed legislation allocating surplus federal revenues to the deposit banks, increasing their numbers, and weakening federal controls over them. The result was runaway inflation. State banks in the South and West responded to demands from land-speculating interests by issuing a new flood of paper money. Reacting somewhat belatedly to the speculative

 As his successor, Jackson chose Martin Van Buren, who had served him loyally as vice president during his second term. Van Buren was the greatest master of practical politics in the Democratic Party, and the Democratic national convention of 1835 unanimously confirmed Jackson’s choice. In accepting the nomination, Van Buren promised to “tread generally in the footsteps of General Jackson.” The newly created Whig Party, reflecting the diversity of its constituency, did not try to decide on a single standard-bearer. Instead, each region chose candidates—Daniel Webster in the East, William Henry Harrison of Ohio (also the Anti-Masonic nominee) in the Old Northwest, and Hugh Lawson White of Tennessee (a former Jackson supporter) in the South. Whigs hoped to deprive Van Buren of enough electoral votes to throw the election into the House of Representatives where one of the Whigs might stand a chance. The stratagem proved unsuccessful. Van Buren carried fifteen of the twenty-six states and won a clear majority in the electoral college. But the election foreshadowed future trouble for the Democrats, particularly in the South. There the Whigs ran virtually even, erasing the enormous majorities that Jackson had run up in 1828 and 1832. The emergence of a two-party system in the previously solid Deep South resulted from two factors—opposition to some of Jackson’s policies and the image of Van Buren as an unreliable Yankee politician. The division did not reflect basic disagreement on the slavery issue. Southern Whigs and Democrats shared a commitment to protecting slavery, and each tried to persuade the electorate they could do the job better than the opposition. As he took office, Van Buren was immediately faced with a catastrophic depression. The price of cotton fell by almost 50 percent, banks all over the nation suspended specie payments, many businesses went bankrupt, and unemployed workers demonstrated in several cities. The sale of public lands fell off so drastically that the federal surplus, earmarked in 1836 for distribution to the states, became a deficit. The Panic of 1837, economic historians have concluded, was not exclusively, or even primarily, the result of government policies. It was in fact international in scope and reflected some complex changes in the world economy that were beyond the control of American policymakers. But the Whigs were quick to blame the state of the economy on Jacksonian finance, and the administration had to make a politically effective response. Since Van Buren and his party were committed to a policy of laissez-faire on the federal level, there was little or nothing they could do to relieve economic distress through subsidies or relief measures. But Van Buren could at least try to salvage the federal funds deposited in shaky state banks and devise a new system of public finance that would not contribute to future panics by fueling speculation and credit expansion. Van Buren’s solution was to establish a public depository for government funds with no connections whatsoever to commercial

The Bank War and the Second Party System


View the Closer Look




 General Harrison’s Log Cabin March—Sheet Music

 In this image, William Henry Harrison’s log cabin and the flag beside it are composed of sheet music for a march. A march is a military tune; it would have been chosen to communicate Harrison’s heroism as an Indian fighter and protector of frontier families.

 banking. His proposal for such an “independent subtreasury” aroused intense opposition from the congressional Whigs, who strongly favored the reestablishment of a national bank as the only way to restore economic stability. Whig resistance stalled the Independent Subtreasury Bill for three years; it was not until 1840 that it was enacted into law. In the meantime, the economy had temporarily revived in 1838, only to sink again into a deeper depression the following year.

THE ELECTION OF 1836
Candidate Van Buren Harrison White Webster Mangum 
Party
Democratic
Whig
Whig
Whig
Independent
Democratic


Popular
Vote
764,198
549,508
145,342
41,287
*


 *Delegates chosen by South Carolina legislature

Electoral
Vote


 Van Buren’s chances for reelection in 1840 were undoubtedly hurt by the state of the economy. The Whigs had the chance to offer alternative policies that promised to restore prosperity. In 1836, the Whigs had been disorganized and had not fully mastered the new democratic politics. But in 1840, they settled on a single nominee and matched the Democrats in grassroots organization and popular electioneering. The Whigs passed over the true leader of their party, Henry Clay. Instead they found their own Jackson in William Henry Harrison, a military hero of advanced age who was associated in the public mind with the battle of Tippecanoe and the winning of the West. To balance the ticket and increase its appeal in the South, they chose John Tyler of Virginia, a converted states’ rights Democrat, to be Harrison’s running mate. Using the slogan “Tippecanoe and Tyler, too,” the Whigs pulled out all stops in their bid for the White House. Rallies and parades took place in every locality, complete with posters, placards, campaign hats and emblems, special songs, and even movable log cabins filled with coonskin caps and barrels of cider for the faithful. Imitating the Jacksonian propaganda against Adams in 1828, they portrayed Van Buren as a luxury-loving aristocrat and



 CHAPTER 10

THE TRIUMPH OF WHITE MEN’S DEMOCRACY

Election of 1840
Electoral Vote by State


Popular Vote


WHIG
William H. Harrison 234 
1,274,624


DEMOCRATIC
Martin Van Buren 


1,127,781




2,402,405




OREGON COUNTRY

IOWA TERR.

WIS. TERR.













A.
 TE

.
 RR

Bo
 und ary



 FL

Fut
 ure

TEXAS REPUBLIC 5





Disputed
Area










PART OF MEXICO





INDIAN TERR.





 compared him with their own homespun candidate. There was an enormous turnout on election day—78 percent of those eligible to vote. When it was over, Harrison had parlayed a narrow edge in the popular vote into a landslide in the electoral college. He carried 19 of the 26 states and won 234 electoral votes to 60 for Van Buren. Buoyed by the electorate’s belief that their policies might revive the economy, the Whigs also won control of both houses of Congress. Contrary to what most historians used to believe, personalities and hoopla did not decide the election of 1840. The economy was in dire straits, and the Whigs, unlike the Democrats, had a program that seemed to offer hope for a solution—the latest version of Henry Clay’s American System. Whigs proposed to revive the Bank of the United States in order to restore fiscal stability, raise tariffs to protect manufacturers and manufacturing jobs, and distribute federal revenues to the states for internal improvements that would stimulate commerce and employment. Whig victories in the state and local elections of 1840, many of which preceded the presidential vote, strongly suggest that voters were responding to the party and its program.

Heyday of the Second
Party System
 What was the two-party system, and how were the parties different? America’s second party system came of age in the election of 1840. Unlike the earlier competition between Federalists and Jeffersonian Republicans, the rivalry of Democrats and Whigs made the two-party pattern a normal feature of electoral politics. During the 1840s, the two national parties competed on fairly equal terms for the support of the electorate. Allegiance to one

 party or the other became an important source of personal identity for many Americans and increased their interest and participation in politics. In addition to drama and entertainment, the parties offered the voters a real choice of programs and ideologies. Whigs stood for a “positive liberal state”—which meant government had the right and duty to subsidize or protect enterprises that could contribute to general prosperity and economic growth. Democrats normally advocated a “negative liberal state.” According to them, government should keep its hands off the economy; only by doing nothing could it avoid favoring special interests and interfering with free competition. They charged that granting subsidies or special charters to any group would create pockets of privilege or monopoly and put ordinary citizens under the thumb of the rich and powerful. Conflict over economic issues helped determine each party’s base of support. In the Whig camp were industrialists who wanted tariff protection, merchants who favored internal improvements as a stimulus to commerce, and farmers and planters who had adapted successfully to a market economy. Democrats appealed mainly to smaller farmers, workers, declining gentry, and emerging entrepreneurs who were excluded from the established commercial groups that stood to benefit most from Whig programs. Democratic rhetoric about monopoly and privilege appealed to those who had mixed or negative feelings about the rise of a national market economy. To some extent, this division pitted richer, more privileged Americans against those who were poorer and less economically or socially secure. But it did not follow class lines in any simple or direct way. Many businessmen were Democrats, and large numbers of wage earners voted Whig. Merchants engaged in the import trade had no use for Whiggish high tariffs, whereas workers in industries clamoring for protection often concluded that their jobs depended on such duties. Lifestyles and ethnic or religious identities also strongly affected party loyalties. In the northern states, one way to tell the typical Whig from the typical Democrat was to see what each did on Sunday. A person who went to one of the evangelical Protestant churches was very likely to be a Whig. On the other hand, the person who attended a ritualized service—Catholic, Lutheran, or Episcopalian— or did not go to church at all was most probably a Democrat. The Democrats were the favored party of immigrants, Catholics, freethinkers, backwoods farmers, and those of all classes who enjoyed traditional amusements condemned by the new breed of moral reformers. One thing all these groups had in common was a desire to be left alone, free of restrictions on their freedom to think and behave as they liked. The Whigs enjoyed particularly strong support among Protestants of old stock living in smaller cities, towns, and prosperous rural areas devoted to market farming. In general, the Whigs welcomed a market economy but wanted to restrain the individualism and disorder it created by enforcing cultural and moral values derived from the Puritan tradition. Nevertheless, party conflict in Congress continued to center on national economic policy. Whigs stood firm for a loose construction of the Constitution and federal support for business and economic development. The Democrats persisted in their defense of strict construction, states’ rights, and laissez-faire. Debates over tariffs, banking, and internal improvements remained vital and vigorous during the 1840s.

 Conclusion: Tocqueville’s Wisdom

 True believers in both parties saw a deep ideological or moral meaning in the clash over economic issues. Whigs and Democrats had conflicting views of the good society, and their policy positions reflected these differences. The Democrats were the party of white male equality and personal liberty. They perceived the American people as a collection of independent and self-sufficient white men. The role of government was to see to it that the individual was not interfered with—in his economic activity, in his personal habits, and in his religion (or lack of it). Democrats were ambivalent about the rise of the market economy because of the ways it threatened individual independence. The Whigs, on the other hand, were the party of orderly progress under the guidance of an enlightened elite. They believed that the propertied, the well-educated, and the pious were responsible for guiding the masses toward the common good. Believing sincerely that a market economy would benefit everyone in the long run, they had no qualms about the rise of a commercial and industrial capitalism.



Read the Document


Alexis de Tocqueville,
Democracy in America


 Conclusion: Tocqueville’s Wisdom The French traveler Alexis de Tocqueville, author of the most influential account ever written of the emergence of American democracy, visited the United States in 1831 and 1832. He departed well before the presidential election and had relatively little to say about national politics and the formation of political parties. For him, the essence of American democracy was local self-government, such as he observed in the town meetings of New England. The participation of ordinary citizens in the affairs of their communities impressed him greatly, and he praised Americans for not conceding their liberties to a centralized state, as he believed the French had done. However, Tocqueville was acutely aware of the limitations of American democracy. He knew that the kind of democracy men were practicing was not meant for women. Observing how women were strictly assigned to a separate domestic sphere, he concluded that Americans had never supposed “that democratic principles should undermine the husband’s authority and make it doubtful who is in charge of the family.” He also believed the nullification crisis foreshadowed destruction of the Union and predicted the problem of slavery would lead eventually to civil war and racial conflict. He noted the power of white supremacy, providing an unforgettable firsthand description of the sufferings of an Indian community in their forced migration to the West, as well as a graphic account of the way free blacks were segregated and driven from the polls in northern cities such as Philadelphia. White Americans, he believed, were deeply prejudiced against people of color, and he doubted it was possible “for a whole people to rise . . . above itself.” Perhaps a despot could force the equality and mingling of the races, but

 Alexis de Tocqueville (1805–1859) is credited with creating one of the most perceptive and enduring portraits of the American people and their political institutions, and his observations, Democracy in America (2 volumes, 1835–1840), are still read and discussed by Americans today.

 “while American democracy remains at the head of affairs, no one would dare attempt any such thing, and it is possible to foresee that the freer the whites in America are, the more they will seek to isolate themselves.” His observations have value because of their clear-sighted insistence that the democracy and equality of the Jacksonian era were meant for only some of the people. His belief that problems associated with slavery would endanger the union was keenly prophetic.



 CHAPTER 10

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 10 The Triumph of White Men’s Democracy on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1824
House of Representatives elects John Quincy 
 Adams president Congress passes “tariff of abominations”; Jackson elected president over J. Q. Adams Jackson vetoes the Maysville Road bill; Congress passes Indian Removal Act Jackson reorganizes his cabinet; First national nominating conventions meet Jackson vetoes the bill rechartering the Bank of the United States; Jackson reelected, defeating Henry Clay (National Republican candidate)

 1833 Jackson removes federal deposits from the Bank of

 the United States Whig Party comes into existence Jackson issues “specie circular”; Martin Van Buren elected president Financial panic occurs, followed by depression lasting until 1843 Congress passes the Independent Subtreasury Bill; Harrison (Whig) defeats Van Buren (Democrat) for the presidency

 1832–1833 Crisis erupts over South Carolina’s attempt to nullify the tariff of 1832

CHAPTER REVIEW
Democracy in Theory and Practice 
The Bank War and the Second Party System


 How did the relationship between the government and the people change during this time?

 What were the arguments for and against the Bank of the United States?

 The federal government grew more accountable to the people it represented. “Popular sovereignty” meant that men of modest backgrounds could attain new social status, while cultural expression reflected this “decline in deference.” More public officials now had to seek popular election, but public opinion divided over the role of government in the economy. (p. 226)

 Nicholas Biddle believed that the Bank of the United States was essential to American economic stability. Jackson believed the federal bank to be unconstitutional and saw it as a personal enemy and “monster corporation.” Bank proponents believed that Jackson’s “Bank War” exceeded his constitutional authority, and the Whig Party emerged in opposition to his policies. (p. 237)

Jackson and the Politics of Democracy


Heyday of the Second Party System


 What political conflicts did President Andrew and Jackson face and how did he resolve them?

 What was the two-party system, and how were the parties different?

 Jackson resolved political conflicts with iron-fisted authority. During the Peggy Eaton affair, he sacked his entire cabinet, and he handled the Indian dilemma by evicting Native Americans from their homeland. During the nullification crisis, he threatened South Carolina with military force. (p. 229)

 The “second party system” was the rivalry between Whigs and Democrats. The Whigs included industrialists, merchants, and farmers who favored stimulus to commerce. Democrats included smaller farmers, wage workers, and declining gentry— individuals the new market economy had left behind. The division also marked cultural differences in religion, ethnicity, and lifestyle. (p. 242)

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Tariff of abominations An 1828 protective tariff, or tax on imports, that angered southern free traders. p. 230 Trail of Tears In the winter of 1838–1839, the Cherokee were forced to evacuate their lands in Georgia and travel under military guard to presentday Oklahoma. Exposure and disease killed roughly one-quarter of the 16,000 forced migrants en route. p. 234 Nullification The supposed right of any state to declare a federal law inoperative within its boundaries. In 1832, South Carolina nullified the federal tariff. p. 235 
 Bank War Between 1832–1836, Andrew Jackson used his presidential power to fight and ultimately destroy the second Bank of the United States. p. 237 Panic of 1837

 A financial depression that lasted until the 1840s. p. 240

 Second party system Historians’ term for the national two-party rivalry between Democrats and Whigs. The second party system began in the 1830s and ended in the 1850s with the demise of the Whigs and the rise of the Republican Party. p. 242

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
What do you think was the relationship between the new democratic culture and the emergence of the second party system? 
 3. Why do you think the people the Democratic Party appealed to were so worried about a national bank?

 2. Do you think Jackson’s forceful style of leadership was a good model for the presidency? Should he have deferred more to the states or to Congress in pursuing his policies?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 10 on MyHistoryLab Democracy in Theory and Practice Read the Document Moby-Dick p. 227

The Bank War and the Second Party System


 Herman Melville, Excerpt from

◾


Jackson and the Politics of Democracy
Read the Document Andrew Jackson, First Annual
Message to Congress (1829) p. 231


◾


Complete the Assignment
 Man’s Democracy p. 232

Racial Identity in a White


View the Closer Look The Trail of Tears p. 235


◾
◾


View the Closer Look


Read the Document
 the Bank Bill p. 239 Listen to the Audio

◾


Andrew Jackson, Veto of


Van Buren p. 240


 View the Closer Look General Harrison’s Log Cabin March—Sheet Music p. 240

Heyday of the Second Party System
Read the Document Alexis de Tocqueville,
Democracy in America p. 243


Indian Removals p. 236


 Read the Document South Carolina’s Ordinance of Nullification p. 237

◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




Slaves and Masters


Contents and Learning Objectives
THE DIVIDED SOCIETY OF THE OLD SOUTH PG. 248

SLAVERY AND THE SOUTHERN ECONOMY PG. 261

 What were the divisions within black society in the Old South?

 How was slavery related to economic success in the South?

THE WORLD OF SOUTHERN BLACKS PG. 248
What factors made living conditions for southern blacks more or less difficult? 
FEATURE ESSAY
Harriet Jacobs and Maria Norcom: Women of Southern Households 
WHITE SOCIETY IN THE ANTEBELLUM SOUTH PG. 256
What divided and united white southern society? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

Chapter 11 Slaves and Masters


 Nat Turner’s Rebellion: A Turning Point in the Slave South On August 22, 1831, the worst nightmare of southern slaveholders became reality. A group of slaves in Southampton County, Virginia, rose in open and bloody rebellion. Their leader was Nat Turner, a preacher and prophet who believed God had given him a sign that the time was ripe to strike for freedom; a vision of black and white angels wrestling in the sky had convinced him that divine wrath was about to be visited upon the white oppressor. Beginning with a few followers and rallying others as he went along, Turner led his band from plantation to plantation and oversaw the killing of nearly sixty whites. After only forty-eight hours, white forces dispersed the rampaging slaves. The rebels were then rounded up and executed, along with dozens of other slaves who were vaguely suspected of complicity. Nat Turner was the last to be captured, and he went to the gallows unrepentant, convinced he had acted in accordance with God’s will. After the initial panic and rumors of a wider insurrection had passed, white Southerners went about making sure such an incident would never happen again. Their anxiety and determination were

 strengthened by the fact that 1831 also saw the emergence of a more militant northern abolitionism. Just two years after African American abolitionist David Walker published his Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World, calling for blacks to take up arms against slavery, William Lloyd Garrison put out the first issue of his newspaper, The Liberator, the first publication by a white author to demand immediate abolition of slavery rather than gradual emancipation. Nat Turner and William Lloyd Garrison were viewed as two prongs of a revolutionary attack on the southern way of life. Although no evidence came to light that Turner was directly influenced by abolitionist propaganda, many whites believed that he must have been or that future rebels might be. Consequently, they launched a massive campaign to quarantine the slaves from possible exposure to antislavery ideas and attitudes. A series of new laws severely restricted the rights of slaves to move about, assemble without white supervision, or learn to read and write. The wave of repression did not stop at the color line; laws and the threat of mob action prevented white dissenters from

Read the Document


The Confessions of Nat Turner (1831)


A
Ride for Liberty—The Fugitive Slaves by Eastman Johnson depicts a slave family in flight to the North. Source: Brooklyn Museum of Art. Gift of Gwendolyn O.L. Conkling—40.59a—A Ride for Liberty—The Fugitive Slaves by Eastman Johnson, ca. 1862. Oil on paper board, 22 × 26 1/4 in. 
 publicly criticizing or even questioning the institution of slavery. Loyalty to the region was firmly identified with defense of it, and proslavery agitators sought to create a mood of crisis and danger requiring absolute unity and single-mindedness among the white

 population. This embattled attitude lay behind the growth of a more militant sectionalism and inspired threats to secede from the Union unless the South’s peculiar institution could be made safe from northern or abolitionist attack.



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

 he campaign for repression after the Nat Turner rebellion apparently achieved its original aim. Between 1831 and the Civil War, there were no further uprisings resulting in the mass killing of whites. This fact once led some historians to conclude that African American slaves were brainwashed into a state of docility. But resistance to slavery simply took less dangerous forms. The brute force employed in response to the Turner rebellion and the elaborate precautions taken against its recurrence provided slaves with a more realistic sense of the odds against direct confrontation with white power. As a result, they sought and perfected other methods of asserting their humanity. The heroic effort to endure slavery without surrendering to it gave rise to an African American culture of lasting value. This culture combined unique family arrangements, religious ideas of liberation, and creative responses to the oppression of servitude. Among white Southerners, the need to police and control the huge population of enslaved people influenced every aspect of daily life and produced an increasingly isolated, divided, and insecure society. While long-standing racial prejudice contributed to the divided society, the determination of whites to preserve the institution of slavery derived in large part from the important role slavery played in the southern economy.

T


The Divided Society of the
Old South
 What were the divisions within black society in the Old South? Slavery would not have lasted as long as it did—and Southerners would not have reacted so strongly to real or imagined threats to its survival—if an influential class of whites had not had a vital and growing economic interest in this form of human exploitation. Since the early colonial period, forced labor had been considered essential to the South’s plantation economy. In the period between the 1790s and the Civil War, plantation agriculture expanded enormously, and so did dependence on slave labor; unfree blacks were the only workers readily available to landowners who sought to profit from expanding market opportunities by raising staple crops on a large scale. As slavery increased in its importance to the southern economy and society, the divisions within that society grew increasingly apparent. Most fundamentally, the fact that all whites were free and most blacks were slaves created a sharp cleavage between the races in southern society. Indeed, during the last decades before the Civil War, the racial divide grew ever more congruent with the split between free and unfree. Yet the overwhelming importance of race gives an impression of a basic equality within the “master race” that some would say is an illusion. The truth may lie somewhere in between. In the language of sociologists, inequality in the Old South was determined in two ways: by class (differences in status resulting from unequal access to wealth and productive resources) and by caste (inherited advantages or disadvantages associated with racial ancestry). Awareness of both systems of social ranking is necessary for an understanding of southern society. White society was divided by class and by region; both were important for determining a white Southerner’s relationship to the institution of slavery. The large planters were the dominant class,

 and nonslaveholders were of lower social rank. Planters (defined as those who owned twenty or more slaves) tended to live in the plantation areas of the “Cotton Belt” stretching from Georgia across Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas, as well as the low country of South Carolina. In upcountry and frontier areas lived yeoman farmers who owned few or no slaves. In 1860, only one-quarter of all white Southerners belonged to families owning slaves. Even in the Cotton Belt, slaveholders were a minority of whites on the eve of the Civil War—about 40 percent. Planters were the minority of a minority, just 4 percent of the total white population of the South in 1860. Twenty percent of whites owned twenty slaves or less, and the remaining majority, three-fourths of all whites, owned no slaves at all. Thus, southern society was dominated by a planter class that was a numerical and geographically isolated minority; inequalities of class created regional divisions. There were also divisions within black society. Most African Americans in the South were slaves, but a small number, about 6 percent, were free. Even free blacks faced increasing restrictions on their rights during the antebellum era. Among slaves, the great majority lived on plantations and worked in agriculture, but a small number worked either in industrial jobs or in a variety of tasks in urban settings. Even on plantations, there were some differences in status and experience between field hands and servants who worked in the house or in skilled jobs such as carpentry or blacksmithing. Yet because all blacks, even those who were free, suffered under the yoke of racial prejudice and legal inequality, these diverse experiences did not translate into the kind of class divisions that caused rifts within white southern society. Rather, most blacks shared the goal of ending slavery.

The World of Southern Blacks
 What factors made living conditions for southern blacks more or less difficult? The majority of slaves lived on units of land owned by planters who had twenty or more slaves. On the other hand, only 2.4 percent lived on very large plantations of more than two hundred slaves. Few slaves lived in all-black worlds like those of some Caribbean plantations, where it was possible to create autonomous black communities with little white intervention in daily life. Most Southern slaves lived in close contact with their masters and suffered their masters’ strenuous efforts to maintain control over all aspects of their lives. The masters of these agrarian communities sought to ensure their personal safety and the profitability of their enterprises by using physical and psychological means to make slaves docile and obedient. By word and deed, they tried to convince the slaves that whites were superior and had a right to rule over blacks. Masters also drew constant attention to their awesome power and ability to deal harshly with rebels and malcontents. As increasing numbers of slaves were converted to Christianity and attended white-supervised services, they were forced to hear, repeatedly, that God had commanded slaves to serve and obey their masters. Despite these pressures, most African Americans managed to retain an inner sense of their own worth and dignity. When conditions

The World of Southern Blacks


 were right, they openly asserted their desire for freedom and equality and showed their disdain for white claims that slavery was a “positive good.” Some historians have argued that a stress on the strength of slave culture obscures the harshness and cruelty of the system and its damaging effect on the African American personality. Slavery was often a demoralizing and even brutalizing experience, providing little opportunity for learning about the outside world, developing mental skills, and exercising individual initiative. Compared with serfs in Russia or even with slaves on some of the large sugar plantations of the Caribbean, slaves on the relatively small southern plantations or farms, with their high turnover of personnel, had less chance to develop communal ties of the kind associated with peasant villages. Nevertheless, their sense of being part of a distinctive group with its own beliefs and ways of doing things, fragile and precarious though it may have been, made psychic survival possible and helped engender an African American ethnicity that would be a source of strength in future struggles. Although slave culture did not normally provoke violent resistance to the slaveholders’ regime, the inner world that slaves made for themselves gave them the spiritual strength to thwart the masters’ efforts to take over their hearts and minds. After emancipation, this resilient cultural heritage would combine with the tradition of open protest created by rebellious slaves and free black abolitionists to inspire and sustain new struggles for equality.

Slaves’ Daily Life and Labor
 Slaves’ daily life varied enormously depending on the region in which they lived and the type of plantation or farm on which they worked. By the time of the Civil War, 90 percent of the South’s four million slaves worked on plantations or farms, with the remainder working in industry or in cities. Slaves were close to half of the total population in the “Black Belt” or “Cotton Belt” of the lower South— South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Texas—and many lived in plantation regions with a slave majority. In the upper South—North Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Missouri—whites outnumbered slaves by more than three to one, and slaves were far more likely to live on farms where they worked side by side with an owner. On large plantations in the Cotton Belt, most slaves worked in “gangs” under an overseer. White overseers, sometimes helped by black “drivers,” enforced a workday from sunup to sundown, six days a week. Cotton cultivation required year-round labor, so there was never a slack season under “King Cotton.” Enslaved women and children were expected to work in the fields as well, often bringing babies and young children to the fields where they could be cared for by older children, and nursed by their mothers during brief breaks. Some older children worked in “trash gangs,” doing lighter tasks such as weeding and yard cleaning. Life on the sugar plantations was even harsher, sometimes entailing work well into the night during the harvest season. Mortality rates in some parts of sugar-growing Louisiana were very high. In the low country of South Carolina and Georgia, slaves who cultivated rice worked under a “task system” that gave them more control over the pace of labor. With less supervision, many were able to complete their tasks within an eight-hour day. Likewise, slaves who lived on small farms often worked side by side with their



 masters rather than in large groups of slaves, although such intimacy did not necessarily mean a leveling of power relationships. Yet despite masters’ efforts to control the pace of work, even under the gang system, slaves resisted working on “clock” time, enforcing customary rights to take breaks and especially to take Sunday off completely. While about three-quarters of slaves were field workers, slaves performed many other kinds of labor. They dug ditches, built houses, worked on boats and in mills (often hired out by their masters for a year at a time), and labored as house servants. Some slaves also worked within the slave community as preachers, caretakers of children, and healers, especially women. While white masters sometimes treated domestic workers or other personal servants as having a special status, it would be a mistake to assume that slaves shared their ranking system. Evidence suggests that those with the highest status within slave communities were preachers and healers, people whose special skills and knowledge directly benefited their communities. A small number of slaves, about 5 percent, worked in industry in the South. The closest thing to a factory in the Old South was the Tredegar Iron Works in Richmond, Virginia, staffed almost entirely by slaves. Slaves also built most of the railroads that existed in the southern states, but these were few relative to the North before the Civil War. Overall, the South remained predominantly agricultural throughout the antebellum era, and most slaves worked in the fields. Slaves in cities took on a wider range of jobs than plantation slaves, and in general enjoyed more autonomy. Some urban slaves even lived apart from their masters and hired out their own time, returning a portion of their wages to their owners. They also worked in eating and drinking establishments, hotels, and as skilled laborers in tradesmen’s shops. In addition to the work they did for their masters in the fields or in other jobs, most slaves kept gardens or small farm plots to supplement their daily food rations. They also fished, hunted, and trapped animals. Many slaves also worked “overtime” for their own masters on Sundays or holidays in exchange for money or goods, or hired out their overtime hours to others. This “underground economy” suggests slaves’ overpowering desire to provide for their families, sometimes even raising enough funds to purchase their freedom.

Slave Families, Kinship, and
Community
 More than any other, the African American family was the institution that prevented slavery from becoming utterly demoralizing. Contrary to what historians and sociologists used to believe, slaves had a strong and abiding sense of family and kinship. The nature of the families or households that predominated on particular plantations or farms varied. On large plantations with relatively stable slave populations, a substantial majority of slave children lived in two-parent households, and many marriages lasted for as long as twenty to thirty years. They were more often broken up by the death or sale of one of the partners than by voluntary dissolution of the union. Here mothers, fathers, and children were closely bonded, and parents shared child-rearing responsibilities (within the limits allowed by the masters). Marital fidelity was encouraged by masters who believed that stable unions produced more offspring and by Christian churches that viewed adultery and divorce as sinful.



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

Read the Document


 Overseer’s Report from Chicora Wood Plantation

 Chicora Wood was an extremely successful rice plantation in South Carolina owned by Robert Allston. Allston owned several plantations and, of course, many slaves. In 1850 he owned 401 slaves; by 1860 that number had increased to 603.

 But in areas where most slaves lived on farms or small plantations, and especially in areas of the upper South where the trading and hiring out of slaves was frequent, a different pattern seems to have prevailed. Under these circumstances, slaves frequently had spouses who resided on other plantations or farms, often some distance away, and ties between husbands and wives were looser and more fragile. The result was that female-headed families were the norm, and responsibility for child rearing was vested in mothers, assisted in most cases by female relatives and friends. Mothercentered families with weak conjugal ties were a natural response to the infrequent presence of fathers and to the prospect of their being moved or sold beyond visiting distance. Where the breakup of unions by sale or relocation could be expected at any time, it did not pay to invest all of one’s emotions in a conjugal relationship. But whether the basic family form was nuclear or matrifocal (female-headed), the ties that it created were infinitely precious to its members. Masters acquired great leverage over the behavior of slaves by invoking the threat of family breakup through sale. The terrible anguish that usually accompanied the breakup of families through sale showed the depth of kinship feelings. Masters knew that the first place to look for a fugitive was in the neighborhood of a family member who had been sold away. Indeed, many slaves tried to shape their own sales in order to be sold with family members or to the same neighborhood. These efforts were fraught with danger. As one ex-slave recalled, “The mistress asked her which she loved the best her mammy or her daddy and she thought it would please her daddy to say that she loved him the best so she said ‘my daddy’ but she regretted it very much when she found this caused her to be sold [along with her father] the

 next day.” Harriet Jacobs, an escaped slave famous for her published autobiography, hid in her grandmother’s attic for seven years while attempting to secure her children’s freedom. (For more on Harriet Jacobs, see the Feature Essay “Harriet Jacobs and Maria Norcom: Women of Southern Households,” pp. 252–253.) Feelings of kinship and mutual obligation extended beyond the primary family. Grandparents, uncles, aunts, and even cousins were often known to slaves through direct contact or family lore. A sense of family continuity over three or more generations was revealed in the names that slaves gave to their children or took for themselves. Infants were frequently named after grandparents, and those slaves who assumed surnames often chose that of an ancestor’s owner rather than the family name of a current master. Kinship ties were not limited to blood relations. When families were broken up by sale, individual members who found themselves on plantations far from home were likely to be “adopted” into new kinship networks. Orphans or children without responsible parents were quickly absorbed without prejudice into new families. Soon after the Civil War, one Reconstruction official faced an elderly exslave named Roger, who demanded land “to raise crop on” for his “family of sixty ‘parents,’ that is, relations, children included.” A family with sixty parents made no sense to this official, but it made sense in a community in which families were defined by ties of affection and cooperation rather than “blood” relation. For some purposes, all the slaves on a plantation were in reality members of a single extended family, as their forms of address clearly reveal. Elderly slaves were addressed by everyone else as “uncle” and “aunty,” and younger unrelated slaves commonly called each other “brother” or “sister.” Strong kinship ties, whether real or fictive, meant slaves could depend on one another. The kinship network also provided a vehicle for the transmission of African American folk traditions from one generation to the next.

African American Religion
 From the realm of culture and fundamental beliefs, African Americans drew the strength to hold their heads high and look beyond their immediate condition. Religion was the cornerstone of this emerging African American culture. Black Christianity may have owed its original existence to the efforts of white missionaries, but it was far from a mere imitation of white religious forms and beliefs. This distinctive variant of evangelical Protestantism incorporated elements of African religion and emphasized those portions of the Bible that spoke to the aspirations of an enslaved people thirsting for freedom. Most slaves did not encounter Christianity in a church setting. There were a few independent black churches in the antebellum South, which mainly served free blacks and urban slaves with indulgent masters. Free blacks who seceded from white congregations that discriminated against them formed a variety of autonomous Baptist groups as well as southern branches of the highly successful African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church, organized as a national denomination under the leadership of the Reverend Richard Allen of Philadelphia in 1816. But the mass of blacks did not have access to the independent churches. Plantation slaves who were exposed to Christianity either attended the neighboring white churches or worshiped at home.

The World of Southern Blacks


 On large estates, masters or white missionaries often conducted Sunday services. But the narratives and recollections of ex-slaves reveal that white-sanctioned religious activity was only a superficial part of the slaves’ spiritual life. The true slave religion was practiced at night, often secretly, and was led by black preachers. Historian Albert J. Raboteau has described this underground black Christianity as “the invisible institution.” This covert slave religion was a highly emotional affair that featured singing, shouting, and dancing. In some ways, the atmosphere resembled a backwoods revival meeting. But much of what went on was actually an adaptation of African religious beliefs and customs. The chanting mode of preaching—with the congregation responding at regular intervals—and the expression of religious feelings through rhythmic movements, especially the counterclockwise movement known as the ring shout, had clear African origins. The black conversion experience was normally a state of ecstasy more akin to possession by spirits—a major form of African religious expression—than to the agony of those

Read the Document




 “struck down” at white revivals. The emphasis on sinfulness and fear of damnation that were core themes of white evangelicalism played a lesser role among blacks. For them, religion was more an affirmation of the joy of life than a rejection of worldly pleasures and temptations. Slave sermons and religious songs spoke directly to the plight of a people in bondage and implicitly asserted their right to be free. The most popular of all biblical subjects was the deliverance of the children of Israel from slavery in Egypt in the book of Exodus. In one moving spiritual, God commands Moses to “tell Old Pharaoh” to “let my people Go.” Many sermons and songs refer to the crossing of Jordan and the arrival in the Promised Land. “Oh Canaan, sweet Canaan, I am bound for the land of Canaan” and “Oh brothers, don’t get weary. . . . We’ll land on Canaan’s shore” are typical of lines from spirituals known to have been sung by slaves. Other songs invoke the liberation theme in different ways. One recalls that Jesus had “set poor sinners free,” and another prophesies, “We’ll soon be free, when the Lord will call us home.”

Frances E. W. Harper, “The Slave Mother”


 On large plantations, slave men and women formed stable monogamous unions that often lasted until the couple was broken up by the death or sale of one of the partners. This painting by Christian Mayr portrays a slave wedding celebrated in White Sulphur Springs, Virginia, in 1838. The wedding couple wears white attire.

 Complete the Assignment Harriet Jacobs and Maria Norcom: Women of Southern Households on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


Harriet Jacobs and
Maria Norcom
Women of Southern Households


 This 1836 engraving from an antislavery novel depicts a plantation mistress scolding a slave woman while the master looks on. Though white women were also subjugated to the authority of white men in southern society, the divide of race prevented plantation ladies and slaves from finding potential solidarity as women.

H


 arriet Jacobs, born enslaved in North Carolina in 1813, became a slave in James and Maria Norcom’s household in 1825. James began to “whisper foul words” in Harriet’s ears when she was a young teenager. Harriet had no one to whom she could turn, except for her free black grandmother, who lived in the town. Although her grandmother had been a slave, Harriet’s master “dreaded her scorching rebukes” and furthermore “he did not wish to have his villainy made public.” For a time, this wish to “keep up some outward show of decency” protected Harriet. Harriet Jacobs’s grandmother was an unusual woman, who had worked extra for years to buy her children’s freedom, only to be cheated out of her earnings at the end. Like most free black



 women, Harriet’s grandmother was the unmarried head of her own household, separated long ago from the father of her children. Running their own households gave some free black women a measure of autonomy, but also left them with little support in the daily struggle against poverty and racism. Maria Norcom, as the wife of a prominent doctor and large plantation owner, lived a life very different from Harriet’s or her grandmother’s. Yet it was not the life of carefree luxury sometimes portrayed in movies and books about the Old South. Compared to poorer women in the South, Maria had more access to education and periods of recreation and relaxation. But as a lady of the upper class, she was expected to master strict rules of womanhood that demanded moral purity and virtue. She also had to learn the personal and

 managerial skills necessary to oversee a household staffed by slaves. Most southern white women worked hard to keep households and families together, and they all lived within a social system that denied them legal rights by placing them under the domination of husbands and fathers. James Norcom’s behavior, while it certainly violated his vows of marriage, was not egregious enough to have won Maria a divorce under the laws of North Carolina. Whether they were rich or poor, free or enslaved, women were, to a large degree, defined by their relationship to the head of the household, nearly always a white man. Although there were expectations that husbands would protect and care for their wives, women had little recourse against husbands who departed from those expectations. For example, Marion S. D. Converse, a woman from a prominent South Carolina family, dreaded her abusive second husband, Augustus. Through years of beatings and jealous tirades, Marion was unable to escape the bonds of marriage because Augustus’s deplorable conduct fell short of legal grounds for divorce in South Carolina (only abandonment or impotence). Yet Marion Converse was able to gain aid and protection from her prominent family, who shielded her from the worst consequences of an abusive marriage. When Maria Norcom discovered her husband’s overtures toward Harriet, she was distraught and took Harriet to sleep in her own room. Yet, as Harriet later described it, Maria “pitied herself as a martyr; but she was incapable of feeling for the condition of shame and misery in which her unfortunate, helpless slave was placed.” Harriet often woke to find Maria bending over her, and came to fear for her safety

 around this “jealous mistress.” Harriet Jacobs’s and Maria Norcom’s story illustrates that planters ruled their wives as well as their slaves. All southern women were embedded in a social system that gave authority over their lives and choices to men. Despite this commonality, few women were able to reach across the divides of race and class to recognize these similarities. Tormented by jealousy and humiliation, Maria came to blame the slave rather than her husband for their intimacy, imagining that Harriet herself had seduced him. Harriet managed to elude her master’s advances, in part due to Maria’s vigilance. Enslaved women such as Harriet Jacobs were the most vulnerable of southern women. They were subject to a level of violence and sexual assault that was unknown to other women in the South; and when they were victims of violence, they lacked even the limited legal defenses that were open to poor white women. Because black women were considered unable to give or withhold consent, it was not a crime to rape a black woman. And had Harriet fought back physically against her master’s advances, she risked criminal prosecution and even death. When the slave Celia killed the master who had been raping her for years, her court-appointed lawyer argued that she should not be criminally liable, based on a Georgia statute allowing women to use force to defend their “honor” against a rapist. The court, however, decreed that black women were not “women” within the meaning of the statute. Celia had no honor that the law recognized. She was thus convicted of murder, sentenced to death, and hanged.

 Excluding black women from the laws of rape also reinforced common images of black women as either sexually aggressive “Jezebels” or sexless, nurturing “Mammies.” The first stereotype justified the sexual exploitation of slave women and the second fed the slaveowners’ fantasy that their slaves loved and cared for them. Of course, neither of these images corresponded to the realities and hardships of slave life. Enslaved women were often assigned backbreaking labor that paid little attention to common distinctions about “women’s work.” They were expected to do all of the normal tasks assigned to women—sewing, washing, child care—as well as working a full day in the fields. Despite these brutal conditions, slave women organized communities and households, and tried to protect them against the worst excesses of the slave system. Harriet and her grandmother were involved in a complicated network of extended kin, and invested a great deal of energy in protecting brothers and sons from sale “up the river.” Harriet eventually escaped from the Norcoms in 1835, hiding in her grandmother’s attic for seven years. Escaped from the bonds of slavery, Harriet eventually joined the battle to abolish it. Her book, Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, the Autobiography of Linda Brent, was published in 1861, with the help of abolitionist novelist Lydia Maria Child. For many years, critics dismissed the narrative as either a work of fiction or the product of Child’s own pen; but historians today have laid those charges to rest, recognizing Harriet Jacobs’s important

 contribution to the struggle against slavery and to American literature. We know much less about what happened to Maria Norcom, who neither kept a diary nor wrote her own story. All that we know is that she continued in her unhappy marriage to James Norcom. Her daughter Mary Matilda, when she came of age, pursued and attempted to reclaim Harriet as her slave under the Fugitive Slave Act. To thwart this effort, Harriet allowed an abolitionist friend to buy her and set her free. In slaveholding households like that of the Norcoms, all the women, whether white or black, free or enslaved, were subject to the will of the master of the household. Most southern women depended on white men legally and socially, giving them little recourse against men like James Norcom, who burst the bounds of “decency.” Despite their shared submission to James, an impassable gulf separated Harriet and Maria, and its name was race. After the Civil War, southern women, white and black, reorganized their households in a changed society, but it would still be another century before they began to bridge that gulf.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
How did race affect the lives of southern women like Harriet Jacobs and Maria Norcom? 2. Why did slaveholding white men like James Norcom have so much power over their slaves and wives? 3. Why were male slaveholders able to sexually abuse black women without having to face legal consequences in the South? 




 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

Listen to the Audio File


When the Roll is


Called up Yonder


 Free blacks in the North established African Methodist Episcopalian churches like the Bethel A.M.E. Church in Philadelphia, founded by the minister Richard Allen. Today, it is the oldest church property continuously owned by African Americans.

 Most of the songs of freedom and deliverance can be interpreted as referring exclusively to religious salvation and the afterlife—and this was undoubtedly how slaves hoped their masters would understand them. But the slaves did not forget that God had once freed a people from slavery in this life and punished their masters. The Bible thus gave African Americans the hope that they, as a people, would repeat the experience of the Israelites and be delivered from bondage. Besides being the basis for a deep-rooted hope for eventual freedom, religion helped the slaves maintain their sense of inner worth. Unless their masters were unusually pious, religious slaves could regard themselves as superior to their owners. Some slaves even believed that all whites were damned because of their unjust treatment of blacks, while all slaves would be saved because any sins they committed were the involuntary result of their condition. More important, the “invisible institution” of the church gave African Americans a chance to create and control a world of their own. Preachers, elders, and other leaders of slave congregations could acquire a sense of status within their own community that had not been conferred by whites; the singers who improvised the spirituals found an outlet for independent artistic expression. Although religion seldom inspired slaves to open rebellion, it must be regarded as a prime source of resistance to the dehumanizing effects of enslavement.

Resistance and Rebellion
 Open rebellion, the bearing of arms against the oppressors by organized groups of slaves, was the most dramatic and clear-cut form of slave resistance. In the period between 1800 and 1831, a number of slaves participated in revolts that showed their willingness to risk their lives in a desperate bid for liberation. In 1800,

 a Virginia slave named Gabriel Prosser mobilized a large band of his fellows to march on Richmond. But a violent storm dispersed “Gabriel’s army” and enabled whites to suppress the uprising without any loss of white life. In 1811, several hundred Louisiana slaves marched on New Orleans brandishing guns, waving flags, and beating drums. It took three hundred soldiers of the U.S. Army, aided by armed planters and militiamen, to stop the advance and to end the rebellion. In 1822, whites in Charleston, South Carolina, uncovered an extensive and well-planned conspiracy, organized by a free black man named Denmark Vesey, to seize local armories, arm the slave population, and take possession of the city. Although the Vesey conspiracy was nipped in the bud, it convinced South Carolinians that blacks were “the Jacobins of the country [a reference to the militants of the French Revolution] against whom we should always be on guard.” Only a year after the Vesey affair, whites in Norfolk County, Virginia, complained of the activities of a marauding band of runaway slaves that had killed several whites. The militia was sent out and captured the alleged leader—a fugitive of several years’ standing named Bob Ferebee. Groups of runaways, who hid for years in places such as the Great Dismal Swamp of Virginia, continued to raid plantations throughout the antebellum period and were inclined to fight to the death rather than be recaptured. As we have already seen, the most bloody and terrifying of all slave revolts was the Nat Turner insurrection of 1831. Although it was the last slave rebellion of this kind during the pre–Civil War period, armed resistance had not ended. Indeed, the most sustained and successful effort of slaves to win their freedom by force of arms took place in Florida between 1835 and 1842, when hundreds of black fugitives fought in the Second Seminole War alongside the Indians who had given them a haven. The Seminoles were resisting removal to Oklahoma, but for the blacks who took part, the war was a struggle for their own freedom, and when it ended, most of them were allowed to accompany their Indian allies to the transMississippi West. Only a tiny fraction of all slaves ever took part in organized acts of violent resistance. Most realized that the odds against a successful revolt were very high, and bitter experience had shown them that the usual outcome was death to the rebels. As a consequence, they characteristically devised safer or more ingenious ways to resist white dominance. One way of protesting against slavery was to run away, and thousands of slaves showed their discontent and desire for freedom in this fashion. Most fugitives never got beyond the neighborhood of the plantation; after “lying out” for a time, they would return, often after negotiating immunity from punishment. But many escapees remained free for years by hiding in swamps or other remote areas, and a fraction made it to freedom in the North or Mexico. Some fugitives stowed away aboard ships heading to northern ports; others traveled overland for hundreds of miles, avoiding patrols and inquisitive whites by staying off the roads and moving only at night. Some were able to escape with the help of the Underground Railroad, an informal network of sympathetic free blacks (and a few whites) who helped fugitives make their way North. Light-skinned blacks sometimes made it to freedom by passing for white, and one resourceful slave even had himself packed in a box and shipped to the North.

The World of Southern Blacks


Watch the Video




Underground Railroad


 Between 1815 and 1860, it is estimated that 130,000 refugees (out of 4 million slaves) escaped the slave South on the “Underground Railroad.” The railroad had as many as 3,200 active workers. By the 1850s, substantial numbers of Northerners had been in open violation of federal law by hiding runaways for a night.

 The typical fugitive was a young, unmarried male from the upper South. For the majority of slaves, however, flight was not a real option. Either they lived too deep in the South to have any chance of reaching free soil, or they were reluctant to leave family and friends behind. Slaves who did not or could not leave the plantation had to register their opposition to the masters’ regime while remaining enslaved. The normal way of expressing discontent was engaging in a kind of indirect or passive resistance. Many slaves worked slowly and inefficiently, not because they were naturally lazy (as whites supposed) but as a gesture of protest or alienation as conveyed in the words of a popular slave song, “You may think I’m working/But I ain’t.” Others withheld labor by feigning illness or injury. Stealing provisions—a very common activity on most plantations— was another way to show contempt for authority. According to the code of ethics prevailing in the slave quarters, theft from the master was no sin; it was simply a way for slaves to get a larger share of the fruits of their own labors. Substantial numbers of slaves committed acts of sabotage. Tools and agricultural implements were deliberately broken, animals were willfully neglected or mistreated, and barns or other

 outbuildings were set afire. Often masters could not identify the culprits because slaves did not readily inform on one another. The ultimate act of clandestine resistance was poisoning the master’s food. Some slaves, especially the “conjure” men and women who practiced a combination of folk medicine and witchcraft, knew how to mix rare, virtually untraceable poisons; and a suspiciously large number of plantation whites became suddenly and mysteriously ill. Sometimes whole families died from obscure “diseases” that did not infect the slave quarters. The basic attitude behind such actions was revealed in the folktales that slaves passed down from generation to generation. The famous Brer Rabbit stories showed how a small, apparently defenseless animal could overcome a bigger and stronger one through cunning and deceit. Although these tales often had an African origin, they also served as an allegory for the black view of the master-slave relationship. Other stories—which were not told in front of whites— openly portrayed the slave as a clever trickster outwitting the master. In one such tale, a slave reports to his master that seven hogs have died of “malitis.” Thinking this is a dread disease, the master agrees to let the slaves have all the meat. What really happened, so the story goes, was this: “One of the strongest Negroes got up early in



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

 the morning” and “skitted to the hog pen with a heavy mallet in his hand. When he tapped Mister Hog ‘tween the eyes with that mallet, ‘malitis’ set in mighty quick.”

Free Blacks in the Old South
 Free blacks occupied an increasingly precarious position in the antebellum South. White Southerners’ fears of free blacks inciting slave revolts, and their reaction to attacks by abolitionists, led slaveholders after 1830 increasingly to defend slavery as a positive good rather than a necessary evil. Southerners articulated this defense of slavery in terms of race, emphasizing a dual image of the black person: Under the “domesticating” influence of a white master, the slave was a child, a happy Sambo; outside of this influence, he was a savage beast. Beginning in the 1830s, all of the southern states passed a series of laws cracking down on free blacks. These laws forced free people of color to register or have white guardians who were responsible for their behavior. Invariably, free Henry “Box” Brown emerges from the crate in which he escaped from slavery blacks were required to carry papers proving their free stain Richmond, Virginia, to freedom in Philadelphia. tus, and in some states, they had to obtain official permission to move from one county to another. Licensing laws were everything by taking the side of the slaves. In southern Louisiana, invoked to exclude blacks from several occupations, and attempts there was even a small group of mulatto planters who lived in luxury, by blacks to hold meetings or form organizations were frequently supported by the labor of other African Americans. blocked by the authorities. Sometimes vagrancy and apprenticeship However, although some free blacks were able to create niches laws were used to force free blacks into a state of economic depenof relative freedom, their position in southern society became dency barely distinguishable from outright slavery. increasingly precarious. Beginning in the 1830s, southern whites Although beset by special problems of their own, most free sought to draw the line between free and unfree more firmly as a blacks identified with the suffering of the slaves; when circumline between black and white. Free blacks were an anomaly in this stances allowed, they protested against the peculiar institution system; increasingly, the southern answer was to exclude, degrade, and worked for its abolition. Many of them had once been slaves and even enslave those free people of color who remained within themselves or were the children of slaves; often they had close relatheir borders. Just before the outbreak of the Civil War, a campaign tives who were still in bondage. Furthermore, they knew that the developed in some southern states to carry the pattern of repression discrimination from which they suffered was rooted in slavery and and discrimination to its logical conclusion: Several state legislatures the racial attitudes that accompanied it. So long as slavery existed, proposed laws giving free people of color the choice of emigrating their own rights were likely to be denied, and even their freedom from the state or being enslaved. was at risk; former slaves who could not prove they had been legally freed were subject to reenslavement. This threat existed even in the North: Under federal fugitive slave laws, escaped slaves could be returned to bondage. Even blacks who were born free were not White Society in the perfectly safe. Kidnapping or fraudulent seizure by slave catchers Antebellum South was always a possibility. Because of the elaborate system of control and surveillance, free What divided and united white southern society? blacks in the South were in a relatively weak position to work against Those who know the Old South only from modern novels, films, slavery. The case of Denmark Vesey showed that a prosperous and and television programs are likely to envision a land filled with well-situated free black might make a stand in the struggle for freemajestic plantations. Pillared mansions behind oak-lined carriagedom, but it also revealed the dangers of revolutionary activity and the ways are portrayed as scenes of aristocratic splendor, where courtly odds against success. The wave of repression against the free black gentlemen and elegant ladies, attended by hordes of uniformed population that followed the Vesey conspiracy heightened the danblack servants, lived in refined luxury. It is easy to conclude from gers and increased the odds. Consequently, most free blacks found such images that the typical white Southerner was an aristocrat who that survival depended on creating the impression of loyalty to the belonged to a family that owned large numbers of slaves. planter regime. In some parts of the lower South, groups of relatively The great houses existed and some wealthy slaveholders did privileged free people of color, mostly of racially mixed origin, were maintain as aristocratic a lifestyle as was ever seen in the United sometimes persuaded that it was to their advantage to preserve the States. But census returns indicate that this was the world of status quo. As skilled artisans and small-business owners depenonly a small percentage of slaveowners and a minuscule portion dent on white favors and patronage, they had little incentive to risk

White Society in the Antebellum South


 of the total white population. The number of large planters who had the means to build great houses and entertain lavishly, those who owned at least fifty slaves, comprised fewer than 1 percent of all whites. Most southern whites were nonslaveholding yeoman farmers. Yet even those who owned no slaves grew to depend on slavery in other ways, whether economically, because they hired slaves, or psychologically, because having a degraded class of blacks below them made them feel better about their own place in society. However, the class divisions between slaveholders and nonslaveholders did contribute to the political rifts that became increasingly apparent on the eve of the Civil War.

The Planters’ World
 The great planters, although few in number, had a weighty influence on southern life. They set the tone and values for much of the rest of society, especially for the less wealthy slaveowners who sought to imitate the planters’ style of living to the extent that resources allowed. Although many of them were too busy tending to their plantations to become openly involved in politics, wealthy planters held more than their share of high offices and often exerted a decisive influence on public policy. Within those regions of the South in which plantation agriculture predominated, they were a ruling class in every sense of the term. Contrary to legend, a majority of the great planters of the pre– Civil War period were self-made rather than descendants of the old colonial gentry. Some were ambitious young men who married planters’ daughters. Others started as lawyers and used their fees and connections to acquire plantations. As the Cotton Kingdom spread westward to Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana, a greater proportion of the largest slaveholders were men who began their careers in commerce, land speculation, banking, and even slave trading. Stephen Duncan of Mississippi, probably the most prosperous cotton planter in the South during the 1850s (he owned eight plantations and 1018 slaves), had invested the profits from his banking operations. Among the largest sugar planters of southern Louisiana at this time were Maunsel White and John Burnside, Irish immigrants who had prospered as New Orleans merchants, and Isaac Franklin, former king of the slave traders. To be successful, a planter had to be a shrewd entrepreneur who kept a careful eye on the market, the prices of slaves and land, and the extent of his indebtedness. Reliable “factors”—the agents who marketed the crop and provided advances against future sales— could assist him in making decisions, but a planter who failed to spend a good deal of time with his account books could end up in serious trouble. Managing the slaves and plantation production was also difficult and time consuming, even when overseers were available to supervise day-to-day activities. Hence few planters could be the men of leisure featured in the popular image of the Old South. Likewise, despite typical images of women in the Old South— full hoop skirts and wide front porches, elaborate parties in plantation houses dripping with Spanish moss, elegant ladies gossiping over tea—few women fit the stereotype of the southern belle. Not only were plantation mistresses a tiny minority of the women who lived and worked in the slave states before the Civil War, but even



 those who were part of the planter elite rarely lived lives of leisure. (See the Feature Essay “Harriet Jacobs and Maria Norcom: Women of Southern Households,” pp. 252–253.) Some of the richest and most secure plantation families did aspire to live in the manner of a traditional landed aristocracy. A few were so successful that they were accepted as equals by visiting English nobility. Big houses, elegant carriages, fancy-dress balls, and excessive numbers of house servants all reflected aristocratic aspirations. The romantic cult of chivalry, described in the popular novels of Sir Walter Scott, was in vogue in some circles and even led to the nonviolent reenactment of medieval tournaments. Dueling, despite efforts to repress it, remained the standard way to settle “affairs of honor” among gentlemen. Another sign of gentility was the tendency of planters’ sons to avoid “trade” as a primary or secondary career in favor of law or the military. Planters’ daughters were trained from girlhood to play the piano, speak French, dress in the latest fashions, and sparkle in the drawing room or on the dance floor. The aristocratic style originated among the older gentry of the seaboard slave states, but by the 1840s and 1850s it had spread southwest as a second generation of wealthy planters began to displace the rough-hewn pioneers of the Cotton Kingdom.

Planters, Racism, and Paternalism
 No assessment of the planters’ outlook or “worldview” can be made without considering their relations with their slaves. Planters, by the census definition, owned more than half of all the slaves in the South and set standards for treatment and management. It is clear from their private letters and journals, as well as from proslavery propaganda, that most planters liked to think of themselves as benevolent masters. Rather than seeing slavery as a brutal form of economic exploitation, they argued that blacks needed the slave system to ensure that they were cared for and protected. Often they referred to their slaves as if they were members of an extended patriarchal family—a favorite phrase was “our people.” According to this ideology of paternalism, blacks were a race of perpetual children requiring constant care and supervision by superior whites. Paternalistic rhetoric increased greatly after abolitionists began to charge that most slaveholders were sadistic monsters. Paternalism went hand in hand with racism. In a typical proslavery apology, Georgia lawyer Thomas Reade Cobb wrote that “a state of bondage, so far from doing violence to the law of [the African’s] nature, develops and perfects it; and that, in that state, he enjoys the greatest amount of happiness, and arrives at the greatest degree of perfection of which his nature is capable.” Slaveholders justified slavery by the supposed mental and moral inferiority of Africans. It was only in the 1830s and 1840s that a full-blown modern racism developed on both sides of the Atlantic. Racial “scientists” developed theories relating skull size to mental ability, and some proslavery apologists even developed religious theories of “polygenesis,” arguing that blacks were not descended from Adam and Eve. This racial ideology helped slaveholders believe that a benevolent Christian could justly enslave another human being. While some historians have argued that paternalism was part of a social system that was organized like a family hierarchy rather than a brutal, profit-making arrangement, there was no inconsistency between planters’ paternalism and capitalism. Slaves were



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

 themselves a form of capital; that is, they were both the main tools of production for a booming economy as well as an asset in themselves valuable for their rising prices, like shares in the stock market today. The ban on the transatlantic slave trade in 1808 was effective enough to make it economically necessary to the continuation of slavery for the slave population to reproduce itself. Rising slave prices also inhibited extreme physical abuse and deprivation. It was in the interest of masters to see that their slave property remained in good enough condition to work hard and produce large numbers of children. Furthermore, a good return on their investment enabled southern planters to spend more on slave maintenance than could masters in less prosperous plantation economies. Much of the slaveholders’ “paternalist” writing discussed “the coincidence of humanity and interest,” by which they meant that treating slaves well (including firm discipline) was in their best economic interest. Thus, there was a grain of truth in the planters’ claim that their slaves were relatively well provided for. Recent comparative studies have suggested that North American slaves of the pre–Civil War period enjoyed a somewhat higher standard of living than those in other New World slave societies, such as Brazil and the West Indian sugar islands. Their food, clothing, and shelter were normally sufficient to sustain life and labor at slightly above a bare subsistence level, and the rapid increase of the slave population in the Old South stands in sharp contrast to the usual failure of slave populations to reproduce themselves. But some planters did not behave rationally. They failed to control their tempers or tried to work more slaves than they could afford to maintain. Consequently, there were more cases of physical abuse and undernourishment than a purely economic calculation would lead us to expect. The testimony of slaves themselves and of some independent white observers suggests that masters of large plantations generally did not have close and intimate relationships with the mass of field slaves. The kind of affection and concern associated with a father figure appears to have been limited mainly to relationships with a few favored house servants or other elite slaves, such as drivers and highly skilled artisans. The field hands on large estates dealt mostly with overseers who were hired or fired because of their ability to meet production quotas. The limits of paternalism were revealed in the slave market. Planters who looked down on slave traders as less than respectable gentlemen nevertheless broke apart families by selling slaves “down river” when they found themselves in need of money. Even slaveholders who claimed not to participate in the slave market themselves often mortgaged slaves to secure debts; as many as one-third of all slave sales in the South were court-ordered sheriff ’s auctions when such masters defaulted on their debts. While paternalism may have moderated planters’ behavior to some extent, especially when economic self-interest reinforced “humanity,” it is important to remember that most departures from unremitting labor and harsh conditions were concessions wrested from owners through slaves’ defiance and resistance, at great personal risk. Furthermore, when they were being most realistic, planters conceded that the ultimate basis of their authority was the slaves’ fear of force and intimidation, rather than the natural obedience resulting from a loving parent-child relationship. Scattered among

 their statements are admissions that they relied on the “principle of fear,” “more and more on the power of fear,” or—most graphically—that it was necessary “to make them stand in fear.” Devices for inspiring fear included whipping and the threat of sale away from family and friends. Planters’ manuals and instructions to overseers reveal that certain and swift punishment for any infraction of the rules or even for a surly attitude was the preferred method for maintaining order and productivity. When masters did abuse their power by torturing, killing, or raping their slaves, the victims had little recourse. Slaves lacked legal protection against such cruelty because their testimony was not accepted in court. Abolitionists were correct in condemning slavery on principle because it gave one human being nearly absolute power over another. This system was bound to result in atrocities and violence.

Small Slaveholders
 As we have seen, the great majority of slaveholders were not planters. Some of the small slaveholders were urban merchants or professional men who needed slaves only for domestic service, but more typical were farmers who used one or two slave families to ease the burden of their own labor. Relatively little is known about life on these small slaveholding farms; unlike the planters, the owners left few records behind. We do know that life was relatively spartan. Masters lived in log cabins or small frame cottages, and slaves lived in lofts or sheds that were not usually up to plantation housing standards. For better or worse, relations between owners and their slaves were more intimate than on larger estates. These farmers often worked in the fields alongside their slaves and sometimes ate at the same table or slept under the same roof. But such closeness did not necessarily result in better treatment. Slave testimony reveals that both the best and the worst of slavery could be found on these farms, depending on the master. Given a choice, most slaves preferred to live on plantations because they offered the sociability, culture, and kinship of the slave quarters, as well as better prospects for adequate food, clothing, and shelter. Marginal slaveholders often sank into poverty and were forced either to sell their slaves or give them short rations.

Yeoman Farmers
 Just below the small slaveholders on the social scale was a substantial class of yeoman farmers who owned land they worked themselves. Contrary to another myth about the Old South, most of these people did not fit the image of the degraded, shiftless poor white. While there were impoverished white squatters on stretches of barren or sandy soil that no one else wanted, and a significant number of tenant farmers, most were ambitious young men seeking to accumulate the capital to become landowners. The majority of the nonslaveholding rural population were proud, self-reliant farmers. If they were disadvantaged in comparison with farmers elsewhere in the United States, it was because the lack of economic development and urban growth perpetuated frontier conditions and denied them the opportunity to produce a substantial surplus for market. The yeomen were mostly concentrated in the backcountry where slaves and plantations were rarely seen. In every southern

White Society in the Antebellum South


 state, white farmers without slaves populated hilly sections unsuitable for plantation agriculture, like the foothills of the Appalachians and the Ozarks, and long stretches of piney barrens along the Gulf Coast. A somewhat distinct group were the genuine mountaineers, who lived too high up to succeed at farming and relied heavily on hunting, lumbering, and distilling whiskey. Yeoman women, much more than their wealthy counterparts, participated in every dimension of household labor. They worked in the garden, made handicrafts and clothing, and even labored in the fields when necessary. Women in the most dire economic circumstances even worked for wages in small businesses or on nearby farms. They also raised much larger families than their wealthier neighbors because having many children supplied a valuable labor pool for the family farm. There were also a greater number of lower-class women who lived outside of male-headed households. Despite the pressures of respectability, there was a greater acceptance and sympathy in less affluent communities for women who bore illegitimate children or were abandoned by their husbands. Working women created a broader definition of “proper households” and navigated the challenges of holding families together in precarious economic conditions. The lack of transportation facilities, more than some failure of energy or character, limited the prosperity of the yeomen. A large part of their effort was devoted to growing subsistence crops, mainly corn. They raised a small percentage of the South’s cotton and tobacco, but production was severely limited by

Read the Document




 the difficulty of marketing. Their main source of cash was livestock, especially hogs. Hogs could be walked to market over long distances, and massive droves from the backcountry to urban markets were commonplace. But southern livestock, which was generally allowed to forage in the woods rather than being fattened on grain, was of poor quality and did not bring high prices or big profits to raisers. Although they did not benefit directly from the peculiar institution, most yeomen and other nonslaveholders tolerated slavery and fiercely opposed abolitionism in any form. A few antislavery Southerners, most notably Hinton R. Helper of North Carolina, tried to convince the yeomen that they were victimized by planter dominance and should work for its overthrow, but they made little headway. Most yeomen were staunch Jacksonians who resented aristocratic pretensions and feared concentrations of power and wealth in the hands of the few. When asked about the gentry, they commonly voiced their disdain of “cotton snobs” and rich planters generally. In state and local politics, they sometimes expressed such feelings by voting against planter interests on issues involving representation, banking, and internal improvements. Why, then, did they fail to respond to antislavery appeals that called on them to strike at the real source of planter power and privilege? One reason was that some nonslaveholders hoped to get ahead in the world, and in the South this meant acquiring slaves of their own. Just enough of the more prosperous yeomen broke

George Fitzhugh, The Blessings of Slavery (1857)


 This proslavery cartoon of 1841 contends that the slave in America had a better life than did the working-class white in England. Supposedly, the grateful slaves were clothed, fed, and cared for in their old age by kindly and sympathetic masters, while starving English workers were mercilessly exploited by factory owners. Source: Collection of The New-York Historical Society, negative no. 3087.



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

 into the slaveholding classes to make this dream seem believable. Planters, anxious to ensure the loyalty of nonslaveholders, strenuously encouraged the notion that every white man was a potential master. Even if they did not aspire to own slaves, white farmers often viewed black servitude as providing a guarantee of their own liberty and independence. A society that gave them the right to vote and the chance to be self-sufficient on land of their own encouraged the feeling they were fundamentally equal to the largest slaveholders. In part, their anxieties were economic; freed slaves would compete with them for land or jobs. But an intense racism deepened their fears and made their opposition to black freedom implacable. “Now suppose they was free,” a nonslaveholder told a northern traveler, “you see they’d think themselves just as good as we . . . just suppose you had a family of children, how would [you] like to hev a niggar feeling just as good as a white man? How’d you like to hev a niggar steppin’ up to your darter?” Emancipation was unthinkable because it would remove the pride and status that automatically went along with a white skin in this acutely race-conscious society. Slavery, despite its drawbacks, served to keep blacks “in their place” and to make all whites, however poor and uneducated, feel they were free and equal members of a master race.

A
Closed Mind and a Closed Society 

 institution was inherently sinful. The message was carried in a host of books, pamphlets, and newspaper editorials published between the 1830s and the Civil War. Partly, the argument was aimed at the North, as a way of bolstering the strong current of antiabolitionist sentiment. But Southerners themselves were a prime target; the message was clearly calculated to resolve the kind of doubts and misgivings that had been freely expressed before the 1830s. Much of the message may have been over the heads of nonslaveholders, many of whom were semiliterate, but some of the arguments, in popularized form, were used to arouse racial anxieties that tended to neutralize antislavery sentiment among the lower classes. The proslavery argument was based on three main propositions. The first and foremost was that enslavement was the natural and proper status for people of African descent. Blacks, it was alleged, were innately inferior to whites and suited only for slavery. Biased scientific and historical evidence was presented to support this claim. Second, slavery was held to be sanctioned by the Bible and Christianity—a position made necessary by the abolitionist appeal to Christian ethics. Ancient Hebrew slavery was held up as a divinely sanctioned model, and Saint Paul was quoted endlessly on the duty of servants to obey their masters. Southern churchmen took the lead in reconciling slavery with religion and also made renewed efforts to convert the slaves as a way of showing that enslavement could be a means for spreading the gospel. Finally, efforts were made to show that slavery was consistent with the humanitarian spirit of the nineteenth century. The premise that blacks were naturally dependent led to the notion that they

 Despite the tacit assent of most nonslaveholders, the dominant planters never lost their fear that lower-class whites would turn against slavery. They felt threatened from two sides: from the slave quarters where a new Nat Turner might be gathering his forces, and from the backcountry where yeomen and poor whites might heed the call of abolitionists and rise up against planter domination. Beginning in the Read the Document Poem, “The Slave Auction” 1830s, the ruling element tightened the screws of slavery and used their control of government and communications to create a mood of impending catastrophe designed to ensure that all southern whites were of a single mind on the slavery issue. Before the 1830s, open discussion of the rights or wrongs of slavery had been possible in many parts of the South. Apologists commonly described the institution as “a necessary evil.” In the upper South, as late as the 1820s, there had been significant support for the American Colonization Society , with its program of gradual voluntary emancipation accompanied by deportation of the freedmen. In 1831 and 1832—in the wake of the Nat Turner uprising— the Virginia state legislature debated a gradual emancipation plan. Major support for ensuring white safety by getting rid of both slavery and blacks came from representatives of the yeoman farmers living west of the Blue Ridge Mountains. But the defeat of the proposal effectively ended the discussion. The argument that slavery was “a positive good”—rather than an evil slated for This illustration of a public auction of slaves in Charleston, South Carolina in 1856 was representative gradual elimination—won the day. of the horrific treatment of slaves including the separation of the parents of slaves from their young The “positive good” defense of slavery was children. Literary and visual depictions of slave auctions were produced and widely disseminated to an answer to the abolitionist charge that the mobilize abolitionist sentiment among slavery opponents based in the North and in England.

Slavery and the Southern Economy




 needed some kind of “family government” or special regime equivabove all, slave revolt. The persistent barrage of proslavery propaganda and the course of national events in the 1850s created a alent to the asylums that existed for the small numbers of whites mood of panic and desperation. By this time, an increasing number who were also incapable of caring for themselves. The plantation of Southerners had become convinced that safety from abolitionallegedly provided such an environment, as benevolent masters ism and its associated terrors required a formal withdrawal from the guided and ruled this race of “perpetual children.” Union—secession. By the 1850s, the proslavery argument had gone beyond mere apology for the South and its peculiar institution and featured an ingenious attack on the free-labor system of the North. According Slavery and the Southern Economy to Virginian George Fitzhugh, the master-slave relationship was more humane than the one prevailing between employers and wage How was slavery related to economic success laborers in the North. Slaves had security against unemployment in the South? and a guarantee of care in old age, whereas free workers might face destitution and even starvation at any time. Worker insecurity in Southern society transformed itself according to the needs of the free societies led inevitably to strikes, bitter class conflicts, and the slave system because slavery played such a crucial role in the ecorise of socialism; slave societies, on the other hand, could more nomic life of the South. Despite the internal divisions of southern effectively protect property rights and maintain other traditional society, white Southerners from all regions and classes came to values because their laboring class was better treated and, at the perceive their interests tied up with slavery, whether because they same time, more firmly controlled. owned slaves themselves or because they believed in slavery as Proslavery Southerners attempted to seal off their region essential to the “southern way of life” or “white men’s democracy.” from antislavery ideas and influences. Whites who were bold And because slavery was the cornerstone of the southern economy, enough to criticize slavery publicly were mobbed or perseit affected white Southerners’ attitudes toward landholding and cuted. One of the last and bravest of the southern abolitionists, toward industrialization. Cassius M. Clay of Kentucky, armed himself with a brace of For the most part, the expansion of slavery—the number of pistols when he gave speeches, until the threat of mob violence slaves in the South more than tripled between 1810 and 1860 to finally forced him across the Ohio River. In 1856, a University nearly four million—can be attributed to the rise of “King Cotton.” of North Carolina professor was fired because he admitted he The cotton-growing areas of the South were becoming more and would vote for the moderately antislavery Republican Party if he more dependent on slavery, at the same time that agriculture in had a chance. Clergymen who questioned the morality of slavthe upper South was actually moving away from the institution. ery were driven from their pulpits, and northern travelers susYet slavery continued to remain important to the economy of the pected of being abolitionist agents were tarred and feathered. upper South in a different way, through the slave trade. When abolitionists tried to send their literature through the mail during the 1830s, it was seized View the Closer Look Slave Auction in Richmond, Virgina in southern post offices and publicly burned. Such flagrant denials of free speech and civil liberties were inspired in part by fears that nonslaveholding whites and slaves would get subversive ideas about slavery. Hinton R. Helper’s book The Impending Crisis of the South, an 1857 appeal to nonslaveholders to resist the planter regime, was suppressed with particular vigor; those found with copies were beaten up or even lynched. But the deepest fear was that slaves would hear the abolitionist talk or read antislavery literature and be inspired to rebel. Such anxieties rose to panic pitch after the Nat Turner rebellion. Consequently, new laws were passed making it a crime to teach slaves to read and write. Other repressive legislation aimed at slaves banned meetings unless a white man was present, severely restricted the activities of black preachers, and suppressed independent black churches. Free blacks, thought to be possible instigators of slave revolt, were denied basic civil liberties and were the object of growing surveillance and harassment. All these efforts at thought control and interThe spectacle of a slave market was commonplace in the cities of the antebellum South. Here, nal security did not allay planters’ fears of abolitionist subversion, lower-class white dissent, and, the correspondent has depicted a relaxed scene as if to evoke the prosaic nature of the event.



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

View the Map


Slavery in the South


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)
Grea tL 
 a s ke

Boston
N.Y.
MASS. R.I. CONN.

MISSOURI TERRITORY

 PA.

New York


Philadelphia
 ILL.

N.J.


 MD.

 IND.

 DEL.

D.C.


Cincinnati


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

VA. KY. N.C. TENN. ARKANSAS TERRITORY

S.C.


Charleston
 MISS.

 ALA.

 GA.

 More than 50% slave 10% to 50% slave

NEW SPAIN

 LA.

 Less than 10% slave

New Orleans


Gulf of Mexico


 No slaves, or no statistics available



 500 miles 500 kilometers

SLAVE CONCENTRATION, 1820

 In 1820, most slaves lived in the eastern seaboard states of Virginia and South Carolina and in Louisiana on the Gulf of Mexico.

The Internal Slave Trade
 Tobacco, the original plantation crop of the colonial period, continued to be the principal slave-cultivated commodity of the upper tier of southern states during the pre–Civil War era. But markets were often depressed, and profitable tobacco cultivation was hard to sustain for very long in one place because the crop rapidly depleted the soil. During the lengthy depression of the tobacco market that lasted from the 1820s to the 1850s, tobacco farmers in Virginia and Maryland experimented with fertilizer use, crop rotation, and diversified farming, all of which increased the need for capital but reduced the demand for labor. As slave prices rose (because of high demand in the lower South) and demand for slaves in the upper South fell, the “internal” slave trade took off. Increasingly, the most profitable business for slaveholders in Virginia, Kentucky, Maryland, and the Carolinas was selling “surplus” slaves from the upper South to regions of the lower South, where staple crop production was more profitable. This interstate slave trade sent an estimated six to seven hundred thousand slaves in a southwesterly direction between 1815 and 1860. Historian Michael Tadman estimates that the chances of a slave child in the Upper South in the 1820s being “sold South” by 1860 were as high as 30 percent. Such sales were wrenching, not only splitting families, but making it especially unlikely that the slaves sold would ever see friends or family again.

 Some economic historians have concluded that the most important crop produced in the tobacco kingdom was not the “stinking weed” but human beings cultivated for the auction block. Respectable planters did not like to think of themselves as raising slaves for market, but few would refuse to sell some of their “people” if they needed money to get out of debt or make expensive improvements. For the region as a whole, the slave trade provided a crucial source of capital in a period of transition and innovation. Nevertheless, the fact that slave labor was declining in importance in the upper South meant the peculiar institution had a weaker hold on public loyalty there than in the cotton states. Diversification of agriculture was accompanied by a more rapid rate of urban and industrial development than was occurring elsewhere in the South. As a result, Virginians, Marylanders, and Kentuckians were seriously divided on whether their ultimate future lay with the Deep South’s plantation economy or with the industrializing free-labor system that was flourishing just north of their borders.

The Rise of the Cotton Kingdom
 The warmer climate and good soils of the lower tier of southern states made it possible to raise crops more naturally suited than tobacco or cereals to the plantation form of agriculture and the heavy use of slave labor. Since the colonial or revolutionary

Slavery and the Southern Economy




BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)
Grea MINN. 
 MICH.

NEBRASKA TERR.

Milwaukee


 IOWA

Chicago


Des Moines


N.Y.


MASS. R.I.

Buffalo


 PA.

Cleveland
Fort
Wayne


Harrisburg


 CONN.

Pittsburgh
Columbus


New York
Philadelphia


 OHIO

N.J.
 DEL.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Springfield Indianapolis Washington, D.C. MD.
Cincinnati
VA.
Richmond ILL. IND. Louisville St. Louis Norfolk 
 KY.

 MO.

Evansville


New Bern


N.C.


TENN. UNORGANIZED TERR.

Boston


Detroit


Cairo


NEW MEXICO TERR.

N.H.
Portland 

Toronto


KANSAS
Topeka TERR. 
 ME.

 VT.

 WIS.

Minneapolis


UTAH TERR.

Montreal


 t L ak e s

D
ZE NI . R

UN OR G TE A R

S.C.


ARK.
Atlanta 
 MISS.

 ALA.

 More than 50% slave

Charleston


 GA.

 10% to 50% slave

Jackson


 LA.

Mobile


TEXAS
Port Arthur 
 Less than 10% slave

Jacksonville


 No slaves, or no statistics available

New Orleans


 FLA.

 Main routes of the Underground Railroad

Gulf of Mexico




 500 miles 500 kilometers

SLAVE CONCENTRATION, 1860
In 1860, slavery had extended throughout the southern states, with the greatest concentrations of slaves in the states of the Deep South. There were also sizable slave populations in the new states of Missouri, Arkansas, Texas, and Florida. periods, rice and a special long-staple variety of fine cotton had been grown profitably on vast estates along the coast of South Carolina and Georgia. In lower Louisiana, between New Orleans and Baton Rouge, sugar was the cash crop. As in the West Indies, sugar production required a large investment and a great deal of backbreaking labor: in other words, large, well-financed plantations and small armies of slave laborers. Cultivation of rice, longstaple cotton, and sugar was limited by natural conditions to peripheral, semitropical areas. It was the rise of short-staple cotton as the South’s major crop that strengthened the hold of slavery and the plantation on the southern economy. Short-staple cotton differed from the long-staple variety in two important ways: Its bolls contained seeds that were much more difficult to extract by hand, and it could be grown almost anywhere south of Virginia and Kentucky—the main requirement was a guarantee of two hundred frost-free days. Before the 1790s, the seed extraction problem had prevented short-staple cotton from becoming a major market crop. The invention of the cotton gin in 1793 resolved that difficulty, however, and the subsequent westward expansion opened vast areas for cotton cultivation. Unlike rice and sugar, cotton could be grown on small farms as well as on plantations. But large planters enjoyed certain advantages that made them the main producers. Only relatively large operators could afford their own gins or possessed the capital to acquire the fertile bottomlands that brought the highest yields. They also had lower transportation costs because they were able 
 to monopolize land along rivers and streams that were the South’s natural arteries of transportation. The first major cotton-producing regions were inland areas of Georgia and South Carolina, but the center of production shifted rapidly westward during the nineteenth century. By the 1830s, Alabama and Mississippi had surpassed Georgia and South Carolina as cotton-growing states. By the 1850s, Arkansas, northwest Louisiana, and east Texas were the most prosperous and rapidly growing plantation regions. The rise in total production that accompanied this geographic expansion was phenomenal. Between 1792 and 1817, the South’s output of cotton rose from about 13,000 bales to 461,000; by 1840, it was 1.35 million; and in 1860, production peaked at the colossal figure of 4.8 million bales. Most of the cotton went to supply the booming textile industry of Great Britain. Lesser proportions went to the manufacturers of continental Europe and the northeastern United States. “Cotton is king!” proclaimed a southern orator in the 1850s, and he was right. By that time, three-quarters of the world’s supply of cotton came from the American South, and this single commodity accounted for more than half the total dollar value of American exports. Cotton growing and the network of commercial and industrial enterprises that marketed and processed the crop constituted the most important economic interest in the United States on the eve of the Civil War. Since slavery and cotton seemed inextricably linked, it appeared obvious to many Southerners that their peculiar institution was the keystone of national wealth and economic progress.



 CHAPTER 11

SLAVES AND MASTERS

 However, the rise of the Cotton Kingdom did not bring a uniform or steady prosperity to the lower South. Many planters worked the land until it was exhausted and then took their slaves westward to richer soils, leaving depressed and ravaged areas in their wake. Planters were also beset and sometimes ruined by fluctuations in markets and prices. Boom periods and flush times were followed by falling prices and waves of bankruptcies. The great periods of expansion and bonanza profits were 1815–1819, 1832–1837, and 1849–1860. The first two booms were deflated by a fall in cotton prices resulting from overproduction and depressed market conditions. During the eleven years of rising output and high prices preceding the Civil War, however, the planters gradually forgot their earlier troubles and began to imagine they were immune to future economic disasters. Despite the insecurities associated with cotton production, most of the time the crop represented the Old South’s best chance for profitable investment. Prudent planters who had not borrowed too heavily during flush times could survive periods of depression by cutting costs, making their plantations self-sufficient by shifting acreage away from cotton, and planting subsistence crops. For those with worn-out land, two options existed: They could sell their land and move west, or they could sell their slaves to raise capital for fertilization, crop rotation, and other improvements that could help them survive where they were. Hence planters had little incentive to seek alternatives to slavery, the plantation, and dependence on a single cash crop. From a purely economic point of view, they had every reason to defend slavery and to insist on their right to expand it.

Slavery and Industrialization
 As the sectional quarrel with the North intensified, Southerners became increasingly alarmed by their region’s lack of economic self-sufficiency. Dependence on the North for capital, marketing facilities, and manufactured goods was seen as evidence of a dangerous subservience to “external” economic interests. Southern nationalists such as J. D. B. DeBow, editor of the influential DeBow’s Review, called during the 1850s for the South to develop its own industries, commerce, and shipping. As a fervent defender of slavery, DeBow did not believe such diversification would require a massive shift to free wage labor. He saw no reason for slaves not to be used as the main workforce in an industrial revolution. But his call for a diversified economy went unanswered. Men with capital were doing too well in plantation agriculture to risk their money in other ventures. It is difficult to determine whether the main factor that kept most slaves working on plantations and farms was some inherent characteristic of slavery as a labor system or simply the strong market demand for cotton and the South’s capacity to meet it. A minority of slaves—about 5 percent during the 1850s—were, in fact, successfully employed in industrial tasks such as mining, construction, and mill work. In the 1840s and 1850s, a debate raged among white capitalists over whether the South should use free whites or enslaved blacks as the labor supply for industry. William Gregg of South Carolina, the foremost promoter of cotton mills in the Old South, defended a white labor policy, arguing that factory work would provide new economic opportunities for a degraded

 class of poor whites. But other advocates of industrialization feared that the growth of a free working class would lead to social conflict among whites and preferred using slaves for all supervised manual labor. In practice, some factories employed slaves, others white workers, and a few even experimented with integrated workforces. It is clear, however, that the union of slavery and cotton that was central to the South’s prosperity impeded industrialization and left the region dependent on a one-crop agriculture and on the North for capital and marketing.

The “Profitability” Issue
 Some Southerners were making money, and a great deal of it, using slave labor to raise cotton. The great mansions of the Alabama “black belt” and the lower Mississippi could not have been built if their owners had not been successful. But did slavery yield a good return for the great majority of slaveholders who were not large planters? Did it provide the basis for general prosperity and a relatively high standard of living for the southern population in general, or at least for the two-thirds of it who were white and free? These questions have been hotly debated by economic historians. Some knowledge of the main arguments regarding its “profitability” is helpful to an understanding of the South’s attachment to slavery. For many years, historians believed that slave-based agriculture was, on the average, not very lucrative. Planters’ account books seemed to show at best a modest return on investment. In the 1850s, the price of slaves rose at a faster rate than the price of cotton, allegedly squeezing many operators. Some historians even concluded that slavery was a dying institution by the time of the Civil War. Profitability, they argued, depended on access to new and fertile land suitable for plantation agriculture, and virtually all such land within the limits of the United States had already been taken up by 1860. Hence slavery had allegedly reached its natural limits of expansion and was on the verge of becoming so unprofitable that it would fall of its own weight in the near future. A more recent interpretation, based on modern economic theory, holds that slavery was in fact still an economically sound institution in 1860 and showed no signs of imminent decline. A reexamination of planters’ records using modern accounting methods shows that during the 1850s, planters could normally expect an annual return of 8 to 10 percent on capital invested. This yield was roughly equivalent to the best that could then be obtained from the most lucrative sectors of northern industry and commerce. Furthermore, it is no longer clear that plantation agriculture had reached its natural limits of expansion by 1860. Production in Texas had not yet peaked, and construction of railroads and levees was opening up new areas for cotton growing elsewhere in the South. With the advantage of hindsight, economic historians have pointed out that improvements in transportation and flood control would enable the post–Civil War South to double its cotton acreage. Those who now argue that slavery was profitable and had an expansive future have made a strong and convincing case. But the larger question remains: What sort of economic development did a slave plantation system foster? The system may have made slaveholders wealthy, but did the benefits trickle down to the rest of the population—to the majority of whites who owned no slaves and to the slaves themselves? Did it promote

Conclusion: Worlds in Conflict


 efficiency and progressive change? Economists Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman have argued that the plantation’s success was due to an internally efficient enterprise with good managers and industrious, well-motivated workers. Other economic historians have attributed the profitability almost exclusively to favorable market conditions. Large plantation owners were the only segment of the population to enjoy the full benefits of the slave economy. Small slaveholders and nonslaveholders shared only to a very limited extent in the bonanza profits of the cotton economy. Because of various insecurities—lack of credit, high transportation costs, and a greater vulnerability to market fluctuations—they had to devote a larger share of their acreage to subsistence crops, especially corn and hogs, than did the planters. They were thus able to survive, but their standard of living was lower than that of most northern farmers. Slaves received sufficient food, clothing, and shelter for their subsistence and to make them capable of working well enough to keep the plantation afloat economically, but their living standard was below that of the poorest free people in the United States. It was proslavery propaganda rather than documented fact, to maintain that slaves were better off than northern wage laborers. The South’s economic development was skewed in favor of a single route to wealth, open only to the minority possessing both a white skin and access to capital. The concentration of capital and business energies on cotton production foreclosed the kind of diversified industrial and commercial growth that would have provided wider opportunities. Thus, in comparison to the industrializing North, the South was an underdeveloped region in which much of the population had little incentive to work hard. A lack of public education for whites and the denial of even minimal literacy



 to slaves represented a critical failure to develop human resources. The South’s economy was probably condemned so long as it was based on slavery.

Conclusion: Worlds in Conflict
 If slaves lived to some extent in a separate and distinctive world of their own, so did planters, less affluent whites, and even free blacks. The Old South was thus a deeply divided society. The northern traveler Frederick Law Olmsted, who made three journeys through the slave states in the 1850s, provided a vivid sense of how diverse in outlook and circumstances southern people could be. Visiting a great plantation, he watched the slaves stop working as soon as the overseer turned away; on a small farm, he saw a slave and his owner working in the fields together. Treatment of slaves, he found, ranged from humane paternalism to flagrant cruelty. Olmsted heard nonslaveholding whites damn the planters as “cotton snobs” but also talk about blacks as “niggars” and express fear of interracial marriages if slaves were freed. He received hospitality from poor whites living in crowded one-room cabins as well as from fabulously wealthy planters in pillared mansions, and he found life in the backcountry radically different from that in the plantation belts. He showed that the South was a kaleidoscope of groups divided by class, race, culture, and geography. What held it together and provided some measure of unity were a booming plantation economy and a web of customary relationships and loyalties that could obscure the underlying cleavages and antagonisms. The fractured and fragile nature of this society would soon become apparent when it was subjected to the pressures of civil war.



 CHAPTER 11

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 11 Slaves and Masters on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1793
Eli Whitney invents the cotton gin 1800 Gabriel Prosser leads abortive slave rebellion in 
 1837 Panic of 1837 is followed by major depression of the

Virginia
 1811 Slaves revolt in Point Coupée section of Louisiana 1822 Denmark Vesey conspiracy uncovered in Charleston, South Carolina 1829 David Walker publishes Appeal calling for slave insurrection 1830 First National Negro Convention meets 1831 Slaves under Nat Turner rebel in Virginia, killing almost sixty whites 1832 Virginia legislature votes against gradual emancipation 1835–1842 Blacks fight alongside Indians in the Second Seminole War



 cotton market Frederick Douglass publishes the North Star, a black antislavery newspaper Cotton prices rise, and a sustained boom commences Group of free blacks rescues escaped slave Shadrack from federal authorities in Boston Harriet Beecher Stowe’s antislavery novel Uncle Tom’s Cabin is published and becomes a best seller Hinton R. Helper attacks slavery on economic grounds in The Impending Crisis of the South; the book is suppressed in the southern states Cotton prices and production reach all-time peak

CHAPTER REVIEW
The Divided Society of the Old South MICH. ukee hicago 
Buff


Detroit
Cleveland
Fort
Wayne


P
Harris


Pittsb
Columbus


 OHIO

 What were the divisions within black society in the Old South?

 pringfield Indianapolis Washington, D Cincinnati VA Rich ILL. IND. Louisville

 Most African Americans in the Old South were slaves who worked on plantations and farms as agricultural laborers, domestic servants, and skilled craftsmen. Although slave servants and craftsmen enjoyed higher status than field hands, all southern blacks, even the six percent who were free, suffered from racial prejudice and severe legal inequality. (p. 248) KY.

Evansville


N


 airo

 TENN.

N


White Society in the Antebellum South
 What divided and united white southern society? While great planters were a tiny minority of the population, they set the tone for white southern society, propagating the ideology of “paternalism,” that slaves were children who required a stern but loving parent. Most whites owned few or no slaves, but a political system of “white man’s democracy” and the ideology of white supremacy united them with large slaveholders. (p. 256)

Slavery and the Southern Economy
The World of Southern Blacks
 What factors made living conditions for southern blacks more or less difficult? Living conditions were difficult because slaves performed many types of labor. Some worked from sunup to sundown in gangs; others maintained more work control through the “task system”; urban slaves and free blacks had more autonomy. Family and community helped ease slave life, while some slaves resisted oppression by running away, sabotage, and even armed rebellion. (p. 248)

 How was slavery related to economic success in the South? Slavery dominated the economy of the South: Tobacco gave way to the internal slave trade as the biggest business in the upper South, while the cotton gin made large-scale staple agriculture a booming economic machine in the Deep South, fueling the growth of a world textile industry and enriching the planter class. (p. 261)

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Old South The term refers to the slaveholding states between 1830 and 1860, when slave labor and cotton production dominated the economies of the southern states. This period is also known as the “antebellum era.” p. 248 
 Yeoman farmers Southern small landholders who owned no slaves, and who lived primarily in the foothills of the Appalachian and Ozark mountains. They were self-reliant and grew mixed crops, although they usually did not produce a substantial amount to be sold on the market. p. 258

 Vesey conspiracy An unsuccessful 1822 plot to burn Charleston, South Carolina, and initiate a general slave revolt, led by a free African American, Denmark Vesey. p. 254

 American Colonization Society Founded in 1817, the society advocated the relocation of free blacks and freed slaves to the African colony of Monrovia, present-day Liberia. p. 260

 Underground Railroad A network of safe houses organized by abolitionists (usually free blacks) to help slaves escape to the North or Canada. p. 254

 Cotton gin Invented by Eli Whitney in 1793, this device for separating the seeds from the fibers of short-staple cotton enabled a slave to clean fifty times more cotton as by hand, which reduced production costs and gave new life to slavery in the South. p. 263

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
Do you think the booming cotton economy benefited all members of southern society, or only certain segments? 
 2. What difference did it make in a slave’s life if he or she belonged to a

 3. What do you think is the connection between slavery and racism? Why did slaveholders begin defending slavery in racial terms in the 1830s?

 great planter or to a small farmer?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 11 on MyHistoryLab The Divided Society of the Old South

White Society in the Antebellum South


◾


◾


Read the Document
 p. 247

Confessions of Nat Turner (1831)


Read the Document
 p. 260

The World of Southern Blacks
 Overseer’s Report from Chicora Read the Document Wood Plantation p. 250 Read the Document Mother” p. 251 Listen to the Audio File Yonder p. 254

◾


◾


View the Closer Look
Virginia p. 261


When the Roll is Called up


◾


View the Map


Underground Railroad p. 255


Poem, “The Slave Auction”


Slavery and the Southern Economy


Frances E.W. Harper, “The Slave


Complete the Assignment Harriet Jacobs and Maria
Norcom: Women of Southern Households p. 252
Watch the Video


George Fitzhugh,
Read the Document
The Blessings of Slavery (1857) p. 259


Slave Auction in Richmond,


Slavery in the South p. 262


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




The Pursuit of Perfection


Contents and Learning Objectives
THE RISE OF EVANGELICALISM PG. 269

REFORM TURNS RADICAL PG. 278

 How did the evangelical revivalism of the early nineteenth century spur reform movements?

 What were some of the major antebellum reform movements? ◾ FEATURE ESSAY The War Against “Demon Drink”

DOMESTICITY AND CHANGES IN THE AMERICAN FAMILY PG. 273

LAW AND SOCIETY
The Legal Rights of Married Women: Reforming the Law of Coverture 
 What was the doctrine of “separate spheres,” and how did it change family life?

INSTITUTIONAL REFORM PG. 276
How did Horace Mann change ideas about public schooling in America? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

Chapter 12 The Pursuit of Perfection


Redeeming the Middle Class
 In the winter of 1830 to 1831, a wave of religious revivals swept the northern states. The most dramatic and successful took place in Rochester, New York. Large audiences, composed mostly of respectable and prosperous citizens, heard Presbyterian evangelist Charles G. Finney preach that every man or woman had the power to choose Christ and a godly life. Finney broke with his church’s traditional belief that it was God’s inscrutable will that decided who would be saved when he preached that “sinners ought to be made to feel that they have something to do, and that something is to repent. That is something that no other being can do for them, neither God nor man, and something they can do and do now.” For six months, Finney held prayer meetings almost daily, putting intense pressure on those who had not experienced salvation. Hundreds came forth to declare their faith, and church membership doubled during his stay. The newly awakened Christians of Rochester were urged to convert relatives, neighbors, and employees. If enough people enlisted in the evangelical crusade, Finney proclaimed, the millennium would be achieved within months. Finney’s call for religious and moral renewal fell on fertile ground in Rochester. The bustling boomtown on the Erie Canal was suffering from severe growing pains

 and tensions arising from rapid economic development. Leading families were divided into quarreling factions, and workers were threatening to break free from the control their employers had previously exerted over their daily lives. Most of the early converts were from the middle class. Businessmen who had been heavy drinkers and irregular churchgoers now abstained from alcohol and went to church at least twice a week. They also pressured the employees in their workshops, mills, and stores to do likewise. More rigorous standards of proper behavior and religious conformity unified Rochester’s elite and increased its ability to control the rest of the community. As in other cities swept by the revival, evangelical Protestantism provided the middle class with a stronger sense of identity and purpose. ut the war on sin was not always so unifying. Among those converted in Rochester and elsewhere were some who could not rest easy until the nation as a whole conformed to the pure Christianity of the Sermon on the Mount. Finney expressed such a hope himself, but he concentrated on religious conversion and moral uplift of the individual, trusting that the purification of American society and politics would automatically follow. Other religious and moral reformers were inspired to crusade against those social and political institutions that failed to measure up to the standards of Christian perfection. They proceeded to attack such collective “sins” as the liquor traffic, war, slavery, and even government.

B


Jeremiah Paul, Revival Meeting


 Religiously inspired reformism cut two ways. On the one hand, it imposed a new order and cultural unity to previously divided and troubled communities like Rochester. But it also inspired a variety of more radical movements that threatened to undermine established institutions that failed to live up to the principles of the more idealistic reformers. One of these movements—abolitionism—challenged the central social and economic institution of the southern states and helped trigger political upheaval and civil war.

The Rise of Evangelicalism
 How did the evangelical revivalism of the early nineteenth century spur reform movements? American Protestantism was in a state of constant ferment during the early nineteenth century. The separation of church and state, a process that began during the Revolution, was now complete. Government sponsorship and funding had ended, or would soon end, for the established churches of the colonial era, such as the Congregationalists of New England and the Episcopalians of the South. Dissenting groups, such as Baptists and Methodists, welcomed full religious freedom because it offered a better chance to win new converts. All pious Protestants, however,

 worried about the spread of “infidelity”—a term they applied to Catholics, freethinkers, Unitarians, Mormons, and any nonevangelical Christian. But they faced opposition to their effort to make the nation officially Protestant. Secular ideas drawn from the Enlightenment of the late eighteenth century had achieved wide acceptance as a basis for the establishment of a democratic republic, and opposition to mixing religion with public life remained strong during the age of Jackson. As deism—the belief in a God who expressed himself through natural laws accessible to human reason—declined in popularity in the early to mid-nineteenth century, Catholic immigration increased, and the spread of popery became the main focus of evangelical concern. Both Catholics and Unitarians (who quietly carried forward the rationalistic traditions of the eighteenth century) resented and resisted the evangelicals’ efforts to convert them to “the Christianity of the heart.” Most of those who accepted Christ as their personal savior in revival meetings previously had been indifferent to religion rather than adhering to an alternative set of beliefs. Revivalism proved to be a very effective means to extend religious values and build up church membership. The Great Awakening of the mid-eighteenth century had shown the wonders that evangelists could accomplish, and new revivalists repeated this success by greatly increasing membership in Protestant churches.



 CHAPTER 12

THE PURSUIT OF PERFECTION

 They also capitalized on the growing willingness of Americans to form voluntary organizations. Spiritual renewals were often followed by mobilization of the faithful into associations to spread the gospel and reform American morals. According to some historians, evangelical revival and the reform movements it inspired reflected the same spirit as the new democratic politics. In a sense this is true: Jacksonian politicians and evangelists both sought popular favor and assumed that individuals were free agents capable of self-direction and self-improvement. But leaders of the two types of movements made different kinds of demands on ordinary people. Jacksonians idealized common folk as they found them and saw no danger to the community if individuals pursued their worldly interests. Evangelical reformers, who tended to support the Whigs or to reject both parties, believed that the common people, and not just the elite, needed to be redeemed and uplifted—committed to a higher goal than self-interest. The republic would be safe, they insisted, only if a right-minded minority preached, taught, and agitated until the mass of ordinary citizens was reborn into a higher life.

The Second Great Awakening:
The Frontier Phase
 The Second Great Awakening began on the southern frontier around the turn of the century. In 1801, a crowd estimated at nearly fifty thousand gathered at Cane Ridge, Kentucky. According to a contemporary observer: The noise was like the roar of Niagara. The vast sea of human beings seemed to be agitated as if by a storm. I counted seven ministers all preaching at once . . . . Some of the people were singing, others praying, some crying for mercy . . . while others were shouting most vociferously . . . . At one time I saw at least five hundred swept down in a moment, as if a battery of a thousand guns had been opened upon them, and then followed immediately shrieks and shouts that rent the heavens. Highly emotional camp meetings, organized usually by Methodists or Baptists but sometimes by Presbyterians, became a regular feature of religious life in the South and the lower Midwest. On the frontier, the camp meeting met social as well as religious needs. In the sparsely settled southern backcountry, it was difficult to sustain local churches with regular ministers. Methodists solved part of the problem by sending out circuit riders. Baptists licensed uneducated farmers to preach to their neighbors. But for many people, the only way to get baptized or married or to have a communal religious experience was to attend a camp meeting. Rowdies and scoffers also attended, drinking whiskey, carousing, and fornicating on the fringes of the small city of tents and wagons. Sometimes they were “struck down” by a mighty blast from the pulpit. Evangelists loved to tell stories of such conversions or near conversions. According to Methodist preacher Peter Cartwright, one scoffer was seized by the “jerks”—a set of involuntary bodily movements often observed at camp meetings. Normally such an exercise would lead to conversion, but this particular sinner was so hard-hearted that he refused to surrender to God. The result was that he kept jerking until his neck was broken. Camp meetings provided an emotional outlet for rural people whose everyday lives were often lonely and tedious. They could also

 promote a sense of community and social discipline. Conversion at a camp meeting could be a rite of passage, signifying that a young man or woman had outgrown wild or antisocial behavior and was now ready to become a respectable member of the community. In the southern states, Baptists and Presbyterians eventually deemphasized camp meetings in favor of “protracted meetings” in local churches, which featured guest preachers holding forth day after day for up to two weeks. Southern evangelical churches, especially Baptist and Methodist, grew rapidly in membership and influence during the first half of the nineteenth century and became the focus of community life in rural areas. Although they fostered societies to improve morals—to encourage temperance and discourage dueling, for example—they generally shied away from social reform. The conservatism of a slaveholding society discouraged radical efforts to change the world.

The Second Great Awakening
 in the North Reformist tendencies were more evident in the distinctive kind of revivalism that originated in New England and western New York. Northern evangelists were mostly Congregationalists and Presbyterians, strongly influenced by New England Puritan traditions. Their greatest successes were not in rural or frontier areas but in small- to medium-sized towns and cities. Their revivals could be stirring affairs but were less extravagantly emotional than the camp meetings of the South. Northern evangelists formed societies devoted to the redemption of the human race in general and American society in particular. The reform movement in New England began as an effort to defend Calvinism against the liberal views of religion fostered by the Enlightenment. The Reverend Timothy Dwight, who became president of Yale College in 1795, was alarmed by the younger generation’s growing acceptance of the belief that the Deity was the benevolent master architect of a rational universe rather than an all-powerful, mysterious God. Dwight was particularly disturbed by those religious liberals whose rationalism reached the point of denying the doctrine of the Trinity and who proclaimed themselves to be “Unitarians.” To Dwight’s horror, Unitarians captured some fashionable and sophisticated New England congregations and even won control of the Harvard Divinity School. He fought back by preaching to Yale undergraduates that they were “dead in sin” and succeeded in provoking a series of campus revivals. But the harshness and pessimism of orthodox Calvinist doctrine, with its stress on original sin and predestination, had limited appeal in a republic committed to human freedom and progress. A younger generation of Congregational ministers reshaped New England Puritanism to increase its appeal to people who shared the prevailing optimism about human capabilities. The main theologian of early nineteenth-century neo-Calvinism was Nathaniel Taylor, a disciple of Dwight, who also held forth at Yale. Taylor softened the doctrine of predestination almost out of existence by contending that every individual was a free agent who had the ability to overcome a natural inclination to sin. The first great practitioner of the new evangelical Calvinism was Lyman Beecher, another of Dwight’s pupils. In the period just before and after the War of 1812, Beecher helped promote a

The Rise of Evangelicalism


View the Closer Look




Methodist Camp Meeting, 1819


 The Second Great Awakening swept across the United States in the early decades of the 19th century, bringing religious camp meetings such as the one depicted here to rural and urban areas alike. Held outdoors, these gatherings allowed huge audiences to share in a highly emotional experience as they expressed their faith.

 series of revivals in the Congregational churches of New England. Using his own homespun version of Taylor’s doctrine of free agency, Beecher induced thousands to acknowledge their sinfulness and surrender to God. During the late 1820s, Beecher was forced to confront the new and more radical form of revivalism being practiced in western New York by Charles G. Finney. Upstate New York was a seedbed for religious enthusiasms of various kinds. A majority of its population were transplanted New Englanders who had left behind their close-knit village communities and ancestral churches but not their Puritan consciences. Troubled by rapid economic changes and the social dislocations that went with them, they were ripe for a new faith and a fresh moral direction. Although he worked within Congregational and Presbyterian churches (which were then cooperating under a plan of union established in 1804), Finney departed radically from Calvinist doctrines. In his hands, free agency became unqualified free will. One of his sermons was titled “Sinners Bound to Change Their Own Hearts.” Finney was relatively indifferent to theological issues. His appeal was to emotion rather than to doctrine or reason.

 He wanted converts to feel the power of Christ and become new men and women. He eventually adopted the extreme view that redeemed Christians could be totally free of sin—as perfect as their Father in Heaven. Beginning in 1823, Finney conducted a series of highly successful revivals in towns and cities of western New York, culminating in the aforementioned triumph in Rochester in 1830–1831. Finney sought instantaneous conversions through a variety of new and controversial methods. These included holding protracted meetings that lasted all night or several days in a row, placing an “anxious bench” in front of the congregation where those in the process of repentance could receive special attention, and encouraging women to pray publicly for the souls of male relatives. The results could be dramatic. Sometimes listeners fell to the floor in fits of excitement. “If I had had a sword in my hand,” Finney recalled, “I could not have cut them off as fast as they fell.” Although he appealed to emotion, Finney had a practical, almost manipulative, attitude toward the conversion process: It “is not a miracle or dependent on a miracle in any sense . . . . It is purely a philosophical result of the right use of constituted means.”



 CHAPTER 12

THE PURSUIT OF PERFECTION

 outgoing Christianity was being advanced, not one that called for withdrawal from a sinRead the Document Lyman Beecher, “Six Sermons on ful world. Most of the converts of northern Intemperance” (1828) revivalism were middle-class citizens already active in the lives of their communities. They were seeking to adjust to the bustling world of the market revolution without violating their traditional moral and social values. Their generally optimistic and forward-looking attitudes led to hopes that a wave of conversions would save the nation and the world. In New England, Beecher and his evangelical associates established a great network of missionary and benevolent societies. In 1810, Presbyterians and Congregationalists founded a Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions and soon dispatched two missionaries to India. In 1816, the Reverend Samuel John Mills took the leading role in organizing the American Bible Society. By 1821, the society had distributed one hundred forty thousand Bibles, mostly in parts of the West where churches and clergymen were scarce. Another major effort went into publication and distribution of religious tracts, mainly by the American Tract Society, founded in 1825. Special societies targeted groups beyond the reach of regular churches, such as seamen, Native Americans, and The Beecher family, shown here in a photograph by Mathew Brady, contributed four influential memthe urban poor. In 1816 to 1817, middlebers to the reform movement. Lyman Beecher (seated center) was a successful preacher and a master class women in New York, Philadelphia, strategist in the organized campaign against sin and “infidelity.” His eldest daughter, Catharine (on his right), was a leader in the movement supporting higher education for women. Another daughter, Harriet Charleston, and Boston formed societies (seated far right), wrote the novel Uncle Tom’s Cabin. Lyman’s son, Henry Ward Beecher (standing far to spread the gospel in lower-class wards— right), was an ardent antislavery advocate and later became one of the most celebrated preachers of where, as one of their missionaries put it, the post–Civil War era. He also became involved in a notorious scandal and trial. there was “a great mass of people beyond the restraints of religion.” Lyman Beecher and eastern evangelicals were disturbed by Evangelicals founded moral reform societies as well as misFinney’s new methods and by the emotionalism that accompasions. Some of these aimed at curbing irreligious activity on the nied them. They were also upset because he violated long-standing Sabbath; others sought to stamp out dueling, gambling, and prostiChristian tradition by allowing women to pray aloud in church. tution. In New York in 1831, a zealous young clergyman published An evangelical summit meeting between Beecher and Finney, held a sensational report claiming there were ten thousand prostitutes at New Lebanon, New York, in 1827, failed to reach agreement on in the city. As a result of this exposé, an asylum was established for this and other issues. Beecher even threatened to stand on the state the redemption of “abandoned women.” When middle-class women line if Finney attempted to bring his crusade into Connecticut. But became involved in this crusade, they shifted its focus to the men it soon became clear that Finney was not merely stirring people who patronized prostitutes, and they proposed that teams of observto temporary peaks of excitement; he also was leaving strong and ers record and publish the names of men seen entering brothels. The active churches behind him, and eastern opposition gradually plan was abandoned because it offended those who thought the cause weakened. Finney eventually founded a tabernacle in New York of virtue would be better served by suppressing public discussion and City that became a rallying point for evangelical efforts to reach the investigation of sexual vices. urban masses. Beecher was especially influential in the temperance movement, the most successful reform crusade; his published sermons were the most important and widely distributed of the early From Revivalism to Reform tracts calling for total abstinence from “demon rum.” The temperance The northern wing of the Second Great Awakening, unlike the movement was directed at a real social evil. Since the Revolution, whissouthern, inspired a great movement for social reform. Converts key had become the most popular American beverage. Made from were organized into voluntary associations that sought to stamp corn by individual farmers or, by the 1820s, in commercial distilleries, out sin and social evil and win the world for Christ. An activist and it was cheaper than milk or beer and safer than water (which was

Domesticity and Changes in the American Family


Watch the Video


Drinking and the Temperance Movement in
Nineteenth-Century America




 their nurturing duties with great seriousness and self-consciousness. Women—regarded as particularly susceptible to religious and moral influences—were increasingly confined to the domestic circle, but they assumed a greater importance within it.

Marriage for Love
 In the early nineteenth century, a new ideal of marriage for love arose among the American middle class. Many nineteenth- century Americans placed new value on ties of affection among family members, especially a married couple joined by romantic love. Parents now exercised even less control over their children’s selection of mates than they had in the colonial period. The desire to protect family property and maintain social status remained strong, but mutual affection was now considered absolutely essential to a proper union. Beginning in the late eighteenth century, romantic novels popularized the idea that marriage should be based exclusively on love. It became easier for sons to marry while their fathers were still alive and for younger daughters to wed before their older sisters—trends that reflected a weakening of the Drinking alcohol was a regular part of daily life in nineteenth-century America, at work, at home, and at social gatherings. But the anti-alcohol, or “temperance” movement gained steam in the traditional parental role. 1830s, especially through portrayals of the negative effects of the “Demon Drink” on women and Correspondence between spouses began to children, as seen above. reflect this new “companionate” ideal. For the most part, eighteenth-century letters had been formal and distant in tone. The husband often assumed a patriaroften contaminated). In some parts of the country, rum and brandy chal role, even using such salutations as “my dear child” and rarely were also popular. Hard liquor was frequently consumed with food as confessing that he missed his wife or craved her company. Letters a table beverage, even at breakfast, and children sometimes imbibed from women to their husbands were highly deferential and did not along with adults. Many evangelical reformers regarded intemperusually give advice or express disapproval. ance as the greatest single obstacle to a republic of God-fearing, selfBy the early nineteenth century, first names, pet names, and disciplined citizens. (For more on the temperance movement, see terms of endearment such as “honey” or “darling” were increasingly the Feature Essay “The War against Demon Drink,” pp. 282–283.) used by both sexes, and absent husbands frequently confessed they Cooperating missionary and reform societies—collectively known as felt lost without their mates. In their replies, wives assumed a more “the benevolent empire”—were a major force in American culture egalitarian tone and offered counsel on a wide range of subjects. by the early 1830s. Efforts to modify American attitudes and instituOne wrote to a husband who had admitted to flirting with pretty tions seemed to be bearing fruit. The middle class was embracing a women that she was more than “a little jealous.” She asked him new ethic of self-control and self-discipline, equipping individuals to angrily how he would feel if she made a similar confession: “Would confront a new world of economic growth and social mobility withit be more immoral in me than in you?” out losing their cultural and moral bearings. The change in middle- and upper-class marriage should not be exaggerated or romanticized. In law, and in cases of conflict between spouses, the husband remained the unchallenged head Domesticity and Changes in the of the household. True independence or equality for women was American Family impossible at a time when men held exclusive legal authority over a couple’s property and children. Divorce was difficult for everyone, What was the doctrine of “separate spheres,” and but the double standard made it easier for husbands than wives to how did it change family life? dissolve a marriage on grounds of adultery. Letters also reveal the strains spouses felt between their ideals of mutual love and the realThe evangelical culture of the 1820s and 1830s influenced the famity of very different gender roles and life paths—husbands away ily as an institution and inspired new conceptions of its role in from home for long periods pursuing financial gain as “self-made American society. Many parents viewed children’s rearing as essenmen,” while women stayed at home in the domestic sphere. tial preparation for self-disciplined Christian life and performed



 CHAPTER 12

THE PURSUIT OF PERFECTION

The Cult of Domesticity


 the Northeast. In towns and cities, the rise of factories and countinghouses severed the home from the workplace. Men went forth every The notion that women belonged in the home while the public morning to work, leaving their wives at home to tend the house and sphere belonged to men has been called the ideology of “separate the children. Married women were therefore increasingly deprived of spheres.” In particular, the view that women had a special role to a productive economic role. The cult of domesticity made a virtue of play in the domestic sphere as guardians of virtue and spiritual the fact that men were solely responsible for running the affairs of the heads of the home has been described as the Cult of Domesticity world and building up the economy. or the “Cult of True Womanhood.” In the view of most men, a A new conception of gender roles justified and glorified this woman’s place was in the home and on a pedestal. The ideal wife pattern. The doctrine of “separate spheres”—as set forth in novels, and mother was “an angel in the house,” a model of piety and virtue advice literature, and the new women’s magazines—sentimentalized who exerted a wholesome moral and religious influence over memthe woman who kept a spotless house, nurtured her children, and bers of the coarser sex. A poem published in 1846 expressed a masoffered her husband a refuge from the heartless world of commerce culine view of the true woman: and industry. From a modern point of view, it is easy to condemn the cult of domesticity as a rationalization for male dominance; to I would have her as pure as the snow on the mount— a considerable extent, it was. Yet the new norm of confinement to As true as the smile that to infancy’s given— the home did not necessarily imply that women were inferior. By the As pure as the wave of the crystalline fount, standards of evangelical culture, women in the domestic sphere Yet as warm in the heart as the sunlight of heaven. could be viewed as superior to men, since women were in a good position to cultivate the “feminine” virtues of love and self-sacrifice The sociological reality behind the Cult of True Womanhood was and thus act as official guardians of religious and moral values. a growing division between the working lives of middle-class men Furthermore, many women used domestic ideology to fashion and women. In the eighteenth century and earlier, most economic a role for themselves in the public sphere. The evangelical moveactivity had been centered in and near the home, and husbands and ment encouraged women’s role as the keepers of moral virtue. The wives often worked together in a common enterprise. By the early to revivals not only gave women a role in converting men but premid-nineteenth century this way of life was declining, especially in sented as the main object of worship a Christ with stereotypical feminine characteristics. A nurturing, loving, merciful savior, mediating between a stern father and his erring chilRead the Document Catharine E. Beecher, from A Treatise dren, provided the model for woman’s new role as spiritual on Domestic Economy head of the home. Membership in evangelical church-based associations inspired and prepared women for new roles as civilizers of men and guardians of domestic culture and morality. Female reform societies taught women the strict ethical code they were to instill in other family members; organized mothers’ groups gave instruction in how to build character and encourage piety in children. While many working-class women read about and aspired to the ideal of True Womanhood, domestic ideology only affected the daily lives of relatively affluent women. Working-class wives were not usually employed outside the home during this period, but they labored long and hard within the household. Besides cleaning, cooking, and taking care of large numbers of children, they often took in washing or piecework to supplement a meager family income. Life was especially hard for African American women. Most of those who were “free Negroes” rather than slaves did not have husbands who made enough to support them, and they were obliged to serve in white households or work long hours at home doing other people’s washing and sewing. In urban areas, unmarried working-class women often lived on their own and toiled as household servants, in the sweatshops of the garment industry, and in factories. Barely able to support themselves and at the mercy of male sexual predators, they were in no position to identify with the middle-class ideal of elevated, protected womanhood. For The sentiment on this sampler, stitched in 1820 by Ruth Titus, typifies beliefs about some of them, the relatively well-paid and gregarious life of woman’s proper role, according to the Cult of True Womanhood. the successful prostitute seemed to offer an attractive alterSource: Collection of The New-York Historical Society, negative number 1941.910. native to a life of loneliness and privation.

Domesticity and Changes in the American Family


 For middle-class women whose husbands or fathers earned a good income, freedom from industrial or farm labor offered some tangible benefits. They now had the leisure to read extensively the new literature directed primarily at housewives, to participate in female-dominated charitable activities, and to cultivate deep and lasting friendships with other women. The result was a distinctively feminine subculture emphasizing “sisterhood” or “sorority.” This growing sense of solidarity with other women and of the importance of sexual identity could transcend the private home and even the barriers of social class. Beginning in the 1820s, urban women of the middle and upper classes organized societies for the relief and rehabilitation of poor or “fallen” women. The aim of the organizations was not economic and political equality with men but the elevation of all women to true womanhood. For some women, the domestic ideal even sanctioned efforts to extend their sphere until it conquered the masculine world outside the home. This domestic feminism was reflected in women’s involvement in crusades to stamp out such masculine sins as intemperance, gambling, and sexual vice. In the benevolent societies and reform movements of the Jacksonian era, especially those designated as women’s organizations, women handled money, organized meetings and public appeals, made contracts, and sometimes even gave orders to male subordinates they could not usually perform in their own households. The desire to extend the feminine sphere was the motivating force behind Catharine Beecher’s campaign to make school teaching a woman’s occupation. A prolific and influential writer on the theory and practice of domesticity, this unmarried daughter of Lyman Beecher saw the spinster-teacher as equivalent to a mother. By instilling in young males the virtues that only women could teach, the schoolmarm could help liberate America from corruption and materialism. But Beecher and other domestic feminists continued to emphasize the role of married women who stayed home and did their part simply by being wives and mothers. Reforming husbands was difficult: They were away much of the time and tended to be preoccupied with business. But this very fact gave women primary responsibility for the rearing of children—an activity to which nineteenth-century Americans attached almost cosmic significance. Since women were considered particularly well qualified to transmit piety and morality to future citizens of the republic, the cult of domesticity exalted motherhood and encouraged a new concern with childhood as the time of life when “character” was formed.

The Discovery of Childhood
 The nineteenth century has been called “the century of the child.” More than before, childhood was seen as a distinct stage of life requiring the special and sustained attention of adults, at least until the age of thirteen or fourteen. The middle-class family now became “child centered,” which meant that the care, nurture, and rearing of children was viewed as the family’s main function. In earlier times, adults treated children in a more casual way, often sending them away from home for education or apprenticeship at a very early age. Among the well to do, children spent more time with servants or tutors than with their parents. By the early decades of the nineteenth century, however, children were staying at home longer and receiving much more



 attention from parents, especially mothers. Much less common was the colonial custom—nearly inconceivable today—of naming a child after a sibling who had died in infancy. Each child was now looked on as a unique and irreplaceable individual. New customs and fashions heralded the “discovery” of childhood. Books aimed specifically at juveniles began to roll off the presses. Parents became more self-conscious about their responsibilities and sought help from a new literature providing expert advice on child rearing. One early nineteenth-century mother wrote, “There is scarcely any subject concerning which I feel more anxiety than the proper education of my children. It is a difficult and delicate subject, the more I feel how much is to be learnt by myself.” The new concern for children resulted in more intimate relations between parents and children. The ideal family described in the advice manuals and sentimental literature was bound together by affection rather than authority. Firm discipline remained at the core of “family government,” but there was a change in the preferred method of enforcing good behavior. Corporal punishment declined, partially displaced by shaming or withholding of affection. Disobedient middle-class children were now more likely to be confined to their rooms to reflect on their sins than to receive a good thrashing. Discipline could no longer be justified as the constant application of physical force over naturally wayward beings. In an age of moral perfectionism, the role of discipline was to induce repentance and change basic attitudes. The intended result was often described as “self-government”; to achieve it, parents used guilt, rather than fear, as their main source of leverage. A mother’s sorrow or a father’s stern and prolonged silence was deemed more effective in forming character than were blows or angry words. Some shared realities of childhood cut across class and ethnic lines. For example, there was a high rate of mortality for infants and young children throughout the nineteenth century. Even wealthy families could expect to lose one child out of five or six before the age of five. But class and region made a big difference to children’s lives. Farm children tended livestock, milked cows, churned butter, scrubbed laundry, harvested crops, and hauled water; working-class urban children did “outwork” in textiles, worked in street markets, and scavenged. One important explanation for the growing focus on childhood is the smaller size of families. For reasons that are still not completely understood, the average number of children born to each woman during her fertile years dropped from 7.04 in 1800 to 5.42 in 1850. As a result, the average number of children per family declined about 25 percent, beginning a long-range trend lasting to the present day. The practice of various forms of birth control undoubtedly contributed to this demographic revolution. Ancestors of the modern condom and diaphragm were openly advertised and sold during the pre–Civil War period, but it is likely that most couples controlled family size by practicing the withdrawal method or limiting the frequency of intercourse. Abortion was also surprisingly common and was on the rise. One historian has estimated that by 1850 there was one abortion for every five or six live births. Parents seemed to understand that having fewer children meant they could provide their offspring with a better start in life. Such attitudes were appropriate in a society that was beginning to shift from agriculture to commerce and industry. For rural



 CHAPTER 12

THE PURSUIT OF PERFECTION

 households short of labor, large families were an economic asset. For urban couples who hoped to send their children into a competitive world that demanded special talents and training, they were a financial liability.

Institutional Reform
 How did Horace Mann change ideas about public schooling in America? The family could not carry the whole burden of socializing and reforming individuals. Children needed schooling as well as parental nurturing, and many were thought to lack a proper home environment. Some adults, too, seemed to require special kinds of attention and treatment. Seeking to extend the advantages of “family government” beyond the domestic circle, reformers worked to establish or improve public institutions that were designed to shape individual character and instill a capacity for self-discipline.

The Extension of Education
 The period from 1820 to 1850 saw an enormous expansion of free public schools. The new resolve to put more children in school for longer periods reflected many of the same values that exalted the child-centered family. Up to a certain age, children could be effectively nurtured and educated in the home. But after that they needed formal training at a character-molding institution that would prepare them to make a living and bear the burdens of republican citizenship. Intellectual training at school was regarded as less important than moral indoctrination. Sometimes the school served as a substitute for the family. Educational reformers were alarmed at the masses of poor and immigrant children who allegedly failed to get proper nurturing at home. It was up to schools to make up for this disadvantage. Otherwise, the republic would be in danger from masses of people “incapable of self-government.” Before the 1820s, schooling in the United States was a haphazard affair. The wealthy sent their children to private schools, and some of the poor sent their children to charity or “pauper” schools that were usually financed in part by local governments. Public education was most highly developed in the New England states, where towns were required by law to support elementary schools. It was weakest in the South, where almost all education was private. Agitation for expanded public education began in the 1820s and early 1830s as a central demand of the workingmen’s movements in eastern cities. These hard-pressed artisans viewed free schools open to all as a way of countering the growing gap between rich and poor. Initially, strong opposition came from more affluent taxpayers who did not see why they should pay for the education of other people’s children. But middle-class reformers soon seized the initiative, shaped educational reform to their own end of social discipline, and provided the momentum needed for legislative success. The most influential supporter of the common school movement was Horace Mann of Massachusetts. As a lawyer and member of the state legislature, Mann worked tirelessly to establish a state board of education and adequate tax support for local schools. In 1837, he persuaded the legislature to enact his proposals, and

 he subsequently resigned his seat to become the first secretary of the new board, an office he held with great distinction until 1848. He believed children were clay in the hands of teachers and school officials and could be molded to a state of perfection. Like advocates of child rearing through moral influence rather than physical force, he discouraged corporal punishment except as a last resort. His position on this issue led to a bitter controversy with Boston schoolmasters who retained a Calvinist sense of original sin and favored a freer use of the rod. Against those who argued that school taxes violated property rights, Mann contended that private property was actually held in trust for the good of the community. “The property of this commonwealth,” he wrote, “is pledged for the education of all its youth up to such a point as will save them from poverty and vice, and prepare them for the adequate performance of their social and civil duties.” Mann’s conception of public education as a means of social discipline converted the middle and upper classes to the cause. By teaching middle-class morality and respect for order, the schools could turn potential rowdies and revolutionaries into law-abiding citizens. They could also encourage social mobility by opening doors for lower-class children who were determined to do better than their parents. In practice, new or improved public schools often alienated working-class pupils and their families rather than reforming them. Compulsory attendance laws in Massachusetts and other states deprived poor families of needed wage earners without guaranteeing new occupational opportunities for those with an elementary education. As the laboring class became increasingly immigrant and Catholic in the 1840s and 1850s, dissatisfaction arose over the evangelical Protestant tone of “moral instruction” in the schools. Quite consciously, Mann and his disciples were trying to impose a uniform culture on people who valued differing traditions. In addition to the “three Rs” (“reading, ‘riting, and ‘rithmetic”), the public schools of the mid-nineteenth century taught the “Protestant ethic”—industry, punctuality, sobriety, and frugality. These were the virtues emphasized in the famous McGuffey’s Eclectic Readers, which first appeared in 1836. Millions of children learned to read by digesting McGuffey’s parables about the terrible fate of those who gave in to sloth, drunkenness, or wastefulness. Such moral indoctrination helped produce generations of Americans with personalities and beliefs adapted to the needs of an industrializing society—people who could be depended on to adjust to the precise and regular routines of the factory or the office. But as an education for self-government—in the sense of learning to think for oneself—it left much to be desired. Fortunately, however, education was not limited to the schools nor devoted solely to children. Every city and almost every town or village had a lyceum, debating society, or mechanics’ institute where adults of all social classes could broaden their intellectual horizons. Lyceums featured discourses on such subjects as “self-reliance” or “the conduct of life” by creative thinkers such as Ralph Waldo Emerson, explanations and demonstrations of the latest scientific discoveries, and debates among members on controversial issues. Young Abraham Lincoln, who had received less than two years of formal schooling as a child in backwoods Indiana, sharpened his intellect in the early 1830s as a member of the New Salem (Illinois) debating society. In 1838, after moving to Springfield, he set forth

Institutional Reform


Watch the Video


Who Was Horace Mann and
Why are So Many Schools Named After Him?


 Horace Mann has been called the father of American public education. He saw schools creating citizens for the new Democratic society in the United States.

 his political principles when he spoke at the local lyceum on “The Perpetuation of Our Political Institutions.” More than the public schools, the lyceums and debating societies fostered independent thought and encouraged new ideas.

Discovering the Asylum
 Some segments of the population were obviously beyond the reach of family government and character training provided in homes and schools. In the 1820s and 1830s, reformers became acutely aware of the danger to society posed by an apparently increasing number of criminals, lunatics, and paupers. Their answer was to establish special institutions to house those deemed incapable of self-discipline. Their goals were humanitarian; they believed reform and rehabilitation were possible in a carefully controlled environment. In earlier times, the existence of paupers, lawbreakers, and insane persons had been taken for granted. Their presence was viewed as the consequence of divine judgment or original sin. For the most part, these people were not isolated from local communities. The insane were allowed to wander about if harmless and were confined at home if they were dangerous; the poor were supported by



 private charity or the dole provided by towns or counties; convicted criminals were whipped, held for limited periods in local jails, or— in the case of very serious offenses—executed. By the early nineteenth century, these traditional methods had come to seem both inadequate and inhumane. Dealing with deviants in a neighborly way broke down as economic development and urbanization made communities less cohesive. At the same time, reformers were concluding that all defects of mind and character were correctable—the insane could be cured, criminals reformed, and paupers taught to pull themselves out of destitution. The result was what historian David Rothman termed “the discovery of the asylum”—the invention and establishment of special institutions for the confinement and reformation of deviants. The 1820s and 1830s saw the emergence of state-supported prisons, insane asylums, and poorhouses. New York and Pennsylvania led the way in prison reform. Institutions at Auburn, New York, and Philadelphia attracted international attention as model penitentiaries, mainly because of their experiments in isolating inmates from one another. Solitary confinement was viewed as a humanitarian and therapeutic policy because it gave inmates a chance to reflect on their sins, free from the corrupting influence of other convicts. In theory, prisons and asylums substituted for the family. Custodians were meant to act as parents, providing moral advice and training. In practice, the institutions were far different from the affectionate families idealized by the cult of domesticity. Most accommodated only a single sex or maintained a strict segregation of male and female inmates. Their most prominent feature was the imposition of a rigid daily routine. The early superintendents and wardens believed the enforcement of a rigorous set of rules and procedures would encourage self-discipline. The French observers Alexis de Tocqueville and Gustave de Beaumont summed up these practical expectations after a tour of American prisons in 1831 and 1832: “The habits or order to which the prisoner is subjected for several years . . . the obedience of every moment to inflexible rules, the regularity of a uniform life . . . are calculated to produce a deep impression upon his mind. Perhaps, leaving the prison he is not an honest man, but he has contracted honest habits.” Prisons, asylums, and poorhouses did not achieve the aims of their founders. Public support was inadequate to meet the needs of a growing inmate population, and the personnel of the institutions often lacked the training needed to help the incarcerated. The results were overcrowding and the use of brutality to keep order. For the most part, prisons failed to reform hardened criminals, and the primitive psychotherapy known as “moral treatment” failed to cure most asylum patients. Poorhouses rapidly degenerated into sinkholes of despair. A combination of naive theories and poor performance doomed the institutions to a custodial rather than a reformatory role. Conditions would have been even worse had it not been for Dorothea Dix. Between 1838 and the Civil War, this remarkable woman devoted her energies and skills to publicizing the inhumane treatment prevailing in prisons, almshouses, and insane asylums and to lobbying for corrective action. As a direct result of her activities, fifteen states opened new hospitals for the insane and others improved their supervision of penitentiaries, asylums, and poorhouses. Dix ranks as one of the most practical and effective of all the reformers of the pre–Civil War era.



 CHAPTER 12

THE PURSUIT OF PERFECTION

Reform Turns Radical
 What were some of the major antebellum reform movements? During the 1830s, internal dissension split the great reform movement spawned by the Second Great Awakening. Efforts to promote evangelical piety, improve personal and public morality, and shape character through familial or institutional discipline continued and even flourished. But bolder spirits went beyond such goals and set their sights on the total liberation and perfection of the individual.

Divisions in the Benevolent Empire
 Early nineteenth-century reformers were, for the most part, committed to changing existing attitudes and practices gradually and in ways that would not invite conflict or disrupt society. But by the mid1830s, a new mood of impatience and perfectionism surfaced within the benevolent societies. In 1836, for example, the Temperance Society split over two issues—whether the abstinence pledge should be extended to include beer and wine and whether pressure should be applied to producers and sellers of alcoholic beverages as well as to consumers. Radicals insisted on a total commitment to “cold water” and were prepared to clash head-on with an important economic interest. Moderates held back from such goals and tactics because they wanted to avoid hostility from prominent citizens who drank wine or had money invested in the liquor industry.

Read the Document


William Lloyd Garrison,
First Issue of The Liberator (1831)


 A similar rift occurred in the American Peace Society, an antiwar organization founded in 1828 by clergymen seeking to promote Christian concern for world peace. Most of the founders admitted the propriety of “defensive wars” and were shocked when some members of the society began to denounce all use of force as a violation of the Sermon on the Mount. Dissidents, who called themselves “nonresistants,” withdrew from the organization in 1838. Led by Henry C. Wright, they formed the New England Non-Resistance Society to promote an absolute pacifism, which denied the right of self-defense to nations or individuals and repudiated all forms of government coercion. The new perfectionism realized its most dramatic and important success within the antislavery movement. Before the 1830s, most people who expressed religious and moral concern over slavery were affiliated with the American Colonization Society, a benevolent organization founded in 1817. Most colonizationists admitted that slavery was an evil, but they also viewed it as a deeply rooted social and economic institution that could be eliminated only very gradually and with the cooperation of slaveholders. Reflecting the power of racial prejudice, they proposed to provide transportation to Africa for free blacks who chose to go, or were emancipated for the purpose, as a way of relieving southern fears that a race war would erupt if slaves were simply released from bondage and allowed to remain in America. In 1821, the society established the colony of Liberia in West Africa, and during the next decade a few thousand African Americans were settled there. Colonization proved to be grossly inadequate as a step toward the elimination of slavery. Many of the blacks transported to Africa were already free, and those liberated by masters influenced by the movement represented only a tiny percentage of the natural increase of the southern slave population. Northern blacks denounced the enterprise because it denied the prospect of racial equality in America. Black opposition to colonizationism helped persuade William Lloyd Garrison and other white abolitionists to repudiate the Colonization Society and support immediate emancipation without emigration. Garrison launched a new and more radical antislavery movement in 1831 in Boston, when he began to publish a journal called The Liberator. Besides calling for immediate and unconditional emancipation, Garrison denounced colonization as a slaveholder’s plot to remove troublesome free blacks and as an ignoble surrender to un-Christian prejudices. His rhetoric was as severe as his proposals were radical. As he wrote in the first issue of The Liberator, “I will be as harsh as truth and as uncompromising as justice . . . . I am in earnest—I will not equivocate—I will not excuse—I will not retreat a single inch—And I WILL BE HEARD!” Heard he was. In 1833, Garrison and other abolitionists founded the American Anti-Slavery Society. “We shall send forth agents to lift up the voice of remonstrance, of warning, of entreaty, and of rebuke,” its Declaration of Sentiments proclaimed. The colonization movement was placed on the defensive, and during the 1830s, many of its most active northern supporters became abolitionists.

The Abolitionist Enterprise
 In the inaugural issue of his antislavery weekly, The Liberator, William Lloyd Garrison announced that he was launching a militant battle against the evil and sin of slavery. The stirring words that appeared in that first issue are repeated on The Liberator’s banner.

 The abolitionist movement, like the temperance crusade, was a direct outgrowth of the Second Great Awakening. Many leading abolitionists had undergone conversion experiences in the 1820s

Reform Turns Radical


 and were already committed to a life of Christian activism before they dedicated themselves to freeing the slaves. Several were ministers or divinity students seeking a mission in life that would fulfill spiritual and professional ambitions. The career of Theodore Dwight Weld exemplified the connection between revivalism and abolitionism. Weld came from a long line of New England ministers. After dropping out of divinity school, he migrated to western New York. There he fell under the influence of Charles G. Finney and, after a long struggle, underwent a conversion experience in 1826. He then became an itinerant lecturer for various reform causes. By the early 1830s, he focused his attention on the moral issues raised by the institution of slavery. After a brief flirtation with the colonization movement, Weld was converted to abolitionism in 1832, recognizing that colonizationists did not really accept blacks as equals or “brothers-in-Christ.” In 1834, he instigated what amounted to a series of abolitionist revivals at Lane Theological Seminary in Cincinnati. When the trustees of the seminary attempted to suppress further discussion of the case for immediate emancipation, Weld led a mass walkout of most students. The “Lane rebels” subsequently founded Oberlin College as a center for abolitionist activity. In 1835 and 1836, Weld toured Ohio and western New York preaching abolitionism. He also supervised and trained other agents and orators as part of a campaign to convert the entire region to immediate emancipation. The tried-and-true methods of the revival—fervent preaching, protracted meetings, and the call for individuals to come forth and announce their redemption—were put at the service of the antislavery movement. Weld and his associates often had to face angry mobs, but they left behind them tens of thousands of new abolitionists and hundreds of local antislavery societies. As a result of their efforts, northern Ohio and western New York became hotbeds of abolitionist sentiment. Antislavery orators and organizers tended to have their greatest successes in the small- to medium-sized towns of the upper North. The typical convert came from an upwardly mobile family engaged in small business, the skilled trades, or market farming. In larger towns and cities, or when they ventured close to the Mason-Dixon line, abolitionists were more likely to encounter fierce and effective opposition. In 1835, Garrison was mobbed in the streets of Boston and almost lynched. In New York City, the Tappan brothers—Lewis and Arthur—were frequent objects of threats and violence. These two successful merchants were key figures in the movement because they used their substantial wealth to finance antislavery activities. In 1835–1836, they supported a massive effort to print antislavery pamphlets and distribute them through the U.S. mail. But they made relatively few converts in their own city; most New Yorkers regarded them as dangerous radicals. Abolitionists who thought of taking their message to the fringes of the South had reason to pause, given the fate of the antislavery editor Elijah Lovejoy. In 1837, while attempting to defend himself and his printing press from a mob in Alton, Illinois, just across the Mississippi River from slaveholding Missouri, Lovejoy was shot and killed. Racism was a major cause of antiabolitionist violence in the North. Rumors that abolitionists advocated or practiced interracial marriage could easily incite an urban crowd. If it could not find white abolitionists, the mob was likely to turn on local blacks. Working-class whites tended to fear that economic and social



 competition with blacks would increase if abolitionists succeeded in freeing slaves and making them citizens. But a striking feature of many of the mobs was that they were dominated by “gentlemen of property and standing.” Solid citizens resorted to violence, it would appear, because abolitionism threatened their conservative notions of social order and hierarchy. By the end of the 1830s, the abolitionist movement was under great stress. Besides the burden of external repression, there was dissension within the movement. Becoming an abolitionist required an exacting conscience and an unwillingness to compromise on matters of principle. These character traits also made it difficult for abolitionists to work together and maintain a united front. During the late 1830s, Garrison, the most visible proponent of the cause, began to adopt positions that some other abolitionists found extreme and divisive. He embraced the nonresistant or “no-government” philosophy of Henry C. Wright and urged abolitionists to abstain from voting or otherwise participating in a corrupt political system. He also attacked the clergy and the churches for refusing to take a strong antislavery stand and encouraged his followers to “come out” of the established denominations rather than continuing to work within them. These positions alienated those members of the Anti-Slavery Society who continued to hope that organized religion and the existing political system could be influenced or even taken over by abolitionists. But it was Garrison’s stand on women’s rights that led to an open break at the national convention of the American Anti-Slavery Society in 1840. Following their leader’s principle that women should be equal partners in the crusade, a Garrison-led majority elected a woman abolitionist to the society’s executive committee. A minority, led by Lewis Tappan, then withdrew to form a competing organization—the American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society. The new organization never amounted to much, but the schism did weaken Garrison’s influence within the movement. When he later repudiated the U.S. Constitution as a proslavery document and called for northern secession from the Union, few antislavery people in the Middle Atlantic or midwestern states went along. Outside New England, most abolitionists worked within the churches and avoided controversial side issues such as women’s rights and nonresistant pacifism. Some antislavery advocates chose the path of political action. The Liberty Party, organized in 1840, was their first attempt to enter the electoral arena under their own banner; it signaled a new effort to turn antislavery sentiment into political power.

Black Abolitionists
 From the beginning the abolitionist movement depended heavily on the support of the northern free black community. Most of the early subscribers to Garrison’s Liberator were African Americans. Black orators, especially escaped slaves such as Frederick Douglass, made northern audiences aware of the realities of bondage. But relations between white and black abolitionists were often tense and uneasy. Blacks protested that they did not have their fair share of leadership positions or influence over policy. Eventually a black antislavery movement emerged that was largely independent of the white-led crusade. In addition to Douglass, prominent black male abolitionists were Charles Remond, William Wells Brown, Robert Purvis, and Henry Highland Garnet. Outspoken women such as Sojourner Truth, Maria Stewart, and Frances Harper also played a significant role in black antislavery activity. The Negro Convention movement,



 CHAPTER 12

THE PURSUIT OF PERFECTION

 which sponsored national meetings of black leaders beginning in 1830, provided an important forum for independent black expression. Their most eloquent statement came in 1854, when black leaders met in Cleveland to declare their faith in a separate identity, proclaiming, “We pledge our integrity to use all honorable means, to unite us, as one people, on this continent.” Black newspapers, such as Freedom’s Journal, first published in 1827, and the North Star, founded by Douglass in 1847, gave black writers a chance to preach their gospel of liberation to black readers. African American authors also produced a stream of books and pamphlets attacking slavery, refuting racism, and advocating various forms of resistance. One of the most influential publications was David Walker’s Appeal . . . to the Colored Citizens of the World, which appeared in 1829. Walker denounced slavery in the most vigorous language possible and called for a black revolt against white tyranny. Free blacks in the North did more than make verbal protests against racial injustice. They were also the main conductors on the fabled Underground Railroad that opened a path for fugitives from slavery. It has been supposed that benevolent whites were primarily responsible for organized efforts to guide and assist fugitive slaves,

Read the Document


David Walker, A Black


Abolitionist Speaks


 but modern research has shown that the Underground Railroad was largely a black-operated enterprise. Courageous ex-slaves such as Harriet Tubman and Josiah Henson made regular forays into the slave states to lead other blacks to freedom, and many of the “stations” along the way were run by free blacks. In northern towns and cities, free blacks organized “vigilance committees” to protect fugitives and thwart the slave catchers. Groups of blacks even used force to rescue recaptured fugitives from the authorities. In Boston in 1851, one such group seized a slave named Shadrack from a U.S. marshal who was in the process of returning him to bondage. In deeds as well as words, free blacks showed their unyielding hostility to slavery and racism. Historians have debated the question of whether the abolitionist movement of the 1830s and early 1840s was a success or a failure. It obviously failed to convert a majority of Americans to its position that slavery was a sinful institution that should be abolished immediately. This position implied that blacks should be granted equality as American citizens, so it ran up against the powerful commitment to white supremacy prevailing in all parts of the country. In the South, abolitionism caused a strong counteraction and helped inspire a more militant and uncompromising defense of slavery. The belief that peaceful agitation, or what abolitionists called “moral suasion,” would convert slaveholders and their northern sympathizers to abolition was obviously unrealistic. But in another sense the crusade was successful. It brought the slavery issue to the forefront of public consciousness and convinced a substantial and growing segment of the northern population that the South’s peculiar institution was morally wrong and potentially dangerous to the American way of life. The South helped the antislavery cause in the North by responding hysterically and repressively to abolitionist agitation. In 1836, Southerners in Congress forced adoption of a “gag rule” requiring that abolitionist petitions be tabled without being read; at about the same time, the post office refused to carry antislavery literature into the slave states. Prominent Northerners who had not been moved to action by abolitionist depictions of slave suffering became more responsive to the movement when it appeared their own civil liberties might be threatened. The politicians who later mobilized the North against the expansion of slavery into the territories drew strength from the antislavery and antisouthern sentiments that abolitionists had already called forth.

 From Abolitionism to Women’s Rights

 David Walker was a free African American who operated a second-hand clothing shop in Boston and spoke out on abolition. Unlike many abolitionists, Walker advocated violent action, the rebellion of slaves, and the killing of masters.

 Abolitionism also served as a catalyst for the women’s rights movement. From the beginning, women were active participants in the abolitionist crusade. Between 1835 and 1838, the American AntiSlavery Society bombarded Congress with petitions, mostly calling for abolition of slavery in the District of Columbia. More than half of the thousands of antislavery petitions sent to Washington had women’s signatures on them. Some antislavery women went further and defied conventional ideas of their proper sphere by becoming public speakers and demanding an equal role in the leadership of antislavery societies. The most famous of these were the Grimké sisters, Sarah and Angelina, who attracted enormous attention being the rebellious daughters of a South Carolina slaveholder. When some

Reform Turns Radical


 male abolitionists objected to their speaking in public to mixed audiences of men and women, Garrison came to their defense and helped forge a link between blacks’ and women’s struggles for equality. The battle to participate equally in the antislavery crusade made a number of women abolitionists acutely aware of male dominance and oppression. For them, the same principles that justified the liberation of the slaves also applied to the emancipation of women from all restrictions on their rights as citizens. In 1840, Garrison’s American followers withdrew from the first World’s Anti-Slavery Convention in London because the sponsors refused to seat the women in their delegation. Among the women thus excluded were Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. Wounded by men’s reluctance to extend the cause of emancipation to include women, Stanton and Mott began discussing plans for a women’s rights convention. They returned to New York, where a campaign was already under way to reform the state’s laws limiting the rights of married women, spearheaded by a young Jewish activist, Ernestine Rose, and Judge Thomas Herttell, the political radical and freethinker who had introduced the first bill to reform the state’s marriage laws to the New York state legislature. (See the Law and Society essay “The Legal Rights of Married Women: Reforming the Law of Coverture,” pp. 286–289.) The campaign for women’s rights came to a head at the famous Seneca Falls Convention that Stanton and Mott organized in upstate New York in 1848. The Declaration of Sentiments issued by this first national gathering of feminists charged that “the history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her.” It went on to demand that all women be given the right to vote and that married women be freed from unjust laws giving husbands control of their property, persons, and children. Rejecting the cult of domesticity with its doctrine of separate spheres, these women and their male supporters launched the modern movement for gender equality.



 group of slaves at Nashoba, Tennessee, and set them to work earning their freedom in an atmosphere of “rational cooperation.” The rapid demise of both of these model communities suggested that utopian socialism did not easily take root in American soil. But the impulse survived. In the 1840s, a number of Americans, including the prominent editor Horace Greeley, became interested in the ideas of the French utopian theorist Charles Fourier. Fourier called for cooperative communities in which everyone did a fair share of the work and tasks were allotted to make use of the natural abilities and instincts of the members. Between 1842 and 1852, about thirty Fourierist “phalanxes” were established in the northeastern and midwestern states, and approximately a hundred thousand people lived for a time in these communities or otherwise supported the movement. The phalanxes were not purely socialistic; in fact, they were organized as joint-stock companies. But they did give the members an opportunity to live and work in a communal atmosphere. Like the Owenite communities, they were short-lived, surviving

View the Map


Utopian Communities Before the Civil War


Oneida
Brook
Farm


Amana


New Harmony


Radical Ideas and Experiments
 Hopes for individual or social perfection were not limited to reformers inspired by evangelicalism. Between the 1820s and 1850s, a great variety of schemes for human redemption came from those who had rejected orthodox Protestantism. Some were secular humanists carrying on the freethinking tradition of the Enlightenment, but most were seekers of new paths to spiritual or religious fulfillment. A movement that achieved remarkable success or notoriety was spiritualism—the belief that one could communicate with the dead. These philosophical and religious radicals attacked established institutions, prescribed new modes of living, and founded utopian communities to put their ideas into practice. A radical movement of foreign origin that gained a toehold in Jacksonian America was utopian socialism. In 1825–1826, the British manufacturer and reformer Robert Owen visited the United States and founded a community based on common and equal ownership of property at New Harmony, Indiana. About the same time, Owen’s associate Frances Wright gathered a

Nashoba


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

Icaria






 400 miles

 400 kilometers

Gulf of Mexico
Utopian Communities
Fourierists


Shakers


Owenites


Others


UTOPIAN COMMUNITIES BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR

The
 search for new paths to spiritual or religious fulfillment attracted many to utopian communitarian societies. By far the largest of these societies during the period before the Civil War was the Shakers, who by the 1830s had established twenty settlements in seven states with a combined membership of approximately six thousand. Their rule of celibacy meant that Shaker communities gained members through adoption and conversion, rather than by natural reproduction.

 Complete the Assignment The War Against “Demon Drink” on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


The War Against
“Demon Drink”
 ‘Mid charnels and pest houses though we may roam, Be it ever so frightful, there’s no plague like Rum! A charm from below seems to lead to the snare, And leaves us in darkness, and gloom, and despair. Rum, Rum, curst, curst Rum, There’s no plague like Rum, there’s no plague like Rum.

T


 unes like this one rang from the windows of American homes in the mid-nineteenth century, signaling the rise of one of the longest lasting social revolutions in American history—the Temperance Movement. The rise of this movement was especially astonishing because drinking was so widespread in early America. Americans in the new republic loved to drink. They drank at weddings, funerals, and civic celebrations. They drank at work during the day, and at home at night. Not only did they enjoy wine and beer, but rum, whiskey, and rye. By 1830, the average American drank nearly ten gallons of distilled spirits per year—nearly twice the average per person in 1790, and almost four times what Americans drink today. While drinking was not limited to men, it was an important aspect of male-bonding culture, at work and in the tavern. Drinking together offered an opportunity for sociability across class lines in the early republic. Artisans drank in the workplace, and during the Revolution, toasting was both a social and political ritual in workingmen’s Revolutionary committees. When George Washington’s presidential home was built in 1792–1793, the laborers and craftsmen were treated to a drink when the cornerstone had been set, again when each of three floors was completed, and when they began work on the roof rafters.

 In Philadelphia paper mills, it was customary for journeymen to receive a half-pint of spirits at eleven o’clock each morning, and again in the afternoon. Because many journeymen and apprentices boarded in the master’s home, drinking together carried over into the household sphere as well. In the 1820s, household commodity production began to decline, with masters separating their workshops from their homes. As historian Paul Johnson explains, “By 1830, the doorway to a middle-class home separated radically different kinds of space: drunkenness and promiscuous sociability on the outside, privacy and icy sobriety indoors.” Master artisans who now headed growing manufactories began to realize that the new market values of efficiency and productivity were at odds with the sociability—and drinking—of the old workplace. They were primed and ready for the message of evangelical temperance reformers. The temperance reformers viewed indulgence in alcohol as a threat to public morality. Drunkenness was seen as a loss of self-control and moral responsibility that spawned crime, vice, and disorder. Above all, it threatened the family. The main target of temperance propaganda was the husband and father who abused, neglected, or abandoned his wife and children because he was a slave to the bottle. Women played a vital role in the movement and were instrumental

 in making it a crusade for the protection of the home. The drinking habits of the poor or laboring classes also aroused great concern. Particularly in urban areas, the “respectable” and propertied elements lived in fear that lower-class mobs, crazed with drink, would attack private property and create social chaos. In 1826, a group of clergymen previously active in mission work organized the American Temperance Society to coordinate and extend the work already begun by local churches and moral reform societies. The original aim was to encourage abstinence from “ardent spirits” or hard liquor; there was no agreement on the evils of beer and wine. The society sent out lecturers, issued a flood of literature, and sponsored essay contests. Its agents organized revival meetings and called on those in attendance to sign a pledge promising abstinence from spirits. The campaign was enormously effective. By 1834, there were five thousand local branches with more than a million members. Some workingmen defiantly insisted on their right to drink, and built their own autonomous social life, in grog halls and taverns, with heavy drinking an important part of it. As one workingclass letter-writer angrily asked, “Who are the most temperate men of modern times? Those who quaff the juice of the grape with their friends, with the greatest good nature, after the manner of the ancient patriarchs, without any malice

 A pair of prints issued by A.D. Fillmore in 1855 extolling the social and moral benefits of temperance and condemning the evils of alcohol. On the Tree of Temperance, the fruits are labeled with the names of virtues, including “Industry,” “Philanthropy,” “Goodwill,” and “Charity.” On either side, the church and the schoolhouse represent the twin ideals of religion and education that were believed to flourish in a temperance regime. The Tree of Intemperance demonstrates the evils of drink using religious imagery of a serpent with an apple in its mouth, and branches labeled with social and moral evils such as “Ignorance,” “Vice,” and “Crime,” as well as anarchy, counterfeiting, and dueling. The men attempting to chop down the tree are temperance reformers, celebrating the 1851 Maine Prohibition Law.

 in their hearts, or the cold-water, palefaced, money-making men, who make the necessities of their neighbors their opportunity for grinding the face of the poor?” But others joined temperance societies of their own. The first Washingtonian Society was born in 1840 when four Baltimore craftsmen attended a temperance lecture, intending to mock the speaker, but instead were converted to the cause. They persuaded their friends to swear off liquor, and quickly touched off a wave of temperance activity among journeymen, apprentices, and other members of the working class. Unlike middle-class evangelicals, who reserved their gospel for the sober, Washingtonian societies sought out the confirmed drunkard and offered him salvation. They also offered more concrete mutual benefits, such as soup kitchens for the poor. The Washingtonians held weekly experience meetings to testify and confess their own experiences with “Demon Drink” and to swear off the

 bottle. The societies also tried to recreate the enjoyable community aspects of tavern life with temperance songs, poems, and theatrical shows. T. S. Arthur’s “Ten Nights in a Bar-Room and What I Saw There,” penned in 1854, was a huge best-seller, and the stage adaptation was one of the longest-running and most popular plays of the antebellum era, entertaining large crowds of teetotalers. Washingtonian societies spread like wildfire; anyone could start one, including women, children, and African Americans. In Utica, New York, alone, there was a Martha Washington Union, an Irish Hibernian Association, a Workingmen’s Temperance Union, youth clubs, and even a black women’s temperance association. While most Washingtonian societies presented themselves as “young men’s associations,” the average age of the men involved was between thirty and thirty-five—and the majority of members may have been women.

 Beginning in the 1840s, the temperance movement, like other reform movements of the period, turned from evangelical hope in individual redemption to a drive for legal regulation. It won some success in the 1850s: Maine enacted dry laws in 1851, followed by twelve more states by 1855. Beginning in the 1850s, as new waves of immigration from Ireland and Germany brought a surge of beer and whiskey consumption, temperance became entangled with the politics of nativism—and, like other reform efforts, it was soon overshadowed by the sectional conflict over slavery. But the mass movement of the “Cold Water Army” did achieve some significant goals. Although it may be doubted whether huge numbers of confirmed drunkards were cured, the movement did succeed in altering the drinking habits of middleclass American males by making temperance a mark of respectability. Per capita consumption of hard liquor declined more than 50 percent during the 1830s, and by 1850 was down to one-third of what it had been in 1830. And the antebellum temperance movement set the stage for national Prohibition—one of the few major social reforms to take place by constitutional amendment, on January 29, 1920, when the Eighteenth Amendment outlawing the “manufacture, sale, and transportation” of liquor in the United States took effect. With the enactment of national Prohibition, temperance at last became embedded, temporarily, in the law of the nation.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why was heavy drinking so prevalent in America in the early nineteenth century? 2. Why did the temperance movement become so active in the 1820s and 1830s? 3. How did the temperance movement change the drinking habits of middle-class American males? 




 CHAPTER 12

THE PURSUIT OF PERFECTION

 for an average of only two years. The common complaint of the founders was that Americans were too individualistic to cooperate in the ways that Fourier’s theories required. Two of the most successful and long-lived manifestations of pre–Civil War utopianism were the Shakers and the Oneida community. The Shakers—officially known as the Millennial Church or the United Society of Believers—began as a religious movement in England. In 1774, a Shaker leader, Mother Ann Lee, brought their radical beliefs to the United States. Lee believed herself to be the feminine incarnation of Christ and advocated a new theology based squarely on the principle of sexual equality. The Shakers, named for their expressions of religious fervor through vigorous dancelike movements, believed in communal ownership and strict celibacy. They lived simply and minimized their contact with the outside world because they expected Christ’s Second Coming to occur momentarily. The Oneida community was established in 1848

Read the Document


Ralph Waldo Emerson,


“Self Reliance” (1841)


 Ralph Waldo Emerson, who was born in Boston in 1803, was a famous essayist, lecturer, and poet. He is perhaps best known as the leader of the Transcendentalist movement.

 at Oneida, New York, and was inspired by an unorthodox brand of Christian perfectionism. Its founder, John Humphrey Noyes, believed the Second Coming of Christ had already occurred; hence human beings were no longer obliged to follow the moral rules that their previously fallen state had required. At Oneida, traditional marriage was outlawed, and a carefully regulated form of “free love” was put into practice. It was the literary and philosophical movement known as transcendentalism that inspired the era’s most memorable experiments in thinking and living on a higher plane. The main idea was that the individual could transcend material reality and ordinary understanding, attaining through a higher form of reason— or intuition—a oneness with the universe as a whole and with the spiritual forces that lay behind it. Transcendentalism was the major American version of the romantic and idealist thought that emerged in the early nineteenth century. Throughout the Western world, and especially in Germany, romanticism was challenging the rationalism and materialism of the Enlightenment in the name of exalted feeling and cosmic spirituality. Most American transcendentalists were Unitarians or ex-Unitarians who were dissatisfied with the sober rationalism of their denomination and sought a more intense kind of spiritual experience. Unable to embrace evangelical Christianity because of intellectual resistance to its doctrines, they sought inspiration from a philosophical and literary idealism of German origin. Their prophet was Ralph Waldo Emerson, a brilliant essayist and lecturer who preached that each individual could commune directly with a benign spiritual force that animated nature and the universe, which he called the “oversoul.” Emerson was a radical individualist committed to “self-culture” and “the sufficiency of the private man.” He carefully avoided all involvement in organized movements or associations because he believed they limited the freedom of the individual to develop inner resources and find a personal path to spiritual illumination. In the vicinity of Emerson’s home in Concord, Massachusetts, a group of like-minded seekers of truth and spiritual fulfillment gathered during the 1830s and 1840s. Among them for a time was Margaret Fuller, the leading woman intellectual of the age. In Woman in the Nineteenth Century (1845), she made a strong claim for the spiritual and artistic equality of women. One group of transcendentalists, led by the Reverend George Ripley, rejected Emerson’s radical individualism and founded a cooperative community at Brook Farm, near Roxbury, Massachusetts, in 1841. For the next four years, group members worked the land in common, conducted an excellent school on the principle that spontaneity rather than discipline was the key to education, and allowed ample time for conversation, meditation, communion with nature, and artistic activity of all kinds. Visitors and guest lecturers included such luminaries as Emerson, Margaret Fuller, and Theodore Parker, the Unitarian theologian and radical reformer. In 1845, Brook Farm was reconstituted as a Fourierist phalanx, but some of the original spirit persisted until its dissolution in 1849. Another experiment in transcendental living adhered more closely to the individualistic spirit of the movement. Between 1845 and 1847, Henry David Thoreau, a young disciple of Emerson, lived by himself in the woods along the shore of Walden Pond and

Conclusion: Counterpoint on Reform


 carefully recorded his thoughts and impressions. In a sense, he pushed the ideal of self-culture to its logical outcome—a utopia of one. The result was Walden (published in 1854), one of the greatest achievements in American literature.

Conclusion: Counterpoint
 on Reform One great American writer observed at close quarters the perfectionist ferment of the age but held himself aloof, suggesting in his novels and tales that pursuit of the ideal led to a distorted view of human nature and possibilities. Nathaniel Hawthorne lived in Concord, knew Emerson and Margaret Fuller, and even spent time at Brook Farm. But his sense of human frailty made him skeptical about the claims of transcendentalism and utopianism. He satirized transcendentalism as unworldly and overoptimistic in his allegorical tale “The Celestial Railroad” and gently lampooned the denizens of Brook Farm in his novel The Blithedale Romance (1852). His view of the dangers of pursuing perfection too avidly came out in his tale of a father who kills his beautiful daughter by trying to remove her one blemish, a birthmark. His greatest novels, The Scarlet Letter (1850) and The House of the Seven Gables (1851), imaginatively probed New England’s Puritan past and the



 shadows it cast on the present. By dwelling on original sin as a psychological reality, Hawthorne told his contemporaries that their efforts to escape from guilt and evil were futile. One simply had to accept the world as an imperfect place. Although he did not engage in polemics against humanitarian reformers and cosmic optimists, Hawthorne wrote parables and allegories that implicitly questioned the fundamental assumptions of pre–Civil War reform. One does not have to agree with Hawthorne’s antiprogressive view of the human condition to acknowledge that the dreams of perfectionist reformers promised more than they could possibly deliver. Revivals could not make all men like Christ; temperance could not solve all social problems; abolitionist agitation could not bring a peaceful end to slavery; and transcendentalism (as Emerson himself sometimes conceded) could not fully emancipate people from the limitations and frustrations of daily life. The consequences of perfectionist efforts were often far different from what their proponents expected. In defense of the reformers, however, one could argue that Hawthorne’s skepticism and fatalism were a prescription for doing nothing in the face of intolerable evils. If the reform impulse was long on inspirational rhetoric but somewhat short on durable, practical achievements, it did at least disturb the complacent and opportunistic surface of American life and open the way to necessary changes.

 Complete the Assignment The Legal Rights of Married Women: Reforming the Law of Coverture on myhistorylab

Law and
Society


B


 y the common law in effect in the United States in the early nineteenth century, women lost their legal personality when they married. The system of coverture governed the union of husband and wife; married women were under the “wing, protection, or cover” of their husbands. Coverture was based on the English medieval feudal system in which lords and vassals owed allegiance to the king, and commoners to lords and vassals. Under the common law of England, husband and wife were referred to as “baron” and “feme.” William Blackstone, the English jurist, professor of common law, and author of Commentaries on the Law of England, explained, “the word baron, or lord, attributes to the husband not a very courteous superiority . . . if the baron kills his feme, it is the same as if he had killed a stranger, or any other person; but if the feme kills her baron, it is regarded by the laws as a much more atrocious crime; as she not only breaks through the restraints of humanity and conjugal affection, but throws off all subjection to the authority of her husband. And therefore the law denominates her crime, a species of treason, and condemns her to the same punishment as if she had killed the king.” As Blackstone explained, “By marriage, the husband and wife are one person in the law.” Coverture denied married women their rights to own and manage property, to form contracts, to sue and be sued, and to exercise legal control over children. Upon marriage, all of a wife’s personal property became her

The Legal Rights of
Married Women
Reforming the Law of Coverture
 husband’s, which he could give or will to someone else if he chose. The husband could not sell his wife’s real estate, but he could control and manage it, and any profits derived from the property belonged to him. Coverture had a few benefits for women. Husbands took legal responsibility for any crimes their wives committed, and sometimes wives could avoid responsibility for unwise financial transactions because they had had no legal right to enter into them. A widow had a right to onethird of her husband’s property (her “dower”), if he died without a will. And a husband had a limited obligation to provide for his wife’s “necessaries.” Blackstone concluded his chapter on husband and wife with the observation that “even the disabilities, which the wife lies under, are for the most part intended for her protection and benefit. So great a favourite is the female sex of the laws of England.” In practice, some women, especially wealthy women, were able to get around some of the laws of coverture by taking advantage of loopholes in the law. First of all, women could go to courts of “equity” or “chancery,” in which a chancellor, rather than a jury, could decide the fair or just outcome based on the facts of the individual case, rather than applying rules of law. (These two court systems of law and equity are merged into one in most states today.) An equity court had the power not only to assign money damages but to require a contract to be carried out. For example, a couple might specify in a prenuptial contract—made before the marriage was entered into—that the wife could keep her own property from before the

 Women’s rights activist Ernestine Rose began petitioning for married women’s property rights in New York in 1836.

 marriage in a “separate estate.” It was also possible for a husband to assign some of his property to his wife after the marriage in a “marriage settlement.” And often they arranged for the wife’s separate estate to be held in “trust” and managed by a third-party trustee, usually a man. It was the legal arrangement of coverture into which Harriet Douglas, a rich New York heiress, resisted entering. Harriet Douglas had very definite ideas about what she wanted in a husband. If she married, she intended to keep control over all of her property, “in obedience to, and conformity with the opinions and precepts of her parents,” and she wanted her husband to renounce his own name, his home, and his profession, to devote himself to her and her family property. As historian Hendrik Hartog observed, according

 to the norms of early America, Harriet Douglas effectively wanted “her husband [to] become her wife.” Henry Cruger, a young lawyer who came to New York from South Carolina and who courted Harriet Douglas, at first chafed at the restrictions she proposed for a marriage arrangement. Henry argued that “the husband ought always to possess an absolute control over the wife’s property.” But a few years later, Henry rethought his position, writing to Harriet in 1829 that he would accept her terms, “however derogatory to proper pride . . . and self-respect.” After extensive negotiations, they finally married in 1833. Henry took “D” for his middle initial without changing his last name, and Harriet was to be known as “Mrs. Douglas Cruger.” Harriet agreed to sign a property settlement agreement after rather than before the marriage ceremony, because Henry claimed that a premarital contract would become part of an embarrassing public record. Harriet’s and Henry’s marriage fell almost immediately on hard times, largely over money matters. Henry repeatedly threatened to return to legal practice if Harriet did not give him more freedom to control their property, urging her, “Take away this poignard of ice from between us . . . I desire no interests separate from yours, for I love you, and we are married.” On several occasions, Harriet drew up new “agency” agreements, giving Henry more control of her estate as her “agent.” Her friends all urged her to “relieve” Henry “from a state of dependence” that could only be galling to a “man of honor.” After years of Henry’s haranguing and lobbying, in 1841 Harriet signed an order guaranteeing him one-half of her income for life. That same year, their marriage fell apart completely. It took eight more years in New York courts to work out Henry’s and Harriet’s rights to her property. Henry argued that their marriage settlement was invalid because it came after rather than before the marriage.

 Harriet claimed the original settlement should be enforced, but the 1841 gift was invalid because Henry and his friends had coerced her into signing it. In 1848, the case ended up in the New York Supreme Court, where Judge Selah Strong decreed that the original marriage settlement was valid, giving Harriet control over her own property, but that the 1841 order was enforceable as well, giving control over half of it to Henry. Years later, Strong wrote, “She was mad and he was bad, and the legal muddle they brought about between them was very deep and formidable.” At the end of their legal muddle, Henry emerged victorious with control over half of Harriet’s separate estate. Despite her strenuous efforts to be an independent married woman, she had failed. In disgust, she “had her marriage bed cut in two, transforming it into two ‘slightly peculiar’ sofas.” The New York Supreme Court made its final decision in Cruger v. Cruger, just one year after the New York legislature passed its first Married Women’s Property Act, allowing women for the first time to maintain ownership and control over property they had inherited before they married. Over the course of the middle decades of the nineteenth century, an increasingly vocal minority of women chafed against the laws of husband and wife that restricted the independence of women like Harriet Cruger. They demanded the reform of the laws of coverture, first through Married Women’s Property Acts, and then through Earnings Laws. Nowhere were they more vocal and successful than in New York. At first, women’s rights reformers concentrated on changing people’s hearts and minds, as had temperance reformers, abolitionists, and others who were part of the great wave of reform in the United States in the early nineteenth century. In their private writings, women’s rights reformers were often more frank than in public discussion, about how marriage kept women subjugated to

 their husbands. They often compared the married woman to a slave—with no right to own property, sign a contract, sue another, or even keep her own name. After 1840, as in so many of the reform movements sparked by the religious fervor of the Second Great Awakening, women’s rights reformers began to turn to legal solutions. The first group of advocates for women’s rights took particular aim at the laws of marriage and divorce. They also organized women’s rights activity on a large scale for the first time. On July 19–20, 1848, the first women’s rights convention in the world took place at Seneca Falls, New York. Elizabeth Cady Stanton, a women’s rights activist and an organizer of the convention, delivered the “Declaration of Sentiments,” modeled on the Declaration of Independence: “We hold these truths to be selfevident: that all men and women are created equal . . . ” Stanton declared further that “The history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her.” The declaration listed a series of wrongs, followed by twelve resolutions. While winning the right to vote was part of the women’s aim, their chief focus was reforming the laws of marriage. Eleven resolutions passed unanimously; the twelfth, calling for the extension of the vote to women, passed narrowly only after abolitionist and former slave Frederick Douglass made a rousing speech in its favor. The Declaration of Sentiments quickly became famous around the world, sparking women’s rights reform movements in England and across Europe. New York’s first Married Women’s Property Act, passed in 1848, the same year as the Seneca Falls convention, was the product of a number of factors. The persistent petition campaigns of feminist reformers had some influence on the legislators, but several other forces were at work as

 well. There was a strong movement in New York to “codify” the common law into written codes, accessible to everyone, thereby minimizing the power of judges and lawyers to shape decisions as they pleased. The leaders of that movement especially took aim at equity courts, which they saw as undemocratic institutions whose individually tailored settlements benefited only the propertied elite. For these politicians, reform of the laws governing married women’s property was a way to democratize property law, making available to everyone the “separate estates” that wealthy families had been able to arrange through equity courts. Finally, wealthy Dutch landowners in the Hudson Valley saw the acts as a way to protect family property. Thus, the Married Women’s Property Acts, in New York and elsewhere, were a good example of the way that legal reform comes about as a result of reformers’ efforts coming together with other circumstances and constituencies. The 1848 act pronounced that “the real and personal property of any female who may hereafter marry, and which she shall own at the time of the marriage, and the rents, issues and profits thereof, shall not be subject to the disposal of her husband, nor be liable for his debts, and shall continue her sole and separate property, as if she were a single female.” It also provided that gifts to married women could remain their separate property, and that marriage settlements and prenuptial agreements would be enforced. The second act, in 1849, made it possible for women to sell or transfer their separate property under certain conditions, and for the trustees of their separate estates to deed property to them if a judge found them capable of managing it. Despite the Married Women’s Property Acts, women who did not have substantial property to inherit from their families still suffered severe legal constraints, most importantly because they still did not control their earnings. New Yorker Ernestine Rose, an early activist for women’s rights,

 observed, “Here is some provision for the favored few; but for the laboring many, there is none. The mass of people commence life with no other capital than the union of heads, hearts and hands. To the benefit of this best of capital, the wife has no right. If they are unsuccessful in married life, who suffers more the bitter consequences of poverty than the wife? But if successful, she can not call a dollar her own.” In the summer of 1854, Elizabeth Cady Stanton rose to address the Joint Judiciary Committee of the New York State Legislature, the first time a woman had ever spoken before that body. She began: “The thinking minds of all nations call for change. There is a deep-lying struggle in the whole fabric of society; a boundless grinding collision of the New with the Old.” Stanton asked the legislators to consider the “legal disabilities under which [women] labor.” On behalf of women, Stanton demanded the right to vote, the right to sit on juries, and the reform of the law of coverture. “Look at the position of woman as wife,” she demanded. “The wife who inherits no property holds about the same legal position that does the slave on the Southern plantation. She can own nothing, sell nothing. She has no right even to the wages she earns; her person, her time, her services are the property of another . . . . But the wife who is so fortunate as to have inherited property, has, by the new law in this State, been redeemed from her lost condition.” Stanton told the legislators that she spoke on behalf of the “daughters of the revolutionary heroes of ‘76,” and exhorted them to be true to the goals of the Revolution, mocking their claims to republicanism: “How like feudal barons you freemen hold your women.” At the same time that Stanton spoke before the legislature, she presented more than six thousand petitions from women across the state. Six years later, in 1860, New York passed the first Earnings Act in the nation, providing that a married woman could “carry on any trade or business, and perform any labor or services on

 her sole and separate account, and the earnings of any married woman, from her trade, business, labor or services, shall be her sole and separate property, and may be used or invested by her in her own name.” By the 1870s, most states had passed some version of married women’s property acts, and many northern states passed Earning Acts as well. By and large, courts interpreted Earnings Acts narrowly. For example, in one 1876 case, the New York Supreme Court ruled that a wife who kept a boardinghouse and nursed a very ill man for several years could not control her earnings because work done in the home was considered to be on the “family account,” rather than her “sole and separate account,” and was therefore the property of the husband. Repeatedly, courts held that women’s labor in the household belonged to the husband, so that only wages earned outside the home—although a minor part of most women’s earnings—were covered by the act. In the Iowa case of Miller v. Miller, a husband and wife attempted to create their own marriage contract, in which both spouses promised to “refrain from scolding, faultfinding and anger.” Mr. Miller promised to provide for family necessaries as well as a sum of $16.66 per month for Mrs. Miller’s individual use, and she promised to “keep her home and family in a comfortable and reasonably good condition.” When Mrs. Miller sued her husband to enforce this contract, she was turned away by the court because she had promised to do only what she was already obligated to do, but he had promised far more than marriage required from a husband, which was only to provide “necessaries.” New York’s 1860 Earnings Act was a limited victory for reformers—they won a change in the law, but courts limited its reach through narrow interpretation. Had courts interpreted the act more broadly to cover all forms of women’s earnings, it would have gone a long way to making women independent legally and economically.

Although the 1860 Earnings Act
 gained some legal rights for women, it failed to resolve completely the inequities that women faced. In the later nineteenth century, women’s rights advocates became convinced that political power was the way to secure civil rights, and they began to focus more specifically on winning the right to vote. Achieving that goal would take another sixty years.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
What was the system of “coverture”? How could couples avoid some of the legal disabilities of coverture? Could they avoid all of them? 2. What were the chief concerns of women’s rights advocates in the mid-nineteenth century? How did their aims and tactics resemble those of other reform movements during this period? 
 3. How did the Married Women’s Property Acts and Earnings Acts improve the legal status of married women, and in what ways did they fall short of reformers’ aims? Why do you think these acts were passed?





 CHAPTER 12

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study Resources
 Take the Study Plan for Chapter 12 The Pursuit of Perfection on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1801
Massive revival held at Cane Ridge, Kentucky 1826 American Temperance Society organized 1830–1831 Charles G. Finney evangelizes Rochester, New York 1831 William Lloyd Garrison publishes first issue of The Liberator 1833 Abolitionists found American Anti-Slavery Society 1835–1836 Theodore Weld advocates abolition in Ohio and upstate New York 1836 American Temperance Society splits into factions 
 1837 Massachusetts establishes a state board of education;

 Abolitionist editor Elijah Lovejoy killed by a proslavery mob American Anti-Slavery Society splits over women’s rights and other issues Transcendentalists organize a model community at Brook Farm Feminists gather at Seneca Falls, New York, and found the women’s rights movement Henry David Thoreau’s Walden published

CHAPTER REVIEW
The Rise of Evangelicalism 
Institutional Reform


 How did the evangelical revivalism of the early nineteenth century spur reform movements?

 How did Horace Mann change ideas about public schooling in America?

 Evangelical revivalists preached the perfectibility of individual moral agents, encouraging each person to choose his or her own moral and political destiny. This perfectionism led evangelical Christians to organize voluntary associations and benevolent societies that would teach people moral and social values. The most important of these reform efforts was the temperance movement. (p.269)

 In 1837, Horace Mann persuaded the Massachusetts legislature to establish a state board of education and allocate taxes to support free local public schools open to all. Mann believed that by teaching middle-class morality and respect for order, schools could produce law-abiding citizens and encourage social mobility by enabling lower-class children to do better than their parents. (p. 276)

Domesticity and Changes in the American Family


Reform Turns Radical


 What was the doctrine of “separate spheres,” and how did it change family life?

 What were some of the major antebellum reform movements?

 The doctrine of “separate spheres” glorified women’s role in caring for the home and family, guarding religious and moral values while men went into the public sphere to earn money and participate in politics. Smaller families and more leisure time for middle-class families also emphasized children’s development, including new public schools open to all. (p. 273)

 Religious revivalism inspired movements for temperance, abolition of slavery, and women’s rights. These movements grew more radical over time, turning to the political sphere in the 1840s as they lost confidence that changing men’s hearts could transform society. The abolitionists organized the Liberty Party in 1840, and feminists held their first convention at Seneca Falls in 1848. (p. 278)

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Second Great Awakening Evangelical Protestant revivals that swept over America in the early nineteenth century. p. 270 Temperance movement Temperance—moderation or abstention in the consumption of alcoholic beverages—attracted many advocates in the early nineteenth century. p. 272 
 Benevolent empire Collection of missionary and reform societies that sought to stamp out social evils in American society in the 1820s and 1830s. p. 273

STUDY RESOURCES

 Cult of Domesticity Term used to characterize the dominant gender role for white women in the antebellum period. It stressed the virtue of women as guardians of the home, which was considered their proper sphere. p. 274 Perfectionism The doctrine that a state of freedom from sin is attainable on earth. p. 275



 Abolitionist movement Reform movement dedicated to the immediate and unconditional end of slavery in the United States. p. 278 Seneca Falls Convention An 1848 gathering of women’s rights advocates that culminated in the adoption of a Declaration of Sentiments demanding voting and property rights for women. p. 281

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
Do you think it was healthy for American politics that religion played such a strong role in antebellum political movements? 
 2. In your view, were women helped or harmed by the doctrine of “separate spheres,” and why?

 3. Why do you think so many antebellum reform movements turned to politics in the 1840s?

 4. What is the connection between women’s influence in the public sphere, and the influence of evangelical religion on society?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 12 on MyHistoryLab The Rise of Evangelicalism

Reform Turns Radical


◾


◾


◾


View the Closer Look Methodist Camp
Meeting, 1819 p. 271


Read the Document
Speaks p. 280


Read the Document Lyman Beecher, “Six Sermons on
Intemperance” (1828) p. 272


View the Map
 p. 281

Watch the Video Drinking and the Temperance
Movement in Nineteenth-Century America p. 273


Domesticity and Changes in the American Family
 Read the Document Catharine E. Beecher, from A Treatise on Domestic Economy p. 274

Institutional Reform
◾


Watch the Video
Who Was Horace Mann and Why Are
So Many Schools Named After Him? p. 277


Read the Document William Lloyd Garrison, First Issue
 of The Liberator (1831) p. 278

◾


David Walker, A Black Abolitionist


Utopian Communities Before the Civil War


Complete the Assignment The War Against “Demon
Drink” p. 282
Read the Document
(1841) p. 284


Ralph Waldo Emerson, “Self Reliance”


Complete the Assignment The Legal Rights of Married
Women: Reforming the Law of Coverture p. 286


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




An Age of Expansionism


Contents and Learning Objectives
MOVEMENT TO THE FAR WEST PG. 293

INTERNAL EXPANSIONISM PG. 305

 What were some of the reasons for which Americans headed into the Western territories, and what were some of the consequences of expansion?

 How did developments in transportation foster industrialization and encourage immigration? ◾ FEATURE ESSAY Hispanic America After 1848: A Case Study in Majority Rule

MANIFEST DESTINY AND THE MEXICANAMERICAN WAR PG. 298
Why did the U.S. annex Texas and the Southwest? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

