Chapter 7 Democracy and Dissent


Force of Public Opinion
 How did the ideas of Jeffersonians differ from those of the Federalists? While presiding over the first meeting of the U.S. Senate in 1789, Vice President John Adams called the senators’ attention to a pressing procedural question: How would they address George Washington, the newly elected president? Adams insisted that Washington deserved an impressive title, a designation lending dignity and weight to his office. The vice president warned the senators that if they called Washington simply “president of the United States,” the “common people of foreign countries [as well as] the sailors and soldiers [would] despise him to all eternity.” Adams recommended “His Highness, the President of the United States, and

 Protector of their Liberties,” but some senators favored “His Elective Majesty” or “His Excellency.” Adams’s initiative caught many persons, including Washington, completely by surprise. They regarded the entire debate as ridiculous. James Madison, a member of the House of Representatives, announced that pretentious European titles were ill suited to the “genius of the people” and “the nature of our Government.” Thomas Jefferson, who was then residing in Paris, could not comprehend what motivated the vice president, and in private correspondence, he repeated Benjamin Franklin’s judgment that Adams “means well for his

Watch the Video


George Washington: The Father of Our Country


 Well-wishers spread flowers in front of George Washington as he rides through Trenton on his way from Virginia to New York for his inauguration as the first president of the United States in 1789.



 CHAPTER 7

DEMOCRACY AND DISSENT: THE VIOLENCE OF PARTY POLITICS, 1788–1800

 Country, is always an honest Man, often a wise one, but sometimes, and in some things, absolutely out of his senses.” When the senators learned that their efforts embarrassed Washington, they dropped the topic. The leader of the new republic would be called president of the United States. One wag, however, dubbed the portly Adams “His Rotundity.” he comic-opera quality of the debate about how to address Washington should not obscure the participants’ serious concern about setting government policy. The members of the first Congress could not take the survival of republican government for granted. All of them, of course, wanted to secure the Revolution. The recently ratified Constitution transferred sovereignty from the states to the people, a bold and unprecedented decision that many Americans feared would generate chronic instability. Translating constitutional abstractions into practical legislation would have been difficult, even under the most favorable conditions. But these were especially trying times. Great Britain and France, rivals in a century of war, put nearly unbearable pressures on the leaders of the new republic and, in the process, made foreign policy a bitterly divisive issue. Although no one welcomed them, political parties gradually took shape during this period. Neither the Jeffersonians (also called the Republicans) nor the Federalists—as the two major groups were called—doubted that the United States would one day become a great commercial power. They differed, however, on how best to manage the transition from an agrarian household economy to an international system of trade and industry. The Federalists encouraged rapid integration of the United States into a world economy, but however enthusiastic they were about capitalism, they did not trust the people or local government to do the job effectively. A modern economy, they insisted, required strong national institutions that would be directed by a social elite who understood the financial challenge and who would work in the best interests of the people. Such claims frightened persons who came to identify themselves as Jeffersonians. Strong financial institutions, they thought, had corrupted the government of Great Britain from which they had just separated themselves. They searched for alternative ways to accommodate the needs of commerce and industry. Unlike the Federalists, the Jeffersonians put their faith in the people, defined for the most part politically as white yeoman farmers. The Jeffersonians insisted that ordinary entrepreneurs, if they could be freed from intrusive government regulations, could be trusted to resist greed and crass materialism and to sustain the virtue of the republic. During the 1790s, former allies were surprised to discover themselves at odds over such basic political issues. One person— Hamilton, for example—would stake out a position. Another, such as Jefferson or Madison, would respond, perhaps speaking a little more extravagantly than a specific issue demanded, goaded by the rhetorical nature of public debate. The first in turn would rebut passionately the new position. By the middle of the decade, this dialectic had almost spun out of control, taking the young republic to the brink of political violence.

T


 Leaders of every persuasion had to learn to live with “public opinion.” The revolutionary elite had invited the people to participate in government, but the gentlemen assumed that ordinary voters would automatically defer to their social betters. Instead, the Founders discovered they had created a rough-and-tumble political culture, a robust public sphere of cheap newspapers and street demonstrations. The newly empowered “public” followed the great debates of the period through articles they read in hundreds of highly partisan journals and magazines. Just as television did in the twentieth century, print journalism opened politics to a large audience that previously might have been indifferent to the activities of elected officials. By the time John Adams left the presidency in 1800, he had learned this lesson well. The ordinary workers and farmers of the United States, feisty individuals who thought they were as good as anyone else and who were not afraid to let their political opinions be known, were not likely to let their president become an “Elective Majesty.”

Principle and Pragmatism:
Establishing a New Government
 Why was George Washington unable to overcome division within the new government? In 1788, George Washington enjoyed great popularity throughout the nation. The people remembered him as the selfless leader of the Continental Army, and even before the states had ratified the Constitution, everyone assumed he would be chosen president of the United States. He received the unanimous support of the electoral college, an achievement that no subsequent president has duplicated. Adams, a respected Massachusetts lawyer who championed national independence in 1776, was selected vice president. As Washington left his beloved Virginia plantation, Mount Vernon, for New York City, he recognized that the people—now so vocal in their support—could be fickle. “I fear,” he explained with mature insight, “if the issue of public measures should not correspond with their sanguine expectations, they will turn the extravagant . . . praise . . . into equally extravagant . . . censures.” Washington owed much of his success as the nation’s first president to an instinctive feeling for the symbolic possibilities of political power. Although he possessed only modest speaking abilities and never matched the intellectual brilliance of some contemporaries, Washington sensed that he had come to embody the hopes and fears of the new republic, and thus, without ever quite articulating the attributes necessary to achieve charisma—an instinctive ability that some leaders have to merge their own personality with the abstract goals of the government—he carefully monitored his official behavior. Washington knew that if he did not convincingly demonstrate the existence of a strong republic, people who championed the sovereignty of the individual states would attempt to weaken federal authority before it was ever properly established. The first Congress quickly established executive departments. Some congressmen wanted to prohibit presidents from dismissing cabinet-level appointees without Senate approval, but James Madison—still a voice for a strong, independent executive—led

Conflicting Visions: Jefferson and Hamilton


 a successful fight against this restriction on presidential authority. Madison recognized that the chief executive could not function unless he had personal confidence in the people with whom he worked. In 1789, Congress created the Departments of War, State, and the Treasury, and as secretaries, Washington nominated Henry Knox, Thomas Jefferson, and Alexander Hamilton, respectively. Edmund Randolph served as part-time attorney general, a position that ranked slightly lower in prestige than the head of a department. Since the secretary of the treasury oversaw the collection of customs and other future federal taxes, Hamilton could anticipate having several thousand jobs to dispense, an obvious source of political patronage. To modern Americans accustomed to a huge federal bureaucracy, the size of Washington’s government seems amazingly small. When Jefferson arrived in New York to take over the State Department, for example, he found two chief clerks, two assistants, and a part-time translator. With this tiny staff, he not only maintained contacts with the representatives of foreign governments, collected information about world affairs, and communicated with U.S. officials living overseas, but also organized the entire federal census! Since the Constitution tied congressional representation to state population, it was extremely important to count the number of inhabitants fairly and efficiently, a task that strained the resources of the new administration. In 1790, at a cost of only $44,377.28, hundreds of federal enumerators were dispatched to obtain an accurate tally of the nation’s inhabitants. Anxious to impress predatory European monarchies with the rapid growth of the United States, Washington hoped the number would be large. The final figure of 3,929,214 people, of which some 700,000 were African American slaves, disappointed the president. Jefferson immediately recognized that his new job would allow him little leisure for personal interests. The situation in other departments was similar. Overworked clerks scribbled madly just to keep up with the press of correspondence. John Adams, reviewing a bundle of letters and memos, grumbled that “often the handwriting is almost illegible.” Considering these working conditions, it is not surprising that the president had difficulty persuading able people to accept positions in the new government. It is even more astonishing that Hamilton and Jefferson were able to accomplish as much as they did with so little assistance. Congress also provided for a federal court system. The Judiciary Act of 1789, the work primarily of Connecticut Congressman Oliver Ellsworth, created a Supreme Court staffed by a chief justice and five associate justices. In addition, the statute set up thirteen district courts authorized to review the decisions of the state courts. John Jay, a leading figure in New York politics, agreed to serve as chief justice, but since federal judges in the 1790s were expected to travel hundreds of miles over terrible roads to attend sessions of the inferior courts, few persons of outstanding talent and training joined Jay on the federal bench. One who did, Judge James Iredell, complained that service on the Supreme Court had transformed him into a “travelling postboy.” Remembering the financial insecurity of the old Confederation government, the newly elected congressmen passed the tariff of 1789, a tax of approximately 5 percent on imports. The new levy generated considerable revenue for the young republic. Even before it went into effect, however, the act sparked controversy. Southern



 planters, who relied heavily on European imports and the northern shippers who could control the flow of imports into the South, claimed that the tariff discriminated against southern interests in favor of those of northern merchants.

Conflicting Visions: Jefferson
 and Hamilton Why did Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson find it so difficult to cooperate as members of Washington’s cabinet? Washington’s first cabinet included two extraordinary personalities, Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson. Both had served the country with distinction during the Revolution, were recognized by contemporaries as men of special genius as well as high ambition, and brought to public office a powerful vision of how the American people could achieve greatness. The story of their opposing views during the decade of the 1790s provides insight into the birth and development of political parties. It also reveals how a common political ideology, republicanism (see Chapter 6), could be interpreted in such vastly different ways that decisions about government policy turned friends into adversaries. Indeed, the falling out of Hamilton and Jefferson reflected deep, potentially explosive political divisions within American society. Hamilton was a brilliant, dynamic young lawyer who had distinguished himself as Washington’s aide-de-camp during the Revolution. Born in the West Indies, the child of an adulterous relationship, Hamilton employed charm, courage, and intellect to fulfill his inexhaustible ambition. He strove not for wealth but for reputation. Men and women who fell under his spell found him almost irresistible, but to enemies, Hamilton appeared a dark, calculating, even evil, genius. He advocated a strong central government and refused to be bound by the strict wording of the Constitution, a document Hamilton once called “a shilly shally thing.” While he had fought for American independence, he admired British culture, and during the 1790s, he advocated closer commercial and diplomatic ties with the former mother country, with whom, he said, “we have a similarity of tastes, language, and general manners.” Jefferson possessed a profoundly different temperament. This tall Virginian was more reflective and shone less brightly in society than Hamilton. Contemporaries sometimes interpreted his retiring manner as lack of ambition. They misread Jefferson. He thirsted not for power or wealth but for an opportunity to advance the democratic principles that he had stated so eloquently in the Declaration of Independence. When Jefferson became secretary of state in January 1790, he had just returned from Paris where he witnessed the first exhilarating moments of the French Revolution. These earthshaking events, he believed, marked the beginning of a worldwide republican assault on absolute monarchy and aristocratic privilege. His European experiences biased Jefferson in favor of France over Great Britain when the two nations clashed. The contrast between these two powerful figures during the early years of Washington’s administration should not be exaggerated. They shared many fundamental beliefs. Indeed, both



 CHAPTER 7

DEMOCRACY AND DISSENT: THE VIOLENCE OF PARTY POLITICS, 1788–1800

Read the Document


Alexander Hamilton,
Opposing Visions for the New Nation


 During the first years of Washington’s administration, neither Hamilton (top) nor Jefferson (bottom) recognized the full extent of their differences. But as events forced the federal government to make decisions on economic and foreign affairs, the two secretaries increasingly came into open conflict.

 Hamilton and Jefferson insisted they were working for the creation of a strong, prosperous republic, one in which commerce would play an important role. Hamilton was publicly accused of being a secret monarchist, but he never repudiated the ideals of the

 American Revolution. Rather than being spokespersons for competing ideologies, Hamilton and Jefferson were different kinds of republicans who, during the 1790s, attempted as best they could to cope with unprecedented political challenges. However much these two men had in common, serious differences emerged. Washington’s secretaries disagreed on precisely how the United States should fulfill its destiny. As head of the Treasury Department, Hamilton urged his fellow citizens to think in terms of bold commercial development, of farms and factories embedded within a complex financial network that would reduce the nation’s reliance on foreign trade. Because Great Britain had already established an elaborate system of banking and credit, the secretary looked to that country for economic models that might be reproduced on this side of the Atlantic. Hamilton also voiced concerns about the role of the people in shaping public policy. His view of human nature caused him to fear democratic excess. He assumed that in a republican society, the gravest threat to political stability was anarchy rather than monarchy. “The truth,” he claimed, “unquestionably is, that the only path to a subversion of the republican system of the Country is, by flattering the prejudices of the people, and exciting their jealousies and apprehensions, to throw affairs into confusion and bring on civil commotion.” The best hope for the survival of the republic, Hamilton believed, lay with the country’s monied classes. If the wealthiest people could be persuaded that their economic self-interest could be advanced—or at least made less insecure—by the central government, then they would work to strengthen it, and by so doing, bring a greater measure of prosperity to the common people. From Hamilton’s perspective, there was no conflict between private greed and public good; one was the source of the other. On almost every detail, Jefferson challenged Hamilton’s analysis. The secretary of state assumed that the strength of the American economy lay not in its industrial potential but in its agricultural productivity. The “immensity of land” represented the country’s major economic resource. Contrary to the claims of some critics, Jefferson did not advocate agrarian self-sufficiency or look back nostalgically to a golden age dominated by simple yeomen. He recognized the necessity of change, and while he thought that persons who worked the soil were more responsible citizens than were those who labored in factories for wages, he encouraged the nation’s farmers to participate in an expanding international market. Americans could exchange raw materials “for finer manufactures than they are able to execute themselves.” Unlike Hamilton, Jefferson expressed faith in the ability of the American people to shape policy. Throughout this troubled decade, even when the very survival of constitutional government seemed in doubt, Jefferson maintained a boundless optimism in the judgment of the common folk. He instinctively trusted the people, feared that uncontrolled government power might destroy their liberties, and insisted public officials follow the letter of the Constitution, a frame of government he described as “the wisest ever presented to men.” The greatest threat to the young republic, he argued, came from the corrupt activities of pseudoaristocrats, persons who placed the protection of “property” and “civil order” above the preservation of “liberty.” To tie the nation’s future to the selfish interests of a privileged class—bankers, manufacturers, and speculators—seemed cynical as well as dangerous. He despised speculators who encouraged “the

 Hamilton’s Plan for Prosperity and Security

 rage of getting rich in a day,” since such “gaming” activities inevitably promoted the kinds of public vice that threatened republican government. To mortgage the future of the common people by creating a large national debt struck Jefferson as particularly insane. But the responsibility for shaping the economy of the new nation fell mainly to Alexander Hamilton as the first secretary of the treasury.

 Hamilton’s Plan for Prosperity and Security Why did many Americans oppose Alexander Hamilton’s blueprint for national prosperity? The unsettled state of the nation’s finances presented the new government with a staggering challenge. In August 1789, the House of Representatives announced that “adequate provision for the support of public credit [is] a matter of high importance to the national honor and prosperity.” However pressing the problem appeared, no one was prepared to advance a solution, and the House asked the secretary of the treasury to make suggestions. Congress may have received more than it bargained for. Hamilton threw himself into the task. He read deeply in abstruse economic literature. He even developed a questionnaire designed to find out how the U.S. economy really worked and sent it to scores of commercial and political leaders throughout the country. But when Hamilton’s three major reports—on public credit, on banking, and on manufacturers—were complete, they bore the unmistakable stamp of his own creative genius. The secretary synthesized a vast amount of information into an economic blueprint so complex, so innovative that even his allies were slightly baffled. Theodore Sedgwick, a congressman who supported Hamilton’s program, explained weakly that the secretary’s ideas were “difficult to understand . . . while we are in our infancy in the knowledge of Finance.” Certainly, Washington never fully grasped the subtleties of Hamilton’s plan. The secretary presented his Report on the Public Credit to Congress on January 14, 1790. His research revealed that the nation’s outstanding debt stood at approximately $54 million. This sum represented various obligations that the U.S. government had incurred during the Revolutionary War. In addition to foreign loans, the figure included loan certificates the government had issued to its own citizens and soldiers. But that was not all. The states still owed creditors approximately $25 million. During the 1780s, Americans desperate for cash had been forced to sell government certificates to speculators at greatly discounted prices, and it was estimated that approximately $40 million of the nation’s debt was owed to twenty thousand people, only 20 percent of whom were the original creditors.

Funding and Assumption
 Hamilton’s Report on the Public Credit contained two major recommendations covering the areas of funding and assumption. First, under his plan, the United States promised to fund its foreign and domestic obligations at full face value. Current holders of loan certificates, whoever they were and no matter how they obtained them, could exchange the old certificates for new government



 bonds bearing a moderate rate of interest. Second, the secretary urged the federal government to assume responsibility for paying the remaining state debts. Hamilton reasoned that his credit system would accomplish several desirable goals. It would significantly reduce the power of the individual states in shaping national economic policy, something Hamilton regarded as essential in maintaining a strong federal government. Moreover, the creation of a fully funded national debt signaled to investors throughout the world that the United States was now solvent, that its bonds represented a good risk. Hamilton argued that investment capital, which might otherwise flow to Europe, would remain in this country, providing a source of money for commercial and industrial investment. In short, Hamilton invited the country’s wealthiest citizens to invest in the future of the United States. Critics claimed that the only people who stood to profit from the scheme were Hamilton’s friends—some of whom sat in Congress and who had purchased great numbers of public securities at very low prices. To Hamilton’s great surprise, Madison—his friend and collaborator in writing The Federalist—attacked the funding scheme in the House of Representatives. The Virginia congressman agreed that the United States should honor its debts. He worried, however, about the citizens and soldiers who, because of personal financial hardship, had been compelled to sell their certificates at prices far below face value. Why should wealthy speculators now profit from their hardship? If the government treated the current holders of certificates less generously, Madison declared, then there might be sufficient funds to provide equitable treatment for the distressed Patriots. Whatever the moral justification for Madison’s plan may have been, it proved unworkable on the national level. Far too many records had been lost since the Revolution for the Treasury Department to be able to identify all the original holders. In February 1790, Congress soundly defeated Madison’s proposal. The assumption portion of Hamilton’s plan unleashed even greater criticism. Some states had already paid their revolutionary debts, and Hamilton’s program seemed designed to reward certain states—Massachusetts and South Carolina, for example—simply because they had failed to put their finances in order. In addition, the secretary’s opponents in Congress became suspicious that assumption was merely a ploy to increase the power and wealth of Hamilton’s immediate friends. “The Secretary’s people scarce disguise their design,” observed William Maclay, a crusty Scots-Irish senator from Pennsylvania, “which is to create a mass of debts which will justify them in seizing all the sources of government.” No doubt, Maclay and others expressed genuine fears. Some of those who protested, however, were simply looking after their own speculative schemes. These men had contracted to purchase huge tracts of vacant western lands from the state and federal governments. They anticipated that when settlers finally arrived in these areas, the price of land would skyrocket. In the meantime, the speculators had paid for the land with revolutionary certificates, often purchased on the open market at fifteen cents on the dollar. This meant that one could obtain 1,000 acres for only $150. Hamilton’s assumption proposal threatened to destroy these lucrative transactions by cutting off the supply of cut-rate securities. On April 12, a rebellious House led by Madison defeated assumption.



 CHAPTER 7

DEMOCRACY AND DISSENT: THE VIOLENCE OF PARTY POLITICS, 1788–1800

 The victory was short-lived. Hamilton and congressional supporters resorted to legislative horse trading to revive his foundering program. In exchange for locating the new federal capital on the Potomac River, a move that would stimulate the depressed economy of northern Virginia, several key congressmen who shared Madison’s political philosophy changed their votes on assumption. Hamilton may also have offered to give the state of Virginia more federal money than it actually deserved. Whatever the details of these negotiations may have been, in August, Washington signed assumption and funding into law. The first element of Hamilton’s design was now securely in place.

Interpreting the Constitution: The
Bank Controversy
 The persistent Hamilton submitted his second report to Congress in January 1791. He proposed that the U.S. government charter a national bank. This privately owned institution would be funded in part by the federal government. Indeed, since the Bank of the United States would own millions of dollars of new U.S. bonds, its financial stability would be tied directly to the strength of the federal government and, of course, to the success of Hamilton’s program. The secretary of the treasury argued that a growing financial community required a central bank to facilitate increasingly complex commercial transactions. The institution not only would serve as the main depository of the U.S. government but also would issue currency acceptable in payment of federal taxes. Because of that guarantee, the money would maintain its value while in circulation. Madison and others in Congress immediately raised a howl of protest. While they were not oblivious to the many important services a national bank might provide for a growing country, they suspected that banks—especially those modeled on British institutions—might “perpetuate a large monied interest” in the United States. And how was one to interpret the Constitution? That document said nothing specifically about chartering financial corporations, and critics warned that if Hamilton and his supporters were allowed to stretch fundamental law on this occasion, they could not be held back in the future. Popular liberties would be at the mercy of whomever happened to be in office. “To take a single step,” Jefferson warned, “beyond the boundaries thus specifically drawn around the powers of Congress is to take possession of a boundless field of power, no longer susceptible to definition.” On this issue, Hamilton stubbornly refused to compromise, announcing angrily, “This is the first symptom of a spirit which must either be killed or will kill the constitution of the United States.” This intense controversy involving his closest advisers worried the president. Even though the bank bill passed Congress (February 8), Washington seriously considered vetoing the legislation on constitutional grounds. Before doing so, however, he requested written opinions from the members of his cabinet. Jefferson’s rambling, wholly predictable attack on the Bank of the United States was not one of his more persuasive performances. By contrast, in only a few days, Hamilton prepared a masterful essay titled “Defense of the Constitutionality of the Bank.” He assured the president that Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution—“The Congress shall have Power . . . To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing

 Powers”—justified issuing charters to national banks. The “foregoing Powers” on which Hamilton placed so much weight were taxation, regulation of commerce, and making war. He boldly articulated a doctrine of implied powers, an interpretation of the Constitution that neither Madison nor Jefferson had anticipated. Hamilton’s “loose construction” carried the day, and on February 25, 1791, Washington signed the bank act into law. Hamilton triumphed in Congress, but the general public looked on his actions with growing fear and hostility. Many persons associated huge national debts and privileged banks with the decay of public virtue. Men of Jefferson’s temperament believed that Great Britain—a country Hamilton held in high regard—had compromised the purity of its ancient constitution by allowing speculators to worm their way into positions of political power. Hamilton seemed intent on reproducing this corrupt system in the United States. When news of his proposal to fund the national debt at full face value leaked out, for example, urban speculators rushed to rural areas, where they purchased loan certificates from unsuspecting citizens at bargain prices. To backcountry farmers, making money without actually engaging in physical labor appeared immoral, unrepublican, and, certainly, un-American. When the greed of a former Treasury Department official led to several serious bankruptcies in 1792, ordinary citizens began to listen more closely to what Madison, Jefferson, and their associates were saying about growing corruption in high places.

Setback for Hamilton
 In his third major report, Report on Manufactures, submitted to Congress in December 1791, Hamilton revealed the final details of his grand design for the economic future of the United States. This lengthy document suggested ways by which the federal government might stimulate manufacturing. If the country wanted to free itself from dependence on European imports, Hamilton observed, then it had to develop its own industry, textile mills for example. Without direct government intervention, however, the process would take decades. Americans would continue to invest in agriculture. But, according to the secretary of the treasury, protective tariffs and special industrial bounties would greatly accelerate the growth of a balanced economy, and with proper planning, the United States would soon hold its own with England and France. In Congress, the battle lines were clearly drawn. Hamilton’s opponents—not yet a disciplined party but a loose coalition of men who shared Madison’s and Jefferson’s misgivings about the secretary’s program—ignored his economic arguments. Instead, they engaged him on moral and political grounds. Madison railed against the dangers of “consolidation,” a process that threatened to concentrate all power in the federal government, leaving the states defenseless. Under the Confederation, of course, Madison had stood with the nationalists against the advocates of extreme states’ rights. His disagreements with Hamilton over economic policy, coupled with the necessity of pleasing the voters of his Virginia congressional district every two years, transformed Madison into a spokesman for the states, echoing the substance of Antifederalist arguments he had once hotly rejected (see Chapter 6). Jefferson attacked the Report on Manufactures from a different angle. He assumed—largely because he had been horrified by

 Charges of Treason: The Battle over Foreign Affairs

 Europe’s urban poverty—that cities breed vice. The government, Jefferson argued, should do nothing to promote their development. He believed that Hamilton’s proposal guaranteed that American workers would leave the countryside and crowd into urban centers. “I think our government will remain virtuous for many centuries,” Jefferson explained, “as long as they [the people] are chiefly agricultural. . . . When they get piled upon one another in large cities, as in Europe, they will become corrupt as in Europe.” And southern congressmen saw tariffs and bounties as vehicles for enriching Hamilton’s northern friends at the planters’ expense. The recommendations in the Report on Manufactures were soundly defeated in the House of Representatives.

Charges of Treason: The Battle
 over Foreign Affairs How did foreign affairs affect domestic politics during the 1790s? During Washington’s second term (1793–1797), war in Europe dramatically thrust foreign affairs into the forefront of American life. The impact of this development on the conduct of domestic politics was devastating. Officials who had formerly disagreed on economic policy now began to identify their interests with either Britain or France, Europe’s most powerful nations. Differences of political opinion, however trivial, were suddenly cited as evidence that one group or the other had entered into treasonous correspondence with external enemies eager to compromise the independence and prosperity of the United States. As Jefferson observed during the troubled summer of 1793, European conflict “kindled and brought forward the two parties with an ardour which our own interests merely, could never excite.” The spirit of nationalism even spilled over into scientific debate. The normally dispassionate Jefferson reacted very badly when a French writer claimed, among other things, that North American animals were smaller than those found in Europe. (See the Feature Essay, “Defense of Superiority: The Impact of Nationalism on Perceptions of the Environment,” pp. 166–167.) Formal political organizations—the Federalists and Republicans—were born in this poisonous atmosphere. The clash between the groups developed over how best to preserve the new republic. The Republicans (Jeffersonians) advocated states’ rights, strict interpretation of the Constitution, friendship with France, and vigilance against “the avaricious, monopolizing Spirit of Commerce and Commercial Men.” The Federalists urged a strong national government, central economic planning, closer ties with Great Britain, and maintenance of public order, even if that meant calling out federal troops.

The Peril of Neutrality
 Great Britain treated the United States with arrogance. The colonists had defeated the redcoats on land, but on the high seas, the Americans were no match for the British navy, the strongest in the world. Indeed, the young republic could not even compel its old adversary to comply with the Treaty of 1783, in which the British



 had agreed to vacate military posts in the Northwest Territory. In 1794, approximately a thousand British soldiers still occupied American land, an obstruction that Governor George Clinton of New York claimed had excluded U.S. citizens “from a very valuable trade to which their situation would naturally have invited them.” Moreover, even though 75 percent of American imports came from Great Britain, that country refused to grant the United States full commercial reciprocity. Among other provocations, it barred American shipping from the lucrative West Indian trade. France presented a very different challenge. In May 1789, Louis XVI, desperate for revenue, authorized a meeting of a representative assembly known as the Estates General. By so doing, the king unleashed explosive revolutionary forces that toppled the monarchy and cost him his life (January 1793). The men who seized power—and they came and went rapidly—were militant republicans, ideologues eager to liberate all Europe from feudal institutions. In the early years of the French Revolution, France drew on the American experience, and Thomas Paine and the Marquis de Lafayette enjoyed great popularity. But the French found they could not stop the violence of revolution. Constitutional reform turned into bloody purges, and one radical group, the Jacobins, guillotined thousands of people who were suspected of monarchist sympathies during the so-called Reign of Terror (October 1793– July 1794). These horrific events left Americans confused. While those who shared Jefferson’s views cheered the spread of republicanism, others who sided with Hamilton condemned French expansionism and political excess. In the face of growing international tension, neutrality seemed the most prudent course for the United States. But that policy was easier for a weak country to proclaim than to defend. In February 1793, France declared war on Great Britain—what the leaders of revolutionary France called the “war of all peoples against all kings”—and these powerful European rivals immediately challenged the official American position on shipping: “free ships make free goods,” meaning that belligerents should not interfere with the shipping of neutral carriers. To make matters worse, no one was certain whether the Franco-American treaties of 1778 (see Chapter 5) legally bound the United States to support its old ally against Great Britain. Both Hamilton and Jefferson wanted to avoid war. The secretary of state, however, believed that nations desiring American goods should be forced to honor American neutrality and, therefore, that if Britain treated the United States as a colonial possession, if the Royal Navy stopped American ships on the high seas and forced seamen to serve the king—in other words, if it impressed American sailors—then the United States should award France special commercial advantages. Hamilton thought Jefferson’s scheme insane. He pointed out that Britain possessed the largest navy in the world and was not likely to be coerced by American threats. The United States, he counseled, should appease the former mother country even if that meant swallowing national pride. A newly appointed French minister to the United States, Edmond Genêt, precipitated the first major diplomatic crisis. This incompetent young man arrived in Charleston, South Carolina, in April 1793. He found considerable popular enthusiasm for the French Revolution, and, buoyed by this reception, he authorized privately owned American vessels to seize British ships in the name



 CHAPTER 7

DEMOCRACY AND DISSENT: THE VIOLENCE OF PARTY POLITICS, 1788–1800

Read the Document


Proclamation of Neutrality (1793)


 The execution of Louis XVI by French revolutionaries served to deepen the growing political division in America. Although they deplored the excesses of the Reign of Terror, Jeffersonian Republicans continued to support the French people. Federalists feared that the violence and lawlessness would spread to the United States.

 of France. Such actions clearly violated U.S. neutrality and invited British retaliation. When U.S. government officials warned Genêt to desist, he threatened to take his appeal directly to the American people, who presumably loved France more than did members of Washington’s administration. This confrontation particularly embarrassed Jefferson, the most outspoken pro-French member of the cabinet. He described Genêt as “hot headed, all imagination, no judgment, passionate, disrespectful and even indecent towards the President.” Washington did not wait to discover whether the treaties of 1778 were still in force. Before he had formally received the impudent French minister, the president issued a Proclamation of Neutrality (April 22). Ironically, after Genêt learned that the Jacobins intended to cut off his head if he returned to France, he requested asylum, married into an extremely wealthy family, and spent the remainder of his life in New York.

 Jay’s Treaty Sparks Domestic Unrest Great Britain failed to take advantage of Genêt’s insolence. Instead, it pushed the United States to the brink of war. British forts in the Northwest Territory remained a constant source of

 tension. In June 1793, a new element was added. The London government blockaded French ports to neutral shipping, and in November, its navy captured several hundred American vessels trading in the French West Indies. The British had not even bothered to give the United States advance warning of a change in policy. Outraged members of Congress, especially those who identified with Jefferson and Madison, demanded retaliation, an embargo, a stoppage of debt payment, even war. Before this rhetoric produced armed struggle, Washington made one final effort to preserve peace. In May 1794, he sent Chief Justice John Jay to London to negotiate a formidable list of grievances. The effort resulted in a political humiliation known simply as Jay’s Treaty. Jay’s main objectives were removal of the British forts on U.S. territory, payment for ships taken in the West Indies, improved commercial relations, and acceptance of the American definition of neutral rights. Jefferson’s supporters—by now openly called the Republican interest—anticipated a treaty favorable to the United States. After all, they explained, the war with France had not gone well for Great Britain, and the British people were surely desperate for American foodstuffs. Even before Jay departed, however, his mission stood

 Charges of Treason: The Battle over Foreign Affairs

 little chance of success. Hamilton, anxious as ever to placate the British, had already secretly informed British officials that the United States would compromise on most issues. Not surprisingly, when Jay reached London, he encountered polite but firm resistance. The chief justice did persuade the British to abandon their frontier posts and to allow small American ships to trade in the British West Indies, but they rejected out of hand the U.S. position on neutral rights. The Royal Navy would continue to search American vessels on the high seas for contraband and to impress sailors suspected of being British citizens. Moreover, there would be no compensation for the ships seized in 1793 until the Americans paid British merchants for debts contracted before the Revolution. And to the particular annoyance of Southerners, not a word was said about the slaves the British army had carried off at the conclusion of the war. While Jay salvaged the peace, he appeared to have betrayed the national interest. News of Jay’s Treaty—perhaps more correctly called Hamilton’s Treaty—produced an angry outcry in the nation’s capital. Even Washington was apprehensive. He submitted the document to the Senate without recommending ratification, a sign that the president was not entirely happy with the results of Jay’s mission. After an extremely bitter debate, the upper house, controlled by Federalists, accepted a revised version of the treaty (June 1795). The vote was 20 to 10, a bare two-thirds majority. The details of the Jay agreement soon leaked to the press. This was an important moment in American political history. The popular journals sparked a firestorm of objection. Throughout the country, people who had generally been apathetic about national politics were swept up in a wave of protest. Urban mobs condemned Jay’s alleged sellout; rural settlers burned him in effigy. Jay jokingly told friends he could find his way across the country simply by following the light of those fires. Southerners announced they would not pay prerevolutionary debts to British merchants. The Virginia legislature proposed a constitutional amendment reducing the Senate’s role in the treaty-making process. As Fisher Ames, a Federalist congressman, noted darkly, “These little whirlwinds of dry leaves and dirt portend a hurricane.” His prediction proved accurate. The storm broke in the House of Representatives. Republican congressmen, led by Madison, thought they could stop Jay’s Treaty by refusing to appropriate funds for its implementation. As part of their plan, they demanded that Washington show the House state papers relating to Jay’s mission. The challenge raised complex issues of constitutional law. The House, for example, was claiming a voice in treaty ratification, a power explicitly reserved to the Senate. Second, there was the question of executive secrecy in the interest of national security. Could the president withhold information from the public? According to Washington—as well as all subsequent presidents—the answer was yes. He took the occasion to lecture the rebellious representatives that “the nature of foreign negotiations requires caution; and their success must often depend on secrecy.” The president still had a trump card to play. He raised the possibility that the House was really contemplating his impeachment. Such an action was, of course, unthinkable. Even criticizing Washington in public was politically dangerous, and as soon as he redefined the issue before Congress, petitions supporting the president flooded into the nation’s capital. The Maryland

Read the Document




The Jay Treaty (1794)


 John Jay (1745–1829) was a successful lawyer and politician from New York. He served in the Continental Congress during the Revolution, co-authored The Federalist Papers with James Madison and Alexander Hamilton, and later became the first Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.

 legislature, for example, declared its “unabated reliance on the integrity, judgment, and patriotism of the President of the United States,” a statement that clearly called into question the patriotism of certain Republican congressmen. The Federalists won a stunning tactical victory over the opposition. Had a less popular man than Washington occupied the presidency, however, they would not have fared so well. The division between the two parties was beyond repair. The Republicans labeled the Federalists “the British party”; the Federalists believed that the Republicans were in league with the French. By the time Jay’s Treaty became law (June 14, 1795), the two giants of Washington’s first cabinet had retired. Late in 1793, Jefferson returned to his Virginia plantation, Monticello, where, despite his separation from day-to-day political affairs, he remained the chief spokesman for the Republican Party. His rival, Hamilton, left the Treasury in January 1795 to practice law in New York City. He maintained close ties with important Federalist officials, and even more than Jefferson, Hamilton concerned himself with the details of party organization.

Complete the Assignment Defense of Superiority: The Impact of Nationalism on Perceptions of the
 Environment on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


N


 ationalism promotes patriotism. However, these expressions of pride can turn malicious. The physical environment of a country can be seen as giving the people who live there special attributes. When claims of superiority seem to have this sort of seemingly scientific justification, the rhetoric of nationalism can become dangerous, often outright racist. Such a situation developed during the earliest years of the American republic. Even before the Revolution, respected scientists such as Benjamin Franklin resented disparaging remarks about American inferiority. Europeans accepted as fact the notion that New World animals and humans were smaller, slower, and less clever than those found in the Old World. Franklin dismissed the theory as nonsense, and at a dinner party in Paris he took the opportunity to demonstrate that if size really mattered, then the Americans were bigger. When the abbe Raynal, a French naturalist, announced that everything American was substandard compared to European experience, Franklin challenged his host to a test. All the Americans at the table stood; so did the French. Franklin noted with satisfaction that the Americans had the “finest stature and form.” Raynal, he observed, was a “mere shrimp.” Although Franklin may have won the battle of the dinner table, other Americans still worried that New World creatures fell short of European standards. The seeds of doubt could be traced to a widely read scientific treatise entitled Histoire naturelle, the first volumes of which appeared in 1749.

Defense of Superiority
The Impact of Nationalism on
Perceptions of the Environment
 The author, French philosopher Comte de Buffon, argued that the climate of North America produced animals of smaller size than those encountered in the Old World. As evidence, Buffon cited the absence of elephants, lions, and other large beasts in the New World. The only New World creatures that exceeded their Old World counterparts in size, he declared, were the toads and snakes that thrived in North America’s abundant swamps. Worse yet, Buffon asserted that America’s climate caused animals found in Europe to “shrink and diminish” when transported to the New World. For Buffon, Native Americans were a case in point. On the basis of superficial reports of Indian weakness, Buffon announced that conditions in the New World were “pernicious to men, who are degenerated, debilitated, and vitiated in a surprising manner in all parts of their organization.” The implications of this idea were not lost on people such as Franklin. If the American environment sapped the Indians of vitality, it was only a matter

A COMPARATIVE VIEW OF THE QUADRUPEDS OF EUROPE AND AMERICA

Bear
 Red deer Beaver Otter Cow

Europe
 lb. 153.7 288.8 18.5 8.9 763.0

America
 lb. 410.0 273.0 45.0 12.0 2500.0

 Source: Adapted from Thomas Jefferson, Notes on the State of Virginia (1787).

 Illustration of frogs from Comte de Buffon’s Histoire Naturelle, 1749. Buffon declared that in the damp American climate only cold-blooded animals such as snakes and frogs flourished and grew larger than their European counterparts.

 of time until European settlers who breathed the same air, drank the same water, and cultivated the same land succumbed to sloth. One of Buffon’s followers counseled those colonists condemned to live in such an unpromising environment “to know how to make themselves happy . . . with mediocrity,” leaving intellectual greatness to those who had wisely remained in the Old World. American anger over Buffon’s theory came to a boil following the American Revolution. The new nation had its honor to defend. If, as the French scientist had maintained, the North American climate caused the physical,

 mental, and moral abilities of humans to decline, then the republican experiment of the young United States seemed destined to fail. Having already asserted that “all men are created equal” in the Declaration of Independence, Thomas Jefferson set out to prove American equality through science. An uncompromising Patriot, he devoted himself almost entirely to the defense of the fledgling republic, spending much of the 1780s poring over accounts of American animals in search of holes in Buffon’s theory. Jefferson published his results in 1785. In Notes on the State of Virginia he countered Buffon with a lengthy series of tables comparing the weight of European and American animals. Not surprisingly, Jefferson always tipped the scale in favor of the New World. While Europe’s puny flying squirrels weighed only 2.2 pounds, America could boast of impressive 4-pound squirrels. American bears were three times fatter than Old World bears. And most telling, America had once been the home of huge Ice Age animals called woolly mammoths. They looked a lot like elephants, and one recently unearthed in Kentucky matched the best Old World elephants in terms of size. Jefferson did not stop there. Determined to use science to improve the international reputation of the United States, Jefferson commissioned the governor of New Hampshire to kill a giant moose, which was then shipped to Paris as a present for Buffon. The plan miscarried. While hunters managed to shoot the moose and drag it from the forest, the unrefrigerated voyage to France made for an extremely foul-smelling gift. For Jefferson, the unlucky moose’s decay was a minor problem, since by his own reasoning, he had put to rest misguided European ideas about animal deficiency in the new American republic. Turning from moose to men, Jefferson took a step that transformed

 a harmless squabble over the weight of squirrels into something much more alarming. Using the latest scientific research, Jefferson claimed that climate had almost no effect on human beings. Instead, a person’s race determined his or her size, vitality, and intelligence. In this scheme, European Americans and Native Americans were equal. And, according to Jefferson, both were vastly superior to Africans. A celebration of national pride had now become a defense of racism. To make his case, Jefferson first defended Native Americans against Buffon’s assertions of climate-induced inferiority. Buffon had suggested that Indians’ beardless faces and “lack of ardour for their female” demonstrated their physical inadequacy in comparison to manly Europeans. In response, Jefferson outlined the practice of face plucking. “With them it is disgraceful to be hairy,” he claimed of Native Americans, because many believed “it likens them to hogs.” Moreover, the Indians did not value French-style womanizing. Jefferson explained that “Their soul is wholly bent upon war,” a trait that “procures them glory among men, and makes them the admiration of women.” Differences between whites and Indians could be attributed not to the environment, but to culture. Indeed, he saw the two groups as a single race, so closely related that he recommended letting them “intermix, and become one people.” Jefferson rejected completely any notion that Africans in America could be part of this “one people.” An unbridgeable biological gulf separated whites and Indians—groups that Jefferson lumped together as “Homo Sapiens Europaeus”—from blacks. Jefferson argued that while Europeans and Native Americans produced fine arts and engaged in brilliant oratory, African slaves exhibited no skill in painting or sculpture, and never “uttered a thought above the level of plain narration.” With

 only anecdotal evidence to support his claims, Jefferson concluded that blacks were “inferior to the whites in the endowments of both body and mind.” According to Jefferson, the harsh truth was that whether found in Africa, on Carolina rice plantations, or on the streets of Boston, Africans were a “different species of the same genus.” They were a separate race, unworthy of genuine political and social equality. During the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, American nationalists seized upon Jefferson’s ideas, seeing Notes on the State of Virginia as a blueprint for a republican society, grounded in rational science and dedicated to racial inequality. In a world still dominated by powerful monarchies and Old World cultures, Americans of all European backgrounds took comfort in being equal to each other and superior to African Americans. In an atmosphere of strident nationalism, few were willing to explain differences between whites and blacks as culturally conditioned. There existed, in Jefferson’s words, a “real distinction which nature has made.” White Americans were destined by nature to be free, while enslaved blacks, whose labor formed the backbone of the whites’ economy, must accept their lesser place in the nation’s future. Jefferson’s scientific thinking about race—inspired by national insecurity and a Frenchman’s musing on New World toads—promoted a divisiveness in American society that continues to trouble the nation.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why were Americans such as Thomas Jefferson so defensive about the size of American animals? 2. What was the relationship between science and racism in Jefferson’s thinking? 




 CHAPTER 7

DEMOCRACY AND DISSENT: THE VIOLENCE OF PARTY POLITICS, 1788–1800

Read the Document


The Treaty of Greenville


 At the Treaty of Greenville in 1795, negotiators shared this calumet, or peace pipe, a spiritually symbolic act for Native Americans. This superficial recognition of the legitimacy of Native American cultures barely disguised the Indians’ crushing loss of sovereignty.

Pushing the Native Americans Aside
 Before Great Britain finally withdrew its troops from the Great Lakes and Northwest Territory, its military officers encouraged local Indian groups—the Shawnee, Chippewa, and Miami—to attack settlers and traders from the United States. The Indians, who even without British encouragement fully appreciated that the newcomers intended to seize their land, won several impressive victories over federal troops in the area that would become western Ohio and Indiana. In 1790, General Josiah Harmar led his soldiers into an ambush. The following year, an army under General Arthur St. Clair suffered more than nine hundred casualties near the Wabash River. But the Indians were militarily more vulnerable than they realized, for when confronted with a major U.S. army under the command of General Anthony Wayne, they received no support from their former British allies. At the Battle of Fallen Timbers (August 20, 1794), Wayne’s forces crushed Indian resistance in the Northwest Territory, and the native peoples were compelled to sign the Treaty of Greenville, formally ceding to the U.S. government the land that became Ohio. In 1796, the last British soldiers departed for Canada. Shrewd negotiations mixed with pure luck helped secure the nation’s southwestern frontier. For complex reasons having to do with the state of European diplomacy, Spanish officials in 1795 encouraged the U.S. representative in Madrid to discuss the navigation of the Mississippi River. Before this initiative, the Spanish government not only had closed the river to American commerce but also had incited the Indians of the region to harass settlers from the United States (see Chapter 6). Relations between the two countries probably would have deteriorated further had the United States not signed Jay’s Treaty. The Spanish assumed— quite erroneously—that Great Britain and the United States had formed an alliance to strip Spain of its North American possessions. To avoid this imagined disaster, officials in Madrid offered the American envoy, Thomas Pinckney, extraordinary concessions: the opening of the Mississippi, the right to deposit goods in New Orleans without paying duties, a secure southern boundary on the 31st parallel (a line roughly parallel to the northern boundary of Florida and running west to the Mississippi), and a promise to stay out of Indian affairs. An amazed Pinckney signed the Treaty of San Lorenzo

 (also called Pinckney’s Treaty) on October 27, 1795, and in March the Senate ratified the document without a single dissenting vote. Pinckney, who came from a prominent South Carolina family, instantly became the hero of the Federalist Party.

A
New Revolution in the Americas  Events in the French colony of Saint-Domingue during the 1790s presented the Washington administration with a particularly difficult foreign policy question. Located in the eastern portion of the Caribbean island of Hispaniola, Saint-Dominique was home to a large slave population of African descent. In fact these slaves far outnumbered the white French living in the colony. When these slaves rebelled against their masters in 1791, both sides called upon the United States for assistance. Washington, father of American liberty but also himself a slave owner, had to decide whether to support the rebels in their bid for liberty or the slave masters in their battle to regain control. American popular opinion, especially in the South, favored the white French population. Most white Americans were uncomfortable with the idea of an independent republic governed by free black politicians. Worse yet, a successful slave rebellion in the Caribbean might encourage slaves in the United States to insurrection. Thomas Jefferson called the expulsion of whites from Saint-Domingue a “tragedy” and warned that if something was not done to prevent the contagion of slave rebellion from spreading then “we shall be the murderers of our own children.” Washington ultimately decided to support the slave owners of Saint-Domingue. His government loaned over $700,000 to the French planters trying to restore their authority. American merchants supplied the French with arms and supplies—but also supplied the rebels. Although the southern colonies were spared any large-scale insurrections, slave owners continued to worry throughout the 1790s. The United States became home to an influx of white French refugees. In the end, the rebels succeeded in defeating their French masters. They also drove off invasions by the Spanish and British, who were at war with Revolutionary France and hoped to take advantage of the turmoil to seize the colony. In 1804, the freedom fighters declared the independence of the Republic of Haiti— the second independent republic founded in the Americas after the United States.

Popular Political Culture


Read the Document


 s

N.J.
 MD.

.


R.


 essee

R.


 Spanish claim line, 1785

S.C.


R


 PA.

 ille reenv y of G Treat Line,

Pittsburgh


TERRITORY VA.

Cincinnati


 GA.

N.Y.


 e Eri ke La

.


Ten
 n

 orth 31° N de Latitu

Flint R.


R.


 St. Clair's Defeat Nov. 4, 1791

 NORTHWEST

.


 pi R .

N.C.


TENN.
Statehood 1796 ho Chatta och . ee R 
 ns

 as

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 KY.

Mi
 Yazoo ssissi p

Ark
 a

 DEL.

 VA.

R


Ft. Detroit
Ft. Miami
(Br.)
Fallen Timbers
Aug. 20, 1794
R.
 ee um Harmar's Defeat a M Oct. 22, 1790

.


 i SPANISH LOUISIANA

R.I.


UPPER CANADA

Major Indian
 battles

 CONN.

 PA.

ITO RY

 io Oh

Major Indian Battles


Ft. Niagara


 io R

P


DA NA A C

Ft. Miami
 (built 1794)

TE RR

 Dutchman's Point VT. N.H. Ft. Oswego MASS. N.Y.

U


 sissipp

T
ES W TH

Mis


R
NO
Ft. Detroit 
 MAINE (part of Mass.)

 Pointe-au-Fer Oswegatchie

Ft. Michilimackinac


R
 PE

 CA

Oh


 ke

 ER

Wa
 bas hR

La


W
 LO

N
.L
 AD aw A re nc eR .

 at

 The Treaty of San Lorenzo (Pickney’s Treaty) (1796)

St


Gre






 KY.





 100 miles

 50 100 kilometers

Apalachicola R.


SPANISH FLORIDA
Gulf of Mexico 
Maximum Spanish
 claim, 1784

 Line of Pinckney's Treaty, 1795



 Spanish-held forts

 British-held forts

 0 100 200 kilometers

CONQUEST OF THE WEST



 200 miles

 Withdrawal of the British, defeat of Native Americans, and negotiations with Spain

 secured the nation’s frontiers.

Popular Political Culture
 Why was it hard for Americans to accept political dissent as a part of political activity? More than any other event during Washington’s administration, ratification of Jay’s Treaty generated intense political strife. Even as members of Congress voted as Republicans or Federalists, they condemned the rising partisan spirit as a grave threat to the stability of the United States. Popular writers equated “party” with “faction” and “faction” with “conspiracy to overthrow legitimate authority.” Party conflict also suggested that Americans had lost the sense of common purpose that had united them during the Revolution. Contemporaries did not appreciate the beneficial role that parties could play by presenting alternative solutions to foreign and domestic problems. Organized opposition smacked of disloyalty and therefore had to be eliminated by any means—fair or foul. These intellectual currents coupled with the existence of two parties created an

 atmosphere that bred suspicion. In the name of national unity, Federalists as well as Republicans advocated the destruction of political adversaries.

Informing the Public: News and Politics
 More than any other single element, newspapers transformed the political culture of the United States. Americans were voracious readers. In 1789, a foreign visitor observed, “The common people [here] are on a footing, in point of literature, with the middle ranks of Europe. They all read and write, and understand arithmetic; almost every little town now furnishes a circulating library.” A rapidly expanding number of newspapers appealed to this large literate audience. John Fenno established the Gazette of the United States (1789), a journal that supported Hamilton’s political philosophy. The Republicans responded in October 1790 with Philip Freneau’s influential National Gazette. While the format of the publications was similar to that of the colonial papers, their tone was quite different. These fiercely partisan journals presented rumor



 CHAPTER 7

DEMOCRACY AND DISSENT: THE VIOLENCE OF PARTY POLITICS, 1788–1800

 and opinion as fact. Public officials were regularly dragged through the rhetorical mud. Jefferson, for example, was accused of cowardice; Hamilton, vilified as an adulterer. As party competition became more bitter, editors showed less restraint. One Republican paper even suggested that George Washington had been a British agent during the Revolution. No wonder Fisher Ames announced in 1801, “The newspapers are an overmatch for any government.” This decade also witnessed the birth of political clubs. These “Democratic” or “Republican” associations, as they were called, first appeared in 1793 and were modeled on the political debating societies that sprang up in France during the early years of the French Revolution. Perhaps because of the French connection, Federalists assumed that the American clubs represented the interests of the Republican Party. Their purpose was clearly political indoctrination. The Philadelphia Society announced it would “cultivate a just knowledge of rational liberty.” A Democratic club in New York City asked each member to declare himself a “firm and steadfast friend of the EQUAL RIGHTS OF MAN.” By 1794, at least twenty-four clubs were holding regular meetings. How many Americans actually attended their debates is not known, but regardless of the number, the clubs obviously complemented the newspapers in providing the common people with highly partisan political information.

Whiskey Rebellion: Charges
 of Republican Conspiracy Political tensions became explosive in 1794. The Federalists convinced themselves that the Republicans were actually prepared to employ violence against the U.S. government. Although the charge was without foundation, it took on plausibility in the context of growing party strife.

Read the Document


 The crisis developed when a group of farmers living in western Pennsylvania protested a federal excise tax on distilled whiskey that Congress had originally passed in 1791. These men did not relish paying any taxes, but this tax struck them as particularly unfair. They made a good deal of money distilling their grain into whiskey, and the excise threatened to put them out of business. Largely because the Republican governor of Pennsylvania refused to suppress the angry farmers, Washington and other leading Federalists assumed that the insurrection represented a direct political challenge. The president called out fifteen thousand militiamen, and, accompanied by Hamilton, he marched against the rebels. The expedition was an embarrassing fiasco. The distillers disappeared, and predictably enough, no one living in the Pittsburgh region seemed to know where the troublemakers had gone. Two supposed rebels were convicted of high crimes against the United States; one was reportedly a “simpleton” and the other insane. Washington eventually pardoned both men. As peace returned to the frontier, Republicans gained much electoral support from voters the Federalists had alienated. In the national political forum, however, the Whiskey Rebellion had just begun. Spokesmen for both parties offered sinister explanations for the seemingly innocuous affair. Washington blamed the Republican clubs for promoting civil unrest. He apparently believed that the opposition party had dispatched French agents to western Pennsylvania to undermine the authority of the federal government. In November 1794, Washington informed Congress that these “self-created societies”—in other words, the Republican political clubs—had inspired “a spirit inimical to all order.” Indeed, the Whiskey Rebellion had been “fomented by combinations of men who . . . have disseminated, from an ignorance or perversion of facts, suspicions, jealousies, and accusations of the whole Government.”

George Washington, Whiskey Rebellion Address to Congress (1794)


 Tarring and feathering federal officials was one way in which western Pennsylvanians protested the tax on whiskey in 1794. Washington’s call for troops to put down the insurrection drew more volunteers than he had been able to raise during most of the Revolution. Source: North Wind Picture Archives.

The Adams Presidency


 The president’s interpretation of this rural tax revolt was no less charitable than the conspiratorial explanation offered by the Republicans. Jefferson labeled the entire episode a Hamiltonian device to create an army for the purpose of intimidating Republicans. How else could one explain the administration’s gross overreaction to a few disgruntled farmers? “An insurrection was announced and proclaimed and armed against,” Jefferson noted, “but could never be found.” The response of both parties reveals a pervasive fear of some secret evil design to destroy the republic. The clubs and newspapers—as yet unfamiliar tools for mobilizing public opinion—fanned these anxieties, convincing many government officials that the First Amendment should not be interpreted as protecting political dissent.

 Washington’s Farewell In September 1796, Washington published his famed Farewell Address, formally declaring his intention to retire from the presidency. In the address, which was printed in newspapers throughout the country, Washington warned against all political factions. Written in large part by Hamilton, who drew on a draft prepared several years earlier by Madison, the address served narrowly partisan ends. The product of growing political strife, it sought to advance the Federalist cause in the forthcoming election. By waiting until September to announce his retirement, Washington denied the Republicans valuable time to organize an effective campaign. There was an element of irony in this initiative. Washington had always maintained he stood above party. While he may have done so in the early years of his presidency, events such as the signing of Jay’s Treaty and the suppression of the Whiskey Rebellion transformed him in the eyes of many Americans into a spokesman solely for Hamilton’s Federalist Party. Washington also spoke to foreign policy matters in the address. He counseled the United States to avoid making any permanent alliances with distant nations that had no real interest in promoting American security. This statement guided foreign relations for many years and became the credo of later American isolationists, who argued that the United States should steer clear of foreign entanglements.

The Adams Presidency
 Why were some Federalists willing to sacrifice political freedoms for party advantage? The election of 1796 took place in an atmosphere of mutual distrust. Jefferson, soon to be the vice president, informed a friend that “an Anglican and aristocratic party has sprung up, whose avowed object is to draw over us the substance, as they have already done the forms, of British government.” On their part, the Federalists were convinced their Republican opponents wanted to hand the government over to French radicals. By modern standards, the structures of both political parties were primitive. Leaders of national stature, such as Madison and Hamilton, wrote letters encouraging local gentlemen around the country to support a certain candidate, but no one attempted to canvass the voters in advance of the election. During the campaign, the Federalists sowed the seeds of their eventual destruction. Party stalwarts agreed that John Adams should stand against the Republican candidate, Thomas Jefferson. Hamilton,



 however, could not leave well enough alone. From his law office in New York City, he schemed to deprive Adams of the presidency. His motives were obscure. He apparently feared that an independentminded Adams would be difficult to manipulate. He was correct. Hamilton exploited an awkward feature of the Electoral College. In accordance with the Constitution, each elector cast two ballots, and the person who gained the most votes became president. The runner-up, regardless of party affiliation, served as vice president. Ordinarily the Federalist electors would have cast one vote for Adams and one for Thomas Pinckney, the hero of the negotiations with Spain and the party’s choice for vice president. Everyone hoped, of course, there would be no tie. Hamilton secretly urged southern Federalists to support only Pinckney, even if that meant throwing away an elector’s second vote. If everything had gone according to plan, Pinckney would have received more votes than Adams, but when New Englanders loyal to Adams heard of Hamilton’s maneuvering, they dropped Pinckney. When the votes were counted, Adams had 71, Jefferson 68, and Pinckney 59. Hamilton’s treachery not only angered the new president but also heightened tensions within the Federalist Party. Moreover, it forced Adams to work with a Republican vice president. Adams hoped that he and Jefferson could cooperate as they had during the Revolution—they had served together on the committee that drafted the Declaration of Independence—but partisan pressures soon overwhelmed the president’s good intentions. Jefferson recorded their final attempt at reconciliation. Strolling home one night after dinner, Jefferson and Adams reached a place “where our road separated, his being down Market Street, mine along Fifth, and we took leave; and he [Adams] never after that . . . consulted me as to any measure of the government.”

THE ELECTION OF 1796
Candidate J. Adams Jefferson T. Pinckney Burr 
Party
Federalist
Republican
Federalist
Republican


Electoral Vote


The XYZ Affair and Domestic Politics
 Foreign affairs immediately occupied Adams’s full attention. The French government regarded Jay’s Treaty as an affront. By allowing Great Britain to define the conditions for neutrality, the United States had in effect sided with that nation against the interests of France. Relations between the two countries had steadily deteriorated. The French refused to receive Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, the U.S. representative in Paris. Pierre Adet, the French minister in Philadelphia, openly tried to influence the 1796 election in favor of the Republicans. His meddling in domestic politics not only embarrassed Jefferson, it also offended the American people. The situation then took a violent turn. In 1797, French privateers began seizing American ships. Since neither the United States nor France officially declared war, the hostilities came to be known as the Quasi-War. Hamilton and his friends welcomed a popular outpouring of anti-French sentiment. The High Federalists—as members of



 CHAPTER 7

DEMOCRACY AND DISSENT: THE VIOLENCE OF PARTY POLITICS, 1788–1800

 Hamilton’s wing of the party were called—counseled the president to prepare for all-out war, hoping that war would purge the United States of French influence. Adams was not persuaded to escalate the conflict. He dispatched a special commission in a final attempt to remove the sources of antagonism. This famous negotiating team consisted of Charles Pinckney, John Marshall, and Elbridge Gerry. They were instructed to obtain compensation for the ships seized by French privateers as well as release from the treaties of 1778. The commission was shocked by the outrageous treatment it received in France. Instead of dealing directly with Talleyrand, the minister of foreign relations, they met with obscure intermediaries who demanded a huge bribe. The commission reported that Talleyrand would not open negotiations unless he was given $250,000. In addition, the French government expected a “loan” of millions of dollars. The Americans refused to play this insulting game. Pinckney angrily sputtered, “No, no, not a sixpence,” and with Marshall he returned to the United States. When they arrived home, Marshall offered his much-quoted toast: “Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute.” Diplomatic humiliation set off a domestic political explosion. When Adams presented the commission’s official correspondence before Congress—the names of Talleyrand’s lackeys were labeled X, Y, and Z—the Federalists burst out with a war cry. At last, they would be able to even old scores with the Republicans. In April 1798, a Federalist newspaper in New York City announced ominously that any American who refused to censure France “must have a soul black enough to be fit for treasons, strategems, and spoils.” Rumors of conspiracy, referred to as the XYZ Affair, spread throughout the country. Personal friendships between Republicans and Federalists were shattered. Jefferson described the tense political atmosphere in a letter to an old colleague: “You and I have formerly seen warm debates and high political passions. But gentlemen of different politics would then speak to each other, and separate the business of the Senate from that of society. It is not so now. Men who have been intimate all their lives, cross the streets to avoid meeting, and turn their heads another way, lest they should be obliged to touch their hats.”

 he would do so only on condition that Adams appoint Hamilton as second in command. This demand placed the president in a terrible dilemma. Several revolutionary veterans—Henry Knox, for example—outranked Hamilton. Moreover, the former secretary of the treasury had consistently undermined Adams’s authority, and to give Hamilton a position of real power in the government seemed awkward at best. When Washington insisted, however, Adams was forced to support Hamilton. The chief of the High Federalists threw himself into the task of recruiting and supplying the troops. No detail escaped his attention. He and Secretary of War McHenry made certain that in this political army only loyal Federalists received commissions. They even denied Adams’s son-in-law a post. The entire enterprise took on an air of unreality. Hamilton longed for military glory, and he may have contemplated attacking Spain’s Latin American colonies. His driving obsession, however, was the restoration of political order. No doubt, he agreed with a Federalist senator from Connecticut who predicted that the Republicans “never will yield till violence is introduced; we must have a partial civil war . . . and the bayonet must convince some, who are beyond the reach of other arguments.” Hamilton should not have treated Adams with such open contempt. After all, the Massachusetts statesman was still the president, and without presidential cooperation, Hamilton could not fulfill his grand military ambitions. Yet whenever pressing questions concerning the army arose, Adams was nowhere to be found. He let commissions lie on his desk unsigned; he took overlong vacations to New England. He made it quite clear his first love was the navy. In May 1798, the president persuaded Congress to establish the Navy Department. For this new cabinet position, he selected Benjamin Stoddert, a person who did not take orders from Hamilton. Moreover, Adams further infuriated the High Federalists by refusing to ask Congress for a formal declaration of war. When they pressed him, Adams threatened to resign, making Jefferson president. As the weeks passed, the American people increasingly regarded the idle army as an expensive extravagance.

Crushing Political Dissent


Silencing Political Opposition: The
Alien and Sedition Acts


 In the spring of 1798, High Federalists assumed that it was just a matter of time until Adams asked Congress for a formal declaration of war. In the meantime, they pushed for a general rearmament, new fighting ships, additional harbor fortifications, and most important, a greatly expanded U.S. Army. About the need for land forces, Adams remained understandably skeptical. He saw no likelihood of French invasion. The president missed the political point. The army the Federalists wanted was intended not to thwart French aggression but to stifle internal opposition. Indeed, militant Federalists used the XYZ Affair as the occasion to institute what Jefferson termed the “reign of witches.” The threat to the Republicans was not simply a figment of the vice president’s overwrought imagination. When Theodore Sedgwick, now a Federalist senator from Massachusetts, first learned of the commission’s failure, he observed in words that capture the High Federalists’ vindictiveness, “It will afford a glorious opportunity to destroy faction. Improve it.” During the summer of 1798, a provisional army gradually came into existence. George Washington agreed to lead the troops, but

 The Federalists did not rely solely on the army to crush political dissent. During the summer of 1798, the party’s majority in Congress passed a group of bills known collectively as the Alien and Sedition Acts. This legislation authorized the use of federal courts and the powers of the presidency to silence the Republicans. The acts were born of fear and vindictiveness, and in their efforts to punish the followers of Jefferson, the Federalists created the nation’s first major crisis over civil liberties. Congress drew up three separate Alien Acts. The first, the Alien Enemies Law, vested the president with extraordinary wartime powers. On his own authority, he could detain or deport citizens of nations with which the United States was at war and who behaved in a manner he thought suspicious. Since Adams refused to ask for a declaration of war, this legislation never went into effect. A second act, the Alien Law, empowered the president to expel any foreigner from the United States simply by executive decree. Congress limited the acts to two years, and while Adams did not attempt to enforce them, the mere threat of arrest caused some Frenchmen to flee the country. The third act, the Naturalization Law, was the most flagrantly political of

The Adams Presidency


Read the Document


The Alien and Sedition Acts (1798)




 created martyrs—the actions of the administration persuaded Republicans that the survival of free government was at stake. Time was running out. “There is no event,” Jefferson warned, “. . . however atrocious, which may not be expected.”

Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions


 In the early years of the republic, political dissent sometimes escalated to physical violence. This fistfight took place on the floor of Congress, February 15, 1798. The combatants are Republican Matthew Lyon and Federalist Roger Griswold.

 the group. The act established a fourteen-year probationary period before foreigners could apply for full U.S. citizenship. Federalists recognized that recent immigrants, especially the Irish, tended to vote Republican. The Naturalization Law, therefore, was designed to keep “hordes of wild Irishmen” away from the polls for as long as possible. The Sedition Law struck at the heart of free political exchange. It defined criticism of the U.S. government as criminal libel; citizens found guilty by a jury were subject to fines and imprisonment. Congress entrusted enforcement of the act to the federal courts. Republicans were justly worried that the Sedition Law undermined rights guaranteed by the First Amendment. When they protested, however, the High Federalists dismissed their complaints. The Constitution, they declared, did not condone “the most groundless and malignant lies, striking at the safety and existence of the nation.” They were determined to shut down the opposition press and were willing to give the government what seemed almost dictatorial powers to achieve that end. The Jeffersonians also expressed concern over the federal judiciary’s expanded role in punishing sedition. They believed such matters were best left to state officials. Americans living in widely scattered regions of the country soon witnessed political repression firsthand. District courts staffed by Federalist appointees indicted seventeen people for criticizing the government. Several cases were absurd. In Newark, New Jersey, for example, a drunkard staggered out of a tavern to watch a sixteen-gun salute fired in honor of President Adams. When the man expressed the hope a cannonball might lodge in Adams’s ample posterior, he was arrested. No wonder a New York City journal declared that “joking may be very dangerous even to a free country.” The federal courts had become political tools. While the fumbling efforts at enforcement of the Sedition Law did not silence opposition—indeed, they sparked even greater criticism and

 By the fall of 1798, Jefferson and Madison were convinced that the Federalists envisioned the creation of a police state. According to Madison, the Sedition Law “ought to produce universal alarm.” It threatened the free communication of ideas that he “deemed the only effectual guardian of every other right.” Some extreme Republicans such as John Taylor of Virginia recommended secession from the Union; others advocated armed resistance. But Jefferson wisely counseled against such extreme strategies. “This is not the kind of opposition the American people will permit,” he reminded his desperate supporters. The last best hope for American freedom lay in the state legislatures. As the crisis deepened, Jefferson and Madison drafted separate protests known as the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions. Both statements vigorously defended the right of individual state assemblies to interpret the constitutionality of federal law. Jefferson wrote the Kentucky Resolutions in November 1798, and in an outburst of partisan anger, he flirted with a doctrine of nullification as dangerous to the survival of the United States as anything advanced by Hamilton and his High Federalist friends. In the Kentucky Resolutions, Jefferson described the federal union as a compact. The states transferred certain explicit powers to the national government, but, in his opinion, they retained full authority over all matters not specifically mentioned in the Constitution. Jefferson rejected Hamilton’s broad interpretation of the “general welfare” clause. “Every state,” Jefferson argued, “has a natural right in cases not within the compact . . . to nullify of their own authority all assumptions of power by others within their limits.” Carried to an extreme, this logic could have led to the breakup of the federal government, and in 1798, Kentucky legislators were not prepared to take such a radical stance. While they diluted Jefferson’s prose, they fully accepted his belief that the Alien and Sedition Acts were unconstitutional and ought to be repealed. When Madison drafted the Virginia Resolutions in December, he took a stand more temperate than Jefferson’s. Madison urged the states to defend the rights of the American people, but he resisted the notion that a single state legislature could or should have the authority to overthrow federal law.

 Adams’s Finest Hour In February 1799, President Adams belatedly declared his independence from the Hamiltonian wing of the Federalist Party. Throughout the confrontation with France, Adams had shown little enthusiasm for war. Following the XYZ debacle, he began to receive informal reports that Talleyrand had changed his tune. The French foreign minister told Elbridge Gerry and other Americans that the bribery episode had been an unfortunate misunderstanding and that if the United States sent new representatives, he was prepared to negotiate in good faith. The High Federalists ridiculed this report.



 CHAPTER 7

DEMOCRACY AND DISSENT: THE VIOLENCE OF PARTY POLITICS, 1788–1800

 But Adams, still brooding over Hamilton’s appointment to the army, decided to throw his own waning prestige behind peace. In February, he suddenly asked the Senate to confirm William Vans Murray as U.S. representative to France. The move caught the High Federalists totally by surprise. They sputtered with outrage. “It is solely the President’s act,” Pickering cried, “and we were all thunderstruck when we heard of it.” Adams was just warming to the task. In May, he fired Pickering and McHenry, an action he should have taken months earlier. With peace in the offing, American taxpayers complained more and more about the cost of maintaining an unnecessary army. The president was only too happy to dismantle Hamilton’s dream. When the new negotiators—Oliver Ellsworth and William Davie joined Murray—finally arrived in France in November 1799, they discovered that yet another group had come to power there. This government, headed by Napoleon Bonaparte, cooperated in drawing up an agreement known as the Convention of Mortefontaine. The French refused to compensate the Americans for vessels taken during the Quasi-War, but they did declare the treaties of 1778 null and void. Moreover, the convention removed annoying French restrictions on U.S. commerce. Not only had Adams avoided war, but he had also created an atmosphere of mutual trust that paved the way for the purchase of the Louisiana Territory. The president declared with considerable justification that the second French mission was “the most disinterested, the most determined and the most successful [act] of my whole life.” It also cost him reelection.

The Peaceful Revolution:
The Election of 1800
 What did Jefferson mean when he claimed in his first inaugural address that “We are all republicans; we are all federalists”? On the eve of the election of 1800, the Federalists were fatally divided. Adams enjoyed wide popularity among the Federalist rank and file, especially in New England, but articulate party leaders such as Hamilton vowed to punish the president for his betrayal of their militant policies. Hamilton even composed a scathing pamphlet titled Letter Concerning the Public Conduct and Character of John Adams, an essay that questioned Adams’s ability to hold high office. Once again the former secretary of the treasury attempted to rig the voting in the Electoral College so that the party’s vice presidential candidate, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, would receive more ballots than Adams and America would be saved from “the fangs of Jefferson.” As in 1796, the conspiracy backfired. The Republicans gained 73 votes while the Federalists trailed with 65. To everyone’s surprise, however, the election was not resolved in the Electoral College. When the ballots were counted, Jefferson and his running mate, Aaron Burr, had tied. This accident—a Republican elector should have thrown away his second vote—sent the selection of the next president to the House of Representatives, a lame-duck body still controlled by members of the Federalist Party. As the House began its work on February 27, 1801, excitement ran high. Each state delegation cast a single vote, with nine votes needed for election. On the first ballot, Jefferson received the support of eight states, Burr six, and two states divided evenly.

 People predicted a quick victory for Jefferson, but after dozens of ballots, the House had still not selected a president. “The scene was now ludicrous,” observed one witness. “Many had sent home for night-caps and pillows, and wrapped in shawls and greatcoats, lay about the floor of the committee-rooms, or sat sleeping in their seats.” The drama dragged on for days. To add to the confusion, Burr unaccountably refused to withdraw. Contemporaries thought his ambition had overcome his good sense. The logjam finally broke when leading Federalists decided that Jefferson, whatever his faults, would make a more responsible president than would the shifty Burr. Even Hamilton labeled Burr “the most dangerous man of the community.” On the thirty-sixth ballot, Representative James A. Bayard of Delaware announced he no longer supported Burr. This decision, coupled with Burr’s inaction, gave Jefferson the presidency, ten states to four.

THE ELECTION OF 1800
Candidate Jefferson Burr J. Adams C. Pinckney 
Party
Republican
Republican
Federalist
Federalist


Electoral Vote


 The Twelfth Amendment, ratified in 1804, saved the American people from repeating this potentially dangerous turn of events. Henceforth, the Electoral College cast separate ballots for president and vice president.

Listen to the Audio File


Jefferson and Liberty


 William Birch’s illustration of the partially constructed United States Capitol building in Washington, D.C., in 1800. When Jefferson first took office, the nation’s new capital was little more than a swampy and isolated village.

STUDY RESOURCES

 During the final days of his presidency, Adams appointed as many Federalists as possible to the federal bench. Jefferson protested the hasty manner in which these “midnight judges” were selected. One of them, John Marshall, became chief justice of the United States, a post he held with distinction for thirty-four years. But behind the last-minute flurry of activity lay bitterness and disappointment. Adams never forgave Hamilton. “No party,” the Federalist president wrote, “that ever existed knew itself so little or so vainly overrated its own influence and popularity as ours. None ever understood so ill the causes of its own power, or so wantonly destroyed them.” On the morning of Jefferson’s inauguration, Adams slipped away from the capital—now located in Washington, D.C.—unnoticed and unappreciated. In the address that Adams missed, Jefferson attempted to quiet partisan fears. “We are all republicans; we are all federalists,” the new president declared. By this statement, he did not mean to suggest that party differences were no longer important. Jefferson reminded his audience that whatever the politicians might say, the people shared a deep commitment to a federal union based on republican ideals set forth during the American Revolution. Indeed, the president interpreted the election of 1800 as a revolutionary episode, as the fulfillment of the principles of 1776. The Federalists were thoroughly dispirited by the entire experience. In the end, it had not been Hamilton’s foolish electoral schemes that destroyed the party’s chances in 1800. Rather, the Federalists had lost touch with a majority of the American people. In office, Adams and Hamilton—whatever their own differences may have been—betrayed their doubts about popular sovereignty too often, and when it came time to marshal broad support, to mobilize



 public opinion in favor of the party of wealth and privilege, few responded. As Secretary of War Oliver Wolcott observed on hearing of Jefferson’s victory, “Have our party shown that they possess the necessary skill and courage to deserve . . . to govern? What have they done? . . . They write private letters. To whom? To each other, but they do nothing to give a proper direction to the public mind.”

Conclusion: Danger of
Political Extremism
 From a broader historical perspective, the election of 1800 seems noteworthy for what did not occur. There were no riots in the streets, no attempted coup by military officers, no secession from the Union, nothing except the peaceful transfer of government from the leaders of one political party to those of the opposition. Americans had weathered the Alien and Sedition Acts, the meddling by predatory foreign powers in domestic affairs, the shrilly partisan rhetoric of hack journalists, and now, at the start of a new century, they were impressed with their own achievement. As one woman who attended Jefferson’s inauguration noted, “The changes of administration which in every government and in every age have most generally been epochs of confusion, villainy and bloodshed, in this our happy country take place without any species of distraction, or disorder.” But as she well understood—indeed, as modern Americans must constantly relearn—extremism in the name of partisan political truth can easily unravel the delicate fabric of representative democracy and leave the republic at the mercy of those who would manipulate the public for private benefit.

Study Resources
 Take the Study Plan for Chapter 7 Democracy and Dissent on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1787
Constitution of the United States signed (September) 1789 George Washington inaugurated (April); Louis XVI of 
 France calls meeting of the Estates General (May) Congress approves Hamilton’s plan for funding and assumption (July) Bank of the United States is chartered (February); Hamilton’s Report on Manufactures rejected by Congress (December)

 1793 France’s revolutionary government announces a “war



 of all people against all kings” (February); Genêt affair strains relations with France (April); Washington issues Proclamation of Neutrality (April); Spread of “Democratic” clubs alarms Federalists; Jefferson resigns as secretary of state (December) Whiskey Rebellion put down by U.S. Army (July–November); General Anthony Wayne defeats Indians at the Battle of Fallen Timbers (August)

 1795 Hamilton resigns as secretary of the treasury (January); Jay’s Treaty divides the nation (June); Pinckney’s Treaty with Spain is a welcome surprise (October) 1796 Washington publishes Farewell Address (September); John Adams elected president (December) 1797 XYZ Affair poisons U.S. relations with France (October) 1798–1800 Quasi-War with France 1798 Congress passes the Alien and Sedition Acts (June and July); Provisional army is formed; Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions protest the Alien and Sedition Acts (November and December)

 1799 George Washington dies (December) 1800 Convention of Mortefontaine is signed with France, ending Quasi-War (September)

 1801 House of Representatives elects Thomas Jefferson president (February)



 CHAPTER 7

CHAPTER REVIEW

CHAPTER REVIEW
Force of Public Opinion How did the ideas of Jeffersonians differ from those of the Federalists? While both Jeffersonians and Federalists agreed that the new United States would eventually become a great commercial power, they differed on how best to achieve the transition from an agrarian economy to an international system based on trade and industry. The Federalists believed that this would require strong national institutions directed by a social elite, but Jeffersonians distrusted strong financial institutions and put their faith in independent white yeomen farmers who would be free of intrusive government regulations. (p. 156) 
Principle and Pragmatism: Establishing
 a New Government

 Charges of Treason: The Battle over Foreign Affairs How did foreign affairs affect domestic politics during the 1790s? The French Revolution split American opinion. Republicans cheered it; Federalists condemned it. When France declared war on Britain (1793), the extremely unpopular Jay’s Treaty (1794) with Britain provoked heated political debate between its Federalist supporters and Republican opponents. Disagreements over how to deal with French aggression and insults during the Quasi-War and the XYZ Affair drove a wedge between the peace-seeking President John Adams and the High Federalists who called for war and military expansion. This divide helped Jefferson win the election of 1800. (p. 163)

Popular Political Culture
PA. N

 Why was George Washington unable to overcome division within the new government?

 MD.

 Why was it hard for Americans to accept political dissent as a part of political activity?

 Despite his huge popularity among all segments of the American population, President Washington was unable to bridge the differences between the two most brilliant and strong-willed members of his cabinet: Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton. These two men fought throughout Washington’s presidency over their different visions for the future of the republic. Hamilton imagined an urban commercial nation with a strong central government; Jefferson championed a simple agrarian republic. (p. 158)

 In the 1790s, many Americans equated political dissent with disloyalty. During the Whiskey Rebellion (1794), both Federalists and Republicans feared the other party planned to use violence to crush political opposition. In the 1790s, many Americans lamented the loss of unity that had tied them together during the struggle for independence. They feared that partisan politics might lead to a conspiracy to overthrow the legitimately elected government. (p. 169)

Conflicting Visions: Jefferson and Hamilton


The Adams Presidency


 VA.

Why did Alexander Hamilton and Thomas
 Jefferson find it so difficult to cooperate as members of Washington’s cabinet?

 Why were some Federalists willing to sacrifice political freedoms for party advantage?

 While both Hamilton and Jefferson insisted they were working to create a strong, prosperous republic in which commerce would be important, they differed profoundly on how to achieve that goal. Where Hamilton was pro-British and wanted the American economy to imitate Britain’s reliance on trade and industry, Jefferson supported the French Revolution and believed that America’s economic strength lay not in developing an industrial workforce but in increasing the country’s agricultural productivity, so that farmers could exchange raw materials for imported manufactured goods. (p. 159)

 Many Republicans believed that the support of Jeffersonian Republicans for France had compromised American sovereignty. Hamilton and the High Federalists believed that a standing army was necessary to defend against invasion and to silence domestic dissent so that it could not split the republic apart. They rationalized that the sacrifice of political liberties entailed in the Alien and Sedition Acts were necessary to protect the Republic from corrupting foreign (particularly French influences). This was especially important since they anticipated the onset of a war with France. They used the rationale of national security to justify their pursuit of party power. (p. 171)

 Hamilton’s Plan for Prosperity and Security

The Peaceful Revolution: The Election of 1800


-Fer


 Dutchman's Point VT. N.H. Oswego MASS. N.Y.

 Why did many Americans oppose Alexander Hamilton’s blueprint for national prosperity?

 Many citizens—especially farmers and former soldiers— felt that Hamilton’s plan to fund state loan certificates at full value would reward the immoral, unrepublican and un-American actions of speculators by allowing them to make money without physical labor. Many also complained that this plan rewarded the financial irresponsibility of states like Massachusetts and South Carolina. Supporters of Jefferson rejected Hamilton’s vision of the United States as a commercial and manufacturing nation, feared that his plan for a Bank of the United States would “perpetuate a large monied interest,” and protested that his doctrine of implied powers would lead to the steady growth of governmental power. (p. 161) R.I.

 CONN.

 What did Jefferson mean when he claimed in his first inaugural address that “we are all Republicans, we are all Federalists”? Jefferson did not mean that party differences had disappeared or were no longer important after the election of 1800. Instead, he wished to remind his audience that whatever their political differences, the people were united by a deep commitment to a federal union based on republican ideals as set forth in the American Revolution. (p. 174)

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Bank of the United States National bank proposed by Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton and established in 1791. It served as a central depository for the U.S. government and had the authority to issue currency. p. 162 Implied powers Powers the Constitution did not explicitly grant the federal government, but that it could be interpreted to grant. p. 162 French Revolution (1789–1799). p. 163 
 A social and political revolution in France

 interests and warned Americans against political factions and foreign entanglements. p. 171 Quasi-War Undeclared war between the United States and France in the late 1790s. p. 171 XYZ Affair A diplomatic incident in which American peace commissioners sent to France by President John Adams in 1797 were insulted with bribe demands from their French counterparts, dubbed X, Y, and Z in American newspapers. The incident heightened war fever against France. p. 172

 Jay’s Treaty Treaty with Britain negotiated by Chief Justice John Jay in 1794. Though the British agreed to surrender forts on U.S. territory, the treaty provoked a storm of protest in America. p. 164

 Alien and Sedition Acts Collective name given to four laws Congress passed in 1798 to suppress criticism of the federal government and curb liberties of foreigners living in the United States. p. 172

 Whiskey Rebellion Protests in 1794 by western Pennsylvania farmers against a federal tax on whiskey. The uprising was suppressed when President George Washington called an army of 15,000 troops to the area. p. 170

 Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions Statements penned by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison to mobilize opposition to the Alien and Sedition Acts, which they argued were unconstitutional. Jefferson’s statement (the Kentucky Resolution) suggested that states could declare null and void congressional acts they deemed unconstitutional. p. 173

 Farewell Address In this 1796 document, President George Washington announced his intention not to seek a third term. He also stressed Federalist

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
How were the disagreements between Hamilton and Jefferson a 
 3. How important were popular opinion and party politics in poisoning

 reflection of popular culture in the country during the 1790s?

 2. How did American foreign policy during the 1790s influence the

 the Adams presidency?

 4. How could a constitutional republic justify the passage of highly

 growth of political dissent?

 partisan legislation such as the Alien and Sedition Acts?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 7 on MyHistoryLab Force of Public Opinion

Popular Political Culture


Watch the Video George Washington: The Father of
Our Country p. 157


◾


Read the Document George Washington, Whiskey
Rebellion Address to Congress (1794) p. 170


Conflicting Visions: Jefferson and Hamilton


The Adams Presidency


◾


◾


Read the Document Alexander Hamilton, Opposing
Visions for the New Nation p. 160


 Charges of Treason: The Battle over Foreign Affairs Read the Document p. 164

The Alien and Sedition Acts (1798)


The Peaceful Revolution: The Election of 1800


Proclamation of Neutrality (1793)
Listen to the Audio File Jefferson and Liberty p. 174


◾


Read the Document


◾


Complete the Assignment Defense of Superiority:
The Impact of Nationalism on Perceptions of the
Environment p. 166
Read the Document


Read the Document
 p. 173

The Jay Treaty (1794) p. 165


The Treaty of Greenville p. 168


Read the Document The Treaty of San Lorenzo
 (Pickney’s Treaty) (1796) p. 169

◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




Republican Ascendancy:
The Jeffersonian Vision


Contents and Learning Objectives
REGIONAL IDENTITIES IN A NEW REPUBLIC PG. 180
How did the Republic’s growth shape the market economy and relations with Native Americans? 
EMBARRASSMENTS OVERSEAS PG. 193
Why did the United States find it difficult to avoid military conflict during this period? 
THE STRANGE WAR OF 1812 PG. 196
Why is the War of 1812 sometimes thought of as a “second war of independence”? 
JEFFERSON AS PRESIDENT PG. 183
How did practical politics challenge Jefferson’s political principles? 
FEATURE ESSAY
Barbary Pirates and American Captives: The Nation’s First Hostage Crisis 
JEFFERSON’S CRITICS PG. 187
How did Jeffersonians deal with the difficult problems of party politics and slavery? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

