Chapter 6 The Republican Experiment


A
New Political Morality  In 1788, Lewis Hallam and John Henry petitioned the General Assembly of Pennsylvania to open a theater. Although a 1786 state law banned the performance of stage plays and other “disorderly sports,” many Philadelphia leaders favored the request to hold “representations” in their city. A committee appointed to study the issue concluded that a theater would contribute to “the general refinement of manners and the polish of society.” Some supporters even argued that the sooner the United States had a professional theater the sooner the young republic would escape the “foreign yoke” of British culture. The Quakers of Philadelphia dismissed such claims as out of hand. They warned that such “seminaries of lewdness and irreligion” would quickly undermine “the virtue of the people.” They pointed out that “no sooner is a playhouse opened than it becomes surrounded with . . . brothels.” Since Pennsylvania was already suffering from a “stagnation of commerce [and] a scarcity of money”—unmistakable signs of God’s

 displeasure—it seemed unwise to risk divine punishment by encouraging new “hot-beds of vice.” Such rhetoric did not sit well with other citizens who interpreted the revolutionary experience from an entirely different perspective. At issue, they insisted, was not popular morality, but state censorship. If the government silenced the stage, then “the same authority . . . may, with equal justice, dictate the shape and texture of our dress, or the modes and ceremonies of our worship.” Depriving those who wanted to see plays of an opportunity to do so, they argued, “will abridge the natural right of every freeman, to dispose of his time and money, according to his own tastes and dispositions.” Throughout post–Revolutionary America everyday matters such as the opening of a new playhouse provoked passionate public debate. These divisions were symptomatic of a new, uncertain political culture struggling to find the proper balance between public morality and private freedom. During the long fight against

 Although the words slave and slavery do not appear in the U.S. Constitution, debate over slavery and the slave trade resulted in a compromise in which both institutions persisted in the new Republic. Not everyone was pleased with the compromise. The Library Company of Philadelphia commissioned this painting, Liberty Displaying the Arts and Sciences (1792) by Samuel Jennings. The broken chain at the feet of the goddess Liberty is meant to demonstrate her opposition to slavery. Source: The Library Company of Philadelphia.

 Great Britain, Americans had defended individual rights. The problem was that the same people also believed that a republic that compromised its virtue could not long preserve liberty and independence. In 1776, Thomas Paine had reminded ordinary men and women that “the sun never shined on a cause of greater worth . . . . ‘Tis not the concern of a day, a year, or an age; posterity are virtually involved in the contest, and will be more or less affected, even to the end of time, by the proceedings now.” During the 1780s Americans understood their responsibility not only to each other, but also to history. They worried, however, that they might not successfully meet the challenge. The dangers were clear. Individual states seemed intent on looking out for local interests rather than the national welfare. Revolutionary leaders such as George Washington and James Madison concluded that the United States needed a strong central

 government to protect rights and property. Their creative quest for solutions brought forth a new and enduring constitution.

Defining Republican Culture
 What were the limits of equality in the “republican” society of the new United States? Today, the term republican no longer possesses the evocative power it did for most eighteenth-century Americans. For them, it defined not a political party, but rather, an entire political culture. After all, they had done something that no other people had achieved for a very long time. They founded a national government without a monarch or aristocracy; in other words, a genuine republic. Making the new system work was a daunting task. Those Americans who read deeply in ancient and renaissance history knew that most republics had failed, often within a few years, only to be replaced by tyrants who cared not at all what ordinary people thought about the public good. To preserve their republic from such a fate, victorious revolutionaries such as Samuel Adams



 CHAPTER 6

THE REPUBLICAN EXPERIMENT

 recast fundamental political values. For them, republicanism represented more than a particular form of government. It was a way of life, a core ideology, an uncompromising commitment to liberty and equality. Adams and his contemporaries certainly believed that creating a new nation-state involved more than simply winning independence from Great Britain. More than did any other form of government, they insisted, a republic demanded an exceptionally high degree of public morality. If American citizens substituted “luxury, prodigality, and profligacy” for “prudence, virtue, and economy,” then their revolution surely would have been in vain. Maintaining popular virtue was crucial to success. An innocent stage play, therefore, set off alarm bells. Such “foolish gratifications” seemed to compromise republican goals. It is not surprising that, when confronted by such temptations, Adams thundered, “Rome, Athens, and all the cities of renown, whence came your fall?” White Americans came out of the Revolution with an almost euphoric sense of the nation’s special destiny. This expansive outlook, encountered among so many ordinary men and women, owed much to the spread of Protestant evangelicalism. However skeptical Jefferson and Franklin may have been about revealed religion, the great mass of American people subscribed to an almost utopian vision of the country’s future. To this new republic, God had promised progress and prosperity. The signs were visible for everyone. “There is not upon the face of the earth a body of people more happy or rising into consequence with more rapid stride,” one man announced in 1786, “than the Inhabitants of the United States of America. Population is increasing, new houses building, new lands clearing, new settlements forming, and new manufactures establishing with a rapidity beyond conception.” Such experience did not translate easily or smoothly into the creation of a strong central government. Modern Americans tend to take for granted the acceptance of the Constitution. Its merits seem self-evident largely because it has survived for two centuries. But in the early 1780s, no one could have predicted that the Constitution as we know it would have been written, much less ratified. It was equally possible that the Americans would have supported a weak confederation or perhaps allowed the various states and regions to go their separate ways. In this uncertain political atmosphere, Americans divided sharply over the relative importance of liberty and order. The revolutionary experience had called into question the legitimacy of any form of special privilege. As one republican informed an aristocratic colleague in the South Carolina assembly, “the day is Arrived when goodness, and not Wealth, are the only Criterions of greatness.” A legislative leader in Pennsylvania put the point even more bluntly: “No man has a greater claim of special privilege for his $100,000 than I have for my $5.” The man who passionately defended social equality for those of varying economic status, however, may still have resisted the extension of civil rights to women or blacks. Nevertheless, liberty was contagious, and Americans of all backgrounds began to make new demands on society and government. For them, the Revolution had suggested radical alternatives, and in many forums throughout the nation—especially in the elected state assemblies—they insisted on being heard.

 In certain quarters, the celebration of liberty met with mixed response. Some Americans—often the very men who had resisted British tyranny—worried that the citizens of the new nation were caught up in a wild, destructive scramble for material wealth. Democratic excesses seemed to threaten order, to endanger the rights of property. Surely a republic could not long survive unless its citizens showed greater self-control. For people concerned about the loss of order, the state assemblies appeared to be the greatest source of instability. Popularly elected representatives lacked what men of property defined as real civic virtue: an ability to work for the common good rather than their private interests. Working out the tensions between order and liberty, between property and equality, generated an outpouring of political genius. At other times in American history, persons of extraordinary talent have been drawn to theology, commerce, or science, but during the 1780s, the country’s intellectual leaders—Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and John Adams, among others— focused their creative energies on the problem of how republicans ought to govern themselves.

Living in the Shadow
 of Revolution During the 1780s, why were Americans so sensitive to the dangers of “aristocratic display”? Revolution changed American society, often in ways no one had planned. This phenomenon is not surprising. The great revolutions of modern times produced radical transformations in French, Russian, and Chinese societies. By comparison, the immediate results of the American Revolution appear much tamer, less wrenching. Nevertheless, national independence compelled people to reevaluate hierarchical social relations that they had taken for granted during the colonial period. The faltering first steps of independence raised fundamental questions about the meaning of equality in American society, some of which remain as pressing today as during the 1780s.

Social and Political Reform
 Following the war, Americans aggressively ferreted out and, with republican fervor, denounced any traces of aristocratic pretense. As colonists, they had long resented the claims that certain Englishmen made to special privilege simply because of noble birth. Even so committed a republican as George Washington had to be reminded that artificial status was contrary to republican principles. In 1783, he and the officers who had served during the Revolution formed the Society of the Cincinnati, a hereditary organization in which membership passed from father to eldest son. The soldiers meant no harm; they simply wanted to maintain old friendships. But anxious republicans throughout America let out a howl of protest, and one South Carolina legislator, Aedanus Burke, warned that the Society intended to create “an hereditary peerage . . . [which would] undermine the Constitution and destroy civil liberty.” After an

Living in the Shadow of Revolution


 embarrassed Washington called for appropriate reforms of the Society’s bylaws, the Cincinnati crisis receded. The fear of privilege remained, however, and wealthy Americans dropped honorific titles such as “esquire.” Lawyers of republican persuasion chided judges who had adopted the English custom of wearing great flowing wigs to court. The appearance of equality was as important as its actual achievement. In fact, the distribution of wealth in postwar America was more uneven than it had been in the mid-eighteenth century. The sudden accumulation of large fortunes by new families made other Americans particularly sensitive to aristocratic display, for it seemed intolerable that a revolution waged against a monarchy should produce a class of persons legally, or even visibly, distinguished from their fellow citizens. Republican ferment also encouraged many states to lower property requirements for voting. After the break with Great Britain, such a step seemed logical. As one group of farmers declared, no man can be “free & independent” unless he possesses “a voice . . . in the choice of the most important Officers in the Legislature.” Pennsylvania and Georgia allowed all white male taxpayers to participate in elections. Other states were less democratic, but with the exception of Massachusetts, they reduced property qualifications. The reforms, however, did not significantly expand the American electorate. Long before the Revolution, an overwhelming percentage of free white males had owned enough land to vote. In any case, during the 1780s, republican lawmakers were not prepared to experiment with universal manhood suffrage; John Adams observed that if the states pushed the reforms too far, “New claims will arise, women will demand a vote . . . and every man who has not a farthing, will demand an equal vote with any other.” The most important changes in voting patterns were the result of western migration. As Americans moved to the frontier, they received full political representation in their state legislatures, and because new districts tended to be poorer than established coastal settlements, their representatives seemed less cultured, less well trained than those sent by eastern voters. Moreover, western delegates resented traveling so far to attend legislative meetings, and they lobbied successfully to transfer state capitals to more convenient locations. During this period, Georgia moved the seat of its government from Savannah to Augusta, South Carolina from Charles Town to Columbia, North Carolina from New Bern to Raleigh, Virginia from Williamsburg to Richmond, New York from New York City to Albany, and New Hampshire from Portsmouth to Concord. After gaining independence, Americans also reexamined the relationship between church and state. Republican spokespersons such as Thomas Jefferson insisted that rulers had no right to interfere with the free expression of an individual’s religious beliefs. As governor of Virginia, he strenuously advocated the disestablishment of the Anglican Church, an institution that had received tax monies and other benefits during the colonial period. Jefferson and his allies regarded such special privilege not only as a denial of religious freedom—after all, rival denominations did not receive tax money—but also as a vestige of aristocratic society. In 1786, Virginia cut the last ties between church and state. Other southern states disestablished the Anglican Church, but in Massachusetts and New Hampshire Congregational churches



 continued to enjoy special status. Moreover, while Americans championed toleration, they seldom favored philosophies that radically challenged Christian values.

African Americans in the New Republic
 Revolutionary fervor forced Americans to confront the most appalling contradiction to republican principles—slavery. The Quaker leader John Woolman (1720–1772) probably did more than any other white person of the era to remind people of the evils of this institution. A trip he took through the Southern Colonies as a young man forever impressed upon Woolman “the dark gloominess” of slavery. In a sermon, the outspoken humanitarian declared “that Men having Power too often misapplied it; that though we made Slaves of the Negroes, and the Turks made Slaves of the Christians, I believed that Liberty was the natural Right of all Men equally.” During the revolutionary period, abolitionist sentiment spread. Both in private and in public, people began to criticize slavery in other than religious language. No doubt, the double standard of their own political rhetoric embarrassed many white Americans. They hotly demanded liberation from parliamentary enslavement at the same time that they held several hundred thousand blacks in permanent bondage. By keeping the issue of slavery before the public through writing and petitioning, African Americans powerfully undermined arguments advanced in favor of human bondage. They demanded freedom, reminding white lawmakers that African American men and women had the same natural right to liberty as did other Americans. In 1779, for example, a group of African Americans living in Connecticut pointedly asked the members of the state assembly “whether it is consistent with the present Claims, of the United States, to hold so many Thousands, of the Race of Adam, our Common Father, in perpetual Slavery.” In New Hampshire, nineteen persons who called themselves “natives of Africa” reminded local legislators that “private or public tyranny and slavery are alike detestable to minds conscious of the equal dignity of human nature.” The scientific accomplishments of Benjamin Banneker (1731–1806), Maryland’s African American astronomer and mathematician, and the international fame of Phillis Wheatley (1753–1784), Boston’s celebrated “African muse,” made it increasingly difficult for white Americans to maintain credibly that African Americans could not hold their own in a free society. Wheatley’s poems went through many editions, and after reading her work, the great French philosopher Voltaire rebuked a friend who had claimed “there never would be Negro poets.” As Voltaire discovered, Wheatley “writes excellent verse in English.” Banneker, like Wheatley, enjoyed a well-deserved reputation, in his case for contributions as a scientist. After receiving a copy of an almanac that Banneker had published in Philadelphia, Thomas Jefferson concluded “that nature has given to our black brethren, talents equal to those of the other colors of men.” In the northern states, there was no real economic justification for slavery, and white laborers, often recent European immigrants, resented having to compete in the workplace against slaves. This economic situation, combined with the acknowledgment



 CHAPTER 6

THE REPUBLICAN EXPERIMENT

 of the double standard represented by slavery, contributed to the establishment of antislavery societies. In 1775, Franklin helped organize a group in Philadelphia called the Society for the Relief of Free Negroes, Unlawfully Held. John Jay, Alexander Hamilton, and other prominent New Yorkers founded a Manumission Society in 1785. By 1792, antislavery societies were meeting from Virginia to Massachusetts, and in the northern states at least, these groups, working for the same ends as various Christian evangelicals, put slaveholders on the intellectual defensive for the first time in American history. In several states north of Virginia, the abolition of slavery took a number of different forms. Even before achieving statehood, Vermont drafted a constitution (1777) that specifically prohibited slavery. In 1780, the Pennsylvania legislature passed a law effecting the gradual emancipation of slaves. Although the Massachusetts assembly refused to address the issue directly, the state courts took up the challenge and liberated the African Americans. A judge ruled slavery unconstitutional in Massachusetts because it conflicted with a clause in the state bill of rights declaring “all men . . . free and equal.” According to one enthusiast, this decision freed “a Grate number of Blacks . . . who . . . are held in a state of slavery within the bowels of a free and christian Country.” By 1800, slavery was well on the road to extinction in the northern states. These positive developments did not mean that white people accepted blacks as equals. In fact, in the very states that outlawed slavery, African Americans faced systematic discrimination. Free blacks were generally excluded from voting, juries, and militia duty—they were denied rights and responsibilities usually associated with full citizenship. They rarely enjoyed access to education, and in cities such as Philadelphia and New York, where African Americans went to look for work, they ended up living in segregated wards or neighborhoods. Even in the churches—institutions

 that had often spoken out against slavery—free African Americans were denied equal standing with white worshipers. Humiliations of this sort persuaded African Americans to form their own churches. In Philadelphia, Richard Allen, a former slave, founded the Bethel Church for Negro Methodists (1793) and later organized the African Methodist Episcopal Church (1816), an institution of great cultural as well as religious significance for nineteenth-century American blacks. Even in the South, where African Americans made up a large percentage of the population, slavery disturbed thoughtful white republicans. Some planters simply freed their slaves, and by 1790 the number of free blacks living in Virginia was 12,766. By 1800, the figure had reached 30,750. There is no question that this trend reflected the uneasiness among white masters. Richard Randolph, one of Virginia’s wealthier planters, explained that he freed his slaves “to make restitution, as far as I am able, to an unfortunate race of bond-men, over whom my ancestors have usurped and exercised the most lawless and monstrous tyranny.” George Washington also manumitted his slaves. To be sure, most southern slaveholders, especially those living in South Carolina and Georgia, rejected this course of action. Their economic well-being depended on slave labor. Perhaps more significant, however, is the fact that no southern leader during the era of republican experimentation defended slavery as a positive good. Such overtly racist rhetoric did not become part of the public discourse until the nineteenth century. Despite promising starts in that direction, the southern states did not abolish slavery. The economic incentives to maintain a servile labor force, especially after the invention of the cotton gin in 1793 and the opening up of the Alabama and Mississippi frontier, overwhelmed the initial abolitionist impulse. An opportunity to translate the principles of the American Revolution into social practice had been lost, at least temporarily. Jefferson reported in 1805, “I have long since given up the expectation of any early provision for the extinction of slavery among us.” Unlike some contemporary Virginians, the man who wrote the Declaration of Independence condoned slavery on his own plantation, even fathering several children by a woman who, since she was his slave, had little choice in the matter of her pregnancy.

The Challenge of
 Women’s Rights

 A 1797 sketch by architect and engineer Benjamin Henry Latrobe depicting African Americans in Norfolk, Virginia, shaving and dressing in preparation for a Sunday afternoon. Latrobe’s drawings of blacks in the American South offer valuable glimpses of daily life in the region.

 The revolutionary experience accelerated changes in the way ordinary people viewed the family. At the beginning of the eighteenth century, fathers claimed authority over other members of their families simply on the grounds that they were fathers. As patriarchs, they demanded obedience. If they behaved like brutal despots, so be it; fathers could treat wives and children however they pleased.

Living in the Shadow of Revolution


Read the Document


Phillis Wheatley, Religious


 and Moral Poems

 This engraving of Phillis Wheatley appeared in her volume of verse, Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral (1773), the first book published by an African American.

 The English philosopher John Locke (1632–1704) powerfully undermined arguments of this sort. In his extremely popular treatise Some Thoughts Concerning Education (1693), Locke insisted that the mind was not formed at birth. The child learned from experience, and if the infant witnessed violent, arbitrary behavior, then the baby would become an abusive adult. As Locke warned parents, “If you punish him [the child] for what he sees you practice yourself, he will not think that Severity to proceed from Kindness in you careful to amend a Fault in him; but will be apt to interpret it, as Peevishness and Arbitrary Imperiousness of a Father.” Enlightened eighteenth-century mothers and fathers— especially, fathers—condemned tyranny in the home. At the time of the American Revolution, few seriously accepted the notion that fathers—be they tyrannical kings or heads of ordinary families—enjoyed unlimited powers over women and children. Indeed, people in England as well as America increasingly described the family in terms of love and companionship. Instead of duties, they spoke of affection. This transformation in the way men and women viewed relations of power within the family was most evident in the popular novels of the period. Americans devoured Pamela and Clarissa, stories by the English writer Samuel Richardson about women who were the innocent victims of unreformed males, usually deceitful lovers and unforgiving fathers.



 It was in this changing intellectual environment that American women began making new demands not only on their husbands but also on republican institutions. Abigail Adams, one of the generation’s most articulate women, instructed her husband, John, as he set off for the opening of the Continental Congress: “I desire you would Remember the Ladies, and be more generous and favourable to them than your ancestors. Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the Husbands.” John responded in a condescending manner. The “Ladies” would have to wait until the country achieved independence. In 1777, Lucy Knox took an even stronger line with her husband, General Henry Knox. When he was about to return home from the army, she warned him, “I hope you will not consider yourself as commander in chief in your own house—but be convinced . . . that there is such a thing as equal command.” If Knox accepted Lucy’s argument, he did so because she was a good republican wife and mother. In fact, women justified their assertiveness largely on the basis of political ideology. If survival of republics really depended on the virtue of their citizens, they argued, then it was the special responsibility of women as mothers to nurture the right values in their children and as wives to instruct their husbands in proper behavior. Contemporaries claimed that the woman who possessed “virtue and prudence” could easily “mold the taste, the manners, and the conduct of her admirers, according to her pleasure.” In fact, “nothing short of a general reformation of manners would take place, were the ladies to use their power in discouraging our licentious manners.” During this period, women began to petition for divorce on new grounds. One case is particularly instructive concerning changing attitudes toward women and the family. In 1784, John Backus, an undistinguished Massachusetts silversmith, was hauled before a local court and asked why he beat his wife. He responded that “it was Partly owing to his Education for his father treated his mother in the same manner.” The difference between Backus’s case and his father’s was that Backus’s wife refused to tolerate such abuse, and she sued successfully for divorce. Studies of divorce patterns in Connecticut and Pennsylvania show that after 1773 women divorced on about the same terms as men. The war itself presented some women with fresh opportunities. In 1780, Ester DeBerdt Reed founded a large volunteer women’s organization in Philadelphia—the first of its kind in the United States—that raised more than $300,000 for Washington’s army. Other women ran family farms and businesses while their husbands fought the British. And in 1790, the New Jersey legislature explicitly allowed women who owned property to vote. Despite these scattered gains, republican society still defined women’s roles exclusively in terms of mother, wife, and homemaker. Other pursuits seemed unnatural, even threatening, and it is perhaps not surprising, therefore, that in 1807 New Jersey lawmakers—angry over a close election in which women voters apparently determined the result—repealed female suffrage in the interests of “safety, quiet, and good order and dignity of the state.” Even an allegedly progressive thinker such as Jefferson could not imagine allowing women to participate in serious politics. When in 1807 his secretary of the treasury, Albert Gallatin, called attention



 CHAPTER 6

THE REPUBLICAN EXPERIMENT

 flush of independence. These early constitutions were provisional, but they nevertheless provided the framers of the federal Constitution of 1787 with invaluable insights into the strengths and weaknesses of government based on the will of the people.

Blueprints for State Government
 Despite disagreements over details, Americans who wrote the various state constitutions shared certain political assumptions. First, they insisted on preparing written documents. For many of them, of course, this seemed a natural step. As colonists, they had lived under royal charters, documents that described the workings of local government in detail. The Massachusetts Bay charter of 1629, for example (see Chapter 2), guaranteed that the Puritans would enjoy the rights of Englishmen even after they had moved to the New World. And in New England, Congregationalists drew up church covenants stating in clear contractual language the rights and responsibilities of the entire congregation. However logical the decision to produce written documents may have seemed to the Americans, it represented a major break with English practice. Political philosophers in the mother country had long boasted of Britain’s unwritten constitution, a collection of judicial reports and parliamentary statutes. But this highly vaunted system had not protected the colonists from oppression; hence, after declaring independence, Americans demanded that their state constitutions explicitly define the rights of the people as well as the power of their rulers. Abigail Adams, wife of President John Adams, was a brilliant woman whose plea to limit the power of husbands gained little sympathetic attention. This portrait of her by Benjamin Blyth is from c. 1766.

 to the shortage of educated people to serve in government jobs and suggested recruiting women, Jefferson responded sharply: “The appointment of a woman to office is an innovation for which the public is not prepared, nor am I.”

The States: Experiments
 in Republicanism Following independence, why did the states insist on drafting written constitutions? In May 1776, the Second Continental Congress invited the states to adopt constitutions. The old colonial charters fi lled with references to king and Parliament were clearly no longer adequate, and within a few years, most states had taken action. Rhode Island and Connecticut already enjoyed republican government by virtue of their unique seventeenth-century charters that allowed the voters to select both governors and legislators. Eleven other states plus Vermont created new political structures, and their deliberations reveal how Americans living in different regions and reacting to different social pressures defined fundamental republican principles. Several constitutions were boldly experimental, and some states later rewrote documents that had been drafted in the first

Natural Rights and the State
Constitutions
 The authors of the state constitutions believed men and women possessed certain natural rights over which government exercised no control whatsoever. So that future rulers—potential tyrants—would know the exact limits of authority, these fundamental rights were carefully spelled out. Indeed, the people of Massachusetts rejected the proposed state constitution of 1778 largely because it lacked a full statement of their basic rights. They demanded a guarantee of “rights of conscience, and . . . security of persons and property, which every member in the State hath a right to expect from the supreme power.” Eight state constitutions contained specific declarations of rights. The length and character of these lists varied, but, in general, they affirmed three fundamental freedoms: religion, speech, and press. They protected citizens from unlawful searches and seizures; they upheld trial by jury. George Mason, a shrewd political thinker who had written important revolutionary pamphlets, penned the most influential declaration of rights. It was appended to the Virginia Constitution of 1776, and the words were incorporated into other state constitutions as well as the famed Bill of Rights of the federal Constitution. In almost every state, delegates to constitutional conventions drastically reduced the power of the governor. The constitutions of Pennsylvania and Georgia abolished the governor’s office. In four other states, terms such as president were substituted for governor. Even when those who designed the new state governments provided for a governor, they severely circumscribed his authority.

Stumbling Toward a New National Government


 He was allowed to make almost no political appointments, and while the state legislators closely monitored his activities, he possessed no veto over their decisions (Massachusetts being the lone exception). Most early constitutions lodged nearly all effective power in the legislature. This decision made good sense to men who had served under powerful royal governors during the late colonial period. These ambitious crown appointees had used executive patronage to influence members of the colonial assemblies, and as the Americans drafted their new republican constitutions, they were determined to bring their governors under tight control. In fact, the writers of the state constitutions were so fearful of the concentration of power in the hands of a single person that they failed to appreciate that elected governors—like the representatives themselves—were now the servants of a free people. The legislature dominated early state government. The constitutions of Pennsylvania and Georgia provided for a unicameral, or one-house, system, and since any male taxpayer could cast a ballot in these states, their legislatures became the nation’s most democratic. Other states authorized the creation of two houses, but even as they did so, some of the more demanding republicans wondered why America needed a senate or upper house at all. What social and economic interests, they asked, did that body represent that could not be more fully and directly voiced in the lower house? After all, America had just freed itself of an aristocracy. The two-house form survived the Revolution largely because it was familiar and because some persons had already begun to suspect that certain checks on the popular will, however arbitrary they might have appeared, were necessary to preserve minority rights.

Power to the People
 Massachusetts did not adopt a constitution until 1780, several years after the other states had done so. The experience of the people of Massachusetts is particularly significant because in their efforts to establish a workable system of republican government, they hit on a remarkable political innovation. After the rejection of two constitutions drafted by the state legislature, the responsibility fell to a specially elected convention of delegates whose sole purpose was the “formation of a new Constitution.” John Adams took a position of leadership at this convention and served as the chief architect of the governmental framework of Massachusetts. This framework included a house and senate, a popularly elected governor—who, unlike the chief executives of other states, possessed a veto over legislative bills—and property qualifications for officeholders as well as voters. The most striking aspect of the 1780 constitution, however, was the wording of its opening sentence: “We . . . the people of Massachusetts . . . agree upon, ordain, and establish.” This powerful statement would be echoed in the federal Constitution. The Massachusetts experiment reminded Americans that ordinary officeholders could not be trusted to define fundamental rights. That important task required a convention of delegates who could legitimately claim to speak for the people. In 1780, no one knew whether the state experiments would succeed. There was no question that a different type of person had begun to appear in public office, one who seemed, to the local



 gentry at least, a little poorer and less polished than they would have liked. When one Virginian surveyed the newly elected House of Burgesses in 1776, he discovered it was “composed of men not quite so well dressed, nor so politely educated, nor so highly born as some Assemblies I have formerly seen.” This particular Virginian approved of such change, for he believed that “the People’s men,” however plain they might appear, possessed honesty and sincerity. They were, in fact, representative republicans, people who insisted they were anyone’s equal in this burgeoning society. Other Americans were less optimistic about the nation’s immediate prospects. The health of a small republic depended entirely on the virtue of its people. If they or their elected officials succumbed to material temptation, if they failed to comprehend the moral dimensions of political power, or if personal liberty threatened the rights of property, then the state constitutions were no more than worthless pieces of paper. The risk of excess seemed great. In 1778, a group of New Englanders, fearful that unbridled freedom would create political anarchy, observed, “The idea of liberty has been held up in so dazzling colours that some of us may not be willing to submit to that subordination necessary in the freest states.”

Stumbling Toward a New
National Government
 Why did many Americans regard the Articles of Confederation as inadequate? When the Second Continental Congress convened in 1775, the delegates found themselves waging war in the name of a country that did not yet exist. As the military crisis deepened, Congress gradually—often reluctantly—assumed greater authority over national affairs, but everyone agreed such narrowly conceived measures were a poor substitute for a legally constituted government. The separate states could not possibly deal with the range of issues that now confronted the American people. Indeed, if independence meant anything in a world of sovereign nations, it implied the creation of a central authority capable of conducting war, borrowing money, regulating trade, and negotiating treaties.

Articles of Confederation
 The challenge of creating a viable central government proved more difficult than anyone anticipated. Congress appointed a committee to draw up a plan for confederation. John Dickinson, the lawyer who had written an important revolutionary pamphlet titled Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania, headed the committee. Dickinson envisioned the creation of a strong central government, and the report his committee presented on July 12, 1776, shocked delegates who assumed that the constitution would authorize a loose confederation of states. Dickinson’s plan placed the western territories, land claimed by the separate states, under congressional control. In addition, Dickinson’s committee called for equal state representation in Congress. Since some states, such as Virginia and Massachusetts, were more populous than others, the plan fueled tensions between large and small states. Also unsettling was Dickinson’s recommendation



 CHAPTER 6

THE REPUBLICAN EXPERIMENT

 that taxes be paid to Congress on the basis of a state’s total population, black Read the Document The Articles of Confederation (1777) as well as white, a formula that angered Southerners who did not think slaves should be counted. Indeed, even before the British evacuated Boston, Dickinson’s committee raised many difficult political questions that would divide Americans for several decades. Not surprisingly, the draft of the plan—the Articles of Confederation— that Congress finally approved in November 1777 bore little resemblance to Dickinson’s original plan. The Articles jealously guarded the sovereignty of the states. The delegates who drafted the framework shared a general republican conviction that power—especially power so far removed from the people—was inherently dangerous and that the only way to preserve liberty was to place as many constraints as possible on federal authority. The result was a government that many people regarded as powerless. The Articles provided for a single legislative body consisting of representatives selected In 1977, the U.S. Postal Service issued this stamp to commemorate the bicentennial of the drafting of annually by the state legislatures. Each the nation’s first constitution—the Articles of Confederation. The Second Continental Congress appointed state possessed a single vote in Congress. It a thirteen-man committee (one from each state) to draft the document, although only five figures are could send as many as seven delegates, as shown here. few as two, but if they divided evenly on a certain issue, the state lost its vote. There was no independent execuregion was claimed by various states, most of it actually belonged to tive and no veto over legislative decisions. The Articles also denied Native Americans. In a series of land grabs that federal negotiators Congress the power of taxation, a serious oversight in time of war. The called treaties, the United States government took the land comprisnational government could obtain funds only by asking the states for ing much of modern Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Kentucky. Since the contributions, called requisitions, but if a state failed to cooperate— Indians had put their faith in the British during the war, they could and many did—Congress limped along without financial support. do little to resist the humiliating treaty agreements at Fort McIntosh Amendments to this constitution required assent by all thirteen states. (1785), Fort Stanwix (1784), and Fort Finney (1786). As John The authors of the new system expected the weak national governDickinson, then serving as the president of the Supreme Executive ment to handle foreign relations, military matters, Indian affairs, and Council of Pennsylvania, told the Indians, since Great Britain has interstate disputes. They most emphatically did not award Congress surrendered “the back country with all the forts . . . that they [the ownership of the lands west of the Appalachian Mountains. Indians] must now depend upon us for the preservation.” If they The new constitution sent to the states for ratification encoundared to resist, “we will instantly turn upon them our armies . . . and tered apathy and hostility. Most Americans were far more interested extirpate them from the land where they were born and now live.” in local affairs than in the actions of Congress. When a British army Some states, such as Virginia and Georgia, claimed land all marched through a state, creating a need for immediate military the way from the Atlantic Ocean to the elusive “South Seas,” in aid, people spoke positively about central government, but as effect extending their boundaries to the Pacific coast by virtue soon as the threat had passed, they sang a different tune. During of royal charters. State legislators—their appetites whetted by this period, even the slightest encroachment on state sovereignty aggressive land speculators—anticipated generating large revrankled republicans who feared centralization would inevitably enues through land sales. Connecticut, New York, Pennsylvania, promote corruption. and North Carolina also announced intentions to seize blocks of western land. Other states were not blessed with vague or ambiguous royal Western Land: Key to the charters. The boundaries of Maryland, Delaware, and New Jersey First Constitution had been established many years earlier, and it seemed as if peoThe major bone of contention with the Articles, however, was the ple living in these states would be permanently cut off from the disposition of the vast, unsurveyed territory west of the Appalachians anticipated bounty. In protest, these “landless” states stubbornly that everyone hoped the British would soon surrender. Although the refused to ratify the Articles of Confederation. Marylanders were

Stumbling Toward a New National Government


 particularly vociferous. All the states had made sacrifices for the common good during the Revolution, they complained, and it appeared only fair that all states should profit from the fruits of victory, in this case, from the sale of western lands. Maryland’s spokesmen feared that if Congress did not void Virginia’s excessive claims to all of the Northwest Territory (the land west of Pennsylvania and north of the Ohio River) as well as to a large area south of the Ohio, beyond the Cumberland Gap, known as Kentucky, then Marylanders would desert their home state in search of cheap Virginia farms, leaving Maryland an underpopulated wasteland. Virginians scoffed at the pleas for equity. They suspected that behind the Marylanders’ statements of high purpose lay the greed of speculators. Private land companies had sprung up before the Revolution and purchased large tracts from the Indians in areas claimed by Virginia. Their agents petitioned Parliament to legitimize these questionable transactions. Their efforts failed. After the Declaration of Independence, however, the companies shifted the focus of their lobbying to Congress, particularly to the representatives of landless states like Maryland. By liberally distributing shares of stock, officials of the Indiana, Illinois, and Wabash companies gained powerful supporters such as Benjamin Franklin, Robert Morris, and Thomas Johnson, governor of Maryland. These activities encouraged Delaware and New Jersey to modify their

Read the Document


Northwest Ordinance


(July 3, 1787)


 Map shows present-day boundaries.

 MINN.

Gre


 CANADA

 at

L


 si

 WISCONSIN i R .

 MICHIGAN

NORTHWEST TERRITORY ILLINOIS
Misso 
 ur

 demands and join the Confederation, while Maryland held out for five years. The leaders of Virginia, though, remained firm. Why, they asked, should Virginia surrender its historic claims to western lands to enrich a handful of selfish speculators? The states resolved the bitter controversy in 1781 as much by accident as by design. Virginia agreed to cede its holdings north of the Ohio River to the Confederation on condition that Congress nullify the land companies’ earlier purchases from the Indians. A practical consideration had softened Virginia’s resolve. Republicans such as Jefferson worried about expanding their state beyond the mountains; with poor transportation links, it seemed impossible to govern such a large territory effectively from Richmond. The western settlers might even come to regard Virginia as a colonial power insensitive to their needs. Marylanders who dreamed of making fortunes on the land market grumbled, but when a British army appeared on their border, they prudently accepted the Articles (March 1, 1781). Congress required another three years to work out the details of the Virginia cession. Other landed states followed Virginia’s example. These transfers established an important principle, for after 1781, it was agreed that the West belonged not to the separate states but to the United States. In this matter, at least, the national government now exercised full sovereignty. No one greeted ratification of the Articles with much enthusiasm. When they thought about national politics at all, Americans concerned themselves primarily with winning independence. The new government gradually developed an administrative bureaucracy, and in 1781 it formally created the Departments of War, Foreign Affairs, and Finance. By far the most influential figure in the Confederation was Robert Morris (1734–1806), a freewheeling Philadelphia merchant who was appointed the first superintendent of finance. Although he was a brilliant manager, Morris’s decisions as superintendent provoked controversy and deep suspicion. He hardly seemed a model republican. Morris mixed public funds under his control with personal accounts, and he never lost an opportunity to make a profit. While such practices were not illegal, his apparent improprieties undermined his own political agenda. He desperately wanted to strengthen the central government, but highly vocal critics resisted, labeling Morris a “pecuniary dictator.”

 es

 ipp

 ak

Mis


 ss



 INDIANA

 i R. Ohio

R


 OHIO

.


NORTHWEST TERRITORY
The U.S. government auctioned off the land in the Northwest Territory, the region defined by the Ohio River, the Great Lakes, and the Mississippi River. Proceeds from the sale of one section in each township were set aside for the creation and support of public schools. 
Northwest Ordinance: The
 Confederation’s Major Achievement Whatever the weaknesses of Congress may have been, it did score one impressive triumph. Congressional action brought order to western settlement, especially in the Northwest Territory, and incorporated frontier Americans into an expanding federal system. In 1781, the prospects for success did not seem promising. For years, colonial authorities had ignored people who migrated far inland, sending neither money nor soldiers to protect them from Indian attack. Tensions between the seaboard colonies and the frontier regions had sometimes flared into violence. Disorders occurred in South Carolina in 1767, in North Carolina in 1769, and in Vermont in 1777. With thousands of men and women, most of them squatters, pouring across the Appalachian Mountains, Congress had to act quickly to avoid the past errors of royal and colonial authorities.

THE REPUBLICAN EXPERIMENT

View the Map


A


Western Land Claims Ceded by the States


A


A
C


R
 e

E


W


 LO

 e S u p er i o Lak r

D


N


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 eR nc

.


 aw r

 CHAPTER 6

 MAINE

St.
L




 (part of Mass.)

NORTHWEST TERRITORY
Ceded by Virginia 1784 
 ron Hu ke La

Lake M
 ich iga

 VERMONT n

N
 CA

U


Ceded by Massachusetts


 ke La

Ceded by Connecticut


P


 MASSACHUSETTS

RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT

 PENNSYLVANIA 17 82

NEW JERSEY

Y ork


R.


 DELAWARE

D.C.


 MARYLAND

 ew

 io Oh

NEW HAMPSHIRE

NEW YORK
ntario 
 e Eri

Ceded by New York
R.


A


R
 ke O P E La

Ceded by
Conn. 1800


Missouri


 AD

Ce


 VIRGINIA by N d Territory of Virginia de Cumberland until 1792 Gap (Kentucky) sis sip pi Mis

Ceded by Spain
 to France 1800

R.


 LOUISIANA

Ceded by
South Carolina
 to Georgia

Ceded by North Carolina
(Tennessee)


ATLANTIC OCEAN

NORTH CAROLINA

State of
Franklin


SOUTH CAROLINA

Ceded by Georgia


 GEORGIA

Ceded by Spain
31° North
Latitude


 SPANISH

 FL

 Boundary of territory ceded by New York

O
R




 ID

Gulf of Mexico






 200 miles

 200 kilometers

 Boundary of territory ceded by Virginia in 1784

A


 Original thirteen states after their land cession

WESTERN LAND CLAIMS CEDED BY THE STATES

 After winning the war, the major issue facing the Continental Congress under the Articles of Confederation was mediating conflicting states’ claims to rich western land. By 1802, the states had ceded all rights to the federal government.

 The initial attempt to deal with this explosive problem came in 1784. Jefferson, then serving as a member of Congress, drafted an ordinance that became the basis for later, more enduring legislation. Jefferson recommended carving ten new states out of the western lands located north of the Ohio River and recently ceded to the United States by Virginia. He specified that each new state establish a republican form of government. When the population of a territory equaled that of the smallest state already in the Confederation, the region could apply for full statehood. In the meantime, free white males could participate in local government, a democratic guarantee that frightened some of Jefferson’s more conservative colleagues. The impoverished Congress was eager to sell off the western territory as quickly as possible. After all, the frontier represented

 a source of income that did not depend on the unreliable generosity of the states. A second ordinance, passed in 1785 and called the Land Ordinance, established an orderly process for laying out new townships and marketing public lands. Public response disappointed Congress. Surveying the lands took far longer than anticipated, and few persons possessed enough hard currency to make even the minimum purchase. Finally, a solution to the problem came from Manasseh Cutler, a New England minister turned land speculator and congressional lobbyist, and his associates, who included several former officers of the Continental Army. Cutler and his associates, representing the Ohio and Scioto companies, offered to purchase more than six million

Strengthening Federal Authority




LAND ORDINANCE OF 1785
Grid pattern of a township 36 sections of 640 acres (1 square mile each) 










 Income of one section reserved for the support of public education

 6 miles























A
Half-section 










A




 320 acres

B
Quarter-section 
 160 acres

C
Half-quarter section 






















 80 acres

D
Quarter-quarter section 
 40 acres

C
B


 6 miles

 unsurveyed acres of land located in present-day southeastern Ohio by persuading Congress to accept, at full face value, government loan certificates that had been issued to soldiers during the Revolution. On the open market, the Ohio company could pick up the certificates for as little as 10 percent of their face value; thus, the company stood to make a fortune. Like so many other get-rich-quick schemes, however, this one failed to produce the anticipated millions. Unfortunately for Cutler and his friends, small homesteaders settled wherever they pleased, refusing to pay either government or speculators for the land. Congress worried about the excess liberty on the frontier. In the 1780s, the West seemed to be filling up with people who by eastern standards were uncultured. Timothy Pickering, a New Englander, declared that “the emigrants to the frontier lands are the least worthy subjects in the United States. They are little less savage than the Indians; and when possessed of the most fertile spots, for want of industry, live miserably.” The charge was as old as the frontier itself. Indeed, seventeenth-century Englishmen had said the same things of the earliest Virginians. The lawless image stuck, however, and even a sober observer such as Washington insisted that the West crawled with “banditti.” The Ordinance of 1784 placed the government of the territories in the hands of people about whom congressmen and speculators had second thoughts. These various currents shaped the Ordinance of 1787, one of the final acts passed under the Confederation. The bill, also called the Northwest Ordinance, provided a new structure for government of the Northwest Territory. The plan authorized the creation of between three and five territories, each to be ruled by a governor, a secretary, and three judges appointed by Congress. When the population reached five thousand, voters who owned property could elect an assembly, but its decisions were subject to the governor’s absolute veto. Once sixty thousand persons resided in a territory, they could write a constitution and petition for full statehood. While these procedures represented a retreat from Jefferson’s original proposal, the Ordinance of 1787 contained

D


D


 1 mile

 several significant features. A bill of rights guaranteed the settlers the right to trial by jury, freedom of religion, and due process of law. In addition, the act outlawed slavery, a prohibition that freed the future states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin from the curse of human bondage. By contrast, settlement south of the Ohio River received far less attention from Congress. Long before the end of the war, thousands of Americans streamed through the Cumberland Gap into a part of Virginia known as Kentucky. The most famous of these settlers was Daniel Boone. In 1775, the population of Kentucky was approximately one hundred; by 1784, it had jumped to thirty thousand. Speculators purchased large tracts from the Indians, planning to resell this acreage to settlers at handsome profits. In 1776, one land company asked Congress to reorganize the company’s holdings into a new state called Transylvania. While nothing came of this selfserving request, another, even more aggressive group of speculators in 1784 carved the State of Franklin out of a section of present-day Tennessee, then claimed by North Carolina. Rival speculators prevented formal recognition of Franklin’s government. By 1790, the entire region south of the Ohio River had been transformed into a crazy quilt of claims and counterclaims that generated lawsuits for many years to come.

Strengthening Federal Authority
 What did the nationalists call for and how did they aim to achieve their initiatives? Despite its success in bringing order to the Northwest Territory, the Confederation increasingly came under heavy fire from critics who wanted a stronger central government. Complaints varied from region to region, from person to person, but most disappointment reflected economic frustration. Americans had assumed that peace would restore economic growth, but recovery following the Revolution was slow.



 CHAPTER 6

THE REPUBLICAN EXPERIMENT

The Nationalist Critique
 Even before England signed a treaty with America, its merchants flooded American ports with consumer items and offered easy credit. Families that had postponed purchases of imported goods—either because of British blockade or personal hardship— now rushed to buy European finery. This sudden renewal of trade with Great Britain on such a large scale strained the American economy. Gold and silver flowed back across the Atlantic, leaving the United States desperately short of hard currency. When large merchant houses called in their debts, ordinary American consumers often found themselves on the brink of bankruptcy. “The disagreeable state of our commerce,” observed James Wilson, an advocate of strong national government, has been the result “of extravagant and injudicious importation. . . . We seemed to have forgot that to pay was as necessary in trade as to purchase.” To blame the Confederation alone for the economic depression would be unfair. Nevertheless, during the 1780s, many people agreed that a stronger central government could somehow have brought greater stability to the struggling economy. In their rush to acquire imported luxuries, Americans seemed to have deserted republican principles, and a weak Congress was helpless to restore national virtue. Critics pointed to the government’s inability to regulate trade. Whenever a northern congressman suggested restricting British access to American markets, southern representatives, who feared any controls on the export of tobacco or rice, bellowed in protest. Southerners anticipated that navigation acts written by the Confederation would put planters under the yoke of northern shipping interests. The country’s chronic fiscal instability increased public anxiety. While the war was still in progress, Congress printed well over $200 million in paper money, but because of extraordinarily high inflation, the rate of exchange for Continental bills soon declined to a fraction of their face value. In 1781, Congress, facing insolvency, turned to the states for help. They were asked to retire the depreciated currency. The situation was spinning out of control. Several states— pressed to pay their own war-related debts—not only recirculated the Continental bills but also issued nearly worthless money of their own. A heavy burden of state and national debt compounded the general sense of economic crisis. Revolutionary soldiers had yet to be paid. Women and men who had loaned money and goods to the government clamored for reimbursement. Foreign creditors demanded interest on funds advanced during the Revolution. These pressures grew, but Congress was unable to respond. The Articles specifically prohibited Congress from taxing the American people. It required little imagination to see that the Confederation would soon default on its legal obligations unless something was done quickly. In response, an aggressive group of men announced that they knew how to save the Confederation. The nationalists—persons such as Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and Robert Morris—called for major constitutional reforms, the chief of which was an amendment allowing Congress to collect a 5 percent tax on imported goods sold in the states. Revenues generated by the proposed Impost of 1781 would be used by the Confederation to reduce the national debt. On this point the nationalists were adamant. They recognized that whoever paid the public debt would gain the public trust. If the states assumed the responsibility, then the country could easily fragment into separate republics. “A national debt,” Hamilton explained

 in 1781, “if it is not excessive, will be to us a national blessing. It will be a powerful cement to our union.” Twelve states accepted the Impost amendment, but Rhode Island—where local interests argued that the tax would make Congress “independent of their constituents”—resolutely refused to cooperate. One negative vote on this proposed constitutional change, and the taxing scheme was dead. State leaders frankly thought the nationalists were up to no good. The “localists” were especially apprehensive of fiscal plans advanced by Robert Morris. His profiteering as superintendent of finance appeared a threat to the moral fiber of the young republic. Richard Henry Lee and Samuel Adams, men of impeccable patriotic credentials, decried Morris’s efforts to create a national bank. Such an institution would bring forth a flock of social parasites, the kind of people that Americans associated with corrupt monarchical government. One person declared that if an impost ever passed, Morris “will have all [the money] in his Pocket.” The nationalists regarded their opponents as economically naive. A country with the potential of the United States required a complex, centralized fiscal system. But for all their pretensions to realism, the nationalists of the early 1780s were politically inept. They underestimated the depth of republican fears, and in their rush to strengthen the Articles, they overplayed their hand. A group of extreme nationalists even appealed to the army for support. To this day, no one knows the full story of the Newburgh Conspiracy of 1783. Officers of the Continental Army stationed at Newburgh, New York, worried that Congress would disband them without funding their pensions, began to lobby intensively for relief. In March, they scheduled general meetings to protest the weakness and duplicity of Congress. The officers’ initial efforts were harmless enough, but frustrated nationalists such as Morris and Hamilton hoped that if the army exerted sufficient pressure on the government, perhaps even threatened a military takeover, then stubborn Americans might be compelled to amend the Articles. The conspirators failed to take George Washington’s integrity into account. No matter how much he wanted a strong central government, he would not tolerate insubordination by the military. Washington confronted the officers directly at Newburgh, intending to read a prepared statement. Fumbling with his glasses before his men, he commented, “Gentlemen, you must pardon me. I have grown gray in your service and now find myself growing blind.” The unexpected vulnerability of this great soldier reduced the troops to tears, and in an instant, the rebellion was broken. Washington deserves credit for preserving civilian rule in this country.

Diplomatic Humiliation
 In foreign affairs, Congress endured further embarrassment. It could not even enforce the provisions of its own peace treaty. American negotiators had promised Great Britain that its citizens could collect debts contracted before the Revolution. The states, however, dragged their heels, and several even passed laws obstructing the settlement of legitimate prewar claims. Congress was powerless to force compliance. The British responded to this apparent provocation by refusing to evacuate troops from posts located in the Northwest Territory. A strong national government would have driven the redcoats out, but without adequate funds, the weak Congress could not provide soldiers for such a mission.

“Have We Fought for This?”


 Congress’s postrevolutionary dealings with Spain were equally humiliating. That nation refused to accept the southern boundary of the United States established by the Treaty of Paris. Spain claimed sovereignty over much of the land located between Georgia and the Mississippi River, and its agents schemed with Indian tribes in this region to resist American expansion. On July 21, 1784, Spain fueled the controversy by closing the lower Mississippi River to citizens of the United States. This unexpected decision devastated western farmers. Free use of the Mississippi was essential to the economic development of the entire Ohio Valley. Because of the prohibitively high cost of transporting freight for long distances over land, western settlers—and southern planters eyeing future opportunities in this area—demanded a secure water link with the world’s markets. Their spokesmen in Congress denounced anyone who claimed that navigation of the Mississippi was a negotiable issue. In 1786, a Spanish official, Don Diego de Gardoqui, opened talks with John Jay, a New Yorker appointed by Congress to obtain rights to navigation of the Mississippi. Jay soon discovered that Gardoqui would not compromise. After making little progress, Jay seized the initiative. If Gardoqui would allow American merchants to trade directly with Spain, thus opening up an important new market to ships from New England and the middle states, then the United States might forgo navigation of the Mississippi for twenty-five years. When southern delegates heard of Jay’s concessions, they were outraged. It appeared to them as if representatives of northern commerce were ready to abandon the southern frontier. Angry congressmen accused New Englanders of attempting to divide the United States into separate confederations, for as one Virginian exclaimed, the proposed Spanish treaty “would weaken if not destroy the union by disaffecting the Southern States . . . to obtain a trivial commercial advantage.” Congress wisely terminated the negotiations with Spain. By the mid-1780s, the Confederation could claim several notable achievements. It designed an administrative system that lasted far longer than did the Articles. It also brought order out of the chaos of conflicting western land claims. Still, as anyone could see, the government was struggling. Congress met irregularly. Some states did not even bother to send delegates, and pressing issues often had to be postponed for lack of a quorum. The nation even lacked a permanent capital, and Congress drifted from Philadelphia to Princeton to Annapolis to New York City, prompting one humorist to suggest that the government purchase an air balloon. This newly invented device, he explained, would allow the members of Congress to “float along from one end of the continent to the other” and “suddenly pop down into any of the states they please.”

“Have We Fought for This?”
 Why did Constitutional delegates compromise on representation and slavery? By 1785, the country seemed to have lost direction. The buoyant optimism that sustained revolutionary patriots had dissolved into pessimism and doubt. Many Americans, especially those who had provided leadership during the Revolution, agreed something had to be done. In 1786, Washington bitterly



 observed, “What astonishing changes a few years are capable of producing. Have we fought for this? Was it with these expectations that we launched into a sea of trouble, and have bravely struggled through the most threatening dangers?”

The Genius of James Madison
 The conviction of people such as Washington that the nation was indeed in a state of crisis reflected tensions within republican thought. To be sure, they supported open elections and the right of individuals to advance their own economic well-being, but when these elements seemed to undermine social and political order, they expressed the fear that perhaps liberty had been carried too far. The situation had changed quite rapidly. As recently as the 1770s, men of republican persuasion had insisted that the greatest threat to the American people was concentration of power in the hands of unscrupulous rulers. With this principle in mind, they transformed state governors into mere figureheads and weakened the Confederation in the name of popular liberties. By the mid-1780s, persons of property and standing saw the problem in a different light. Recent experience suggested to them that ordinary citizens did not in fact possess sufficient virtue to sustain a republic. The states had been plagued not by executive tyranny but by an excess of democracy, by a failure of the majority to preserve the property rights of the minority, by an unrestrained individualism that promoted anarchy rather than good order. As Americans tried to interpret these experiences within a republican framework, they were checked by the most widely accepted political wisdom of the age. Baron de Montesquieu (1689–1755), a French political philosopher of immense international reputation and author of The Spirit of the Laws (1748), declared flatly that a republican government could not flourish in a large territory. The reasons were clear. If the people lost direct control over their representatives, they would fall prey to tyrants. Large distances allowed rulers to hide their corruption; physical separation presented aristocrats with opportunities to seize power. In the United States, most learned men treated Montesquieu’s theories as self-evident truths. His writings seemed to demonstrate the importance of preserving the sovereignty of the states, for however much these small republics abused the rights of property and ignored minority interests, it was plainly unscientific to maintain that a republic consisting of thirteen states, several million people, and thousands of acres of territory could long survive. James Madison rejected Montesquieu’s argument, and in so doing, he helped Americans to think of republican government in radical new ways. This soft-spoken, rather unprepossessing Virginian was the most brilliant American political thinker of his generation. One French official described Madison as “a man one must study a long time in order to make a fair appraisal.” Those who listened carefully to what Madison had to say, however, soon recognized his genius for translating theory into practice. Madison delved into the writings of a group of Scottish philosophers, the most prominent being David Hume (1711–1776), and from their works he concluded that Americans need not fear a greatly expanded republic. Madison perceived that “inconveniences of popular States contrary to prevailing Theory, are in proportion not to the extent, but to the narrowness of their limits.”



 CHAPTER 6

THE REPUBLICAN EXPERIMENT

 Indeed, it was in small states such as Rhode Island that legislative majorities tyrannized the propertied minority. In a large territory, Madison explained, “the Society becomes broken into a greater variety of interest, of pursuits, of passions, which check each other, whilst those who may feel a common sentiment have less opportunity of communication and contact.” Madison did not, however, advocate a modern “interest group” model of political behavior. The contending parties were incapable of working for the common good. They were too mired in their own local, selfish concerns. Rather, Madison thought competing factions would neutralize each other, leaving the business of running the central government to the ablest, most virtuous persons the nation could produce. In other words, Madison’s federal system was not a small state writ large; it was something entirely different, a government based on the will of the people and yet detached from their narrowly based demands. This thinking formed the foundation of Madison’s most famous political essay, The Federalist No. 10.

Constitutional Reform
 A concerted movement to overhaul the Articles of Confederation began in 1786, when Madison and his friends persuaded the Virginia assembly to recommend a convention to explore the creation of a unified system of “commercial regulations.” Congress supported the idea. In September, delegates from five states arrived in Annapolis, Maryland, to discuss issues that extended far beyond commerce. The small turnout was disappointing, but the occasion provided strong nationalists with an opportunity to hatch an even bolder plan. The Annapolis delegates advised Congress to hold a second meeting in Philadelphia “to take into consideration the situation of the United States, to devise such further provisions as shall appear to them necessary to render the constitution of the Federal Government adequate to the exigencies of the Union.” Whether staunch states’ rights advocates in Congress knew what was afoot is not clear. In any case, Congress authorized a grand convention to gather in May 1787. Events played into Madison’s hands. Soon after the Annapolis meeting, an uprising known as Shays’s Rebellion, involving several thousand impoverished farmers, shattered the peace of western Massachusetts. No matter how hard these men worked the soil, they always found themselves in debt to eastern creditors. They complained of high taxes, of high interest rates, and, most of all, of a state government insensitive to their problems. In 1786, Daniel Shays, a veteran of the Battle of Bunker Hill, and his armed neighbors closed a county courthouse where creditors were suing to foreclose farm mortgages. At one point, the rural insurgents threatened to seize the federal arsenal located at Springfield. Congress did not have funds sufficient to support an army, and the arsenal might have fallen had not a group of wealthy Bostonians raised an army of four thousand troops to put down the insurrection. The victors were in for a surprise. At the next general election, Massachusetts voters selected representatives sympathetic to Shays’s demands, and a new liberal assembly reformed debtor law. Nationalists throughout the United States were not so forgiving. From their perspective, Shays’s Rebellion symbolized the breakdown of law and order that they had long predicted. “Great commotions are prevailing in Massachusetts,” Madison wrote. “An appeal to the sword is exceedingly dreaded.” The time had come for sensible

 people to speak up for a strong national government. The unrest in Massachusetts persuaded persons who might otherwise have ignored the Philadelphia meeting to participate in drafting a new constitution.

The Philadelphia Convention
 In the spring of 1787, fifty-five men representing twelve states traveled to Philadelphia. Rhode Island refused to take part in the proceedings, a decision that Madison attributed to its “wickedness and folly.” Thomas Jefferson described the convention as an “assembly of demiGods,” but this flattering depiction is misleading. However much modern Americans revere the Constitution, they should remember that the individuals who wrote it did not possess divine insight into the nature of government. They were practical people—lawyers, merchants, and planters—many of whom had fought in the Revolution and served in the Congress of the Confederation. The majority were in their thirties or forties. The gathering included George Washington, James Madison, George Mason, Robert Morris, James Wilson, John Dickinson, Benjamin Franklin, and Alexander Hamilton, just to name some of the more prominent participants. Absent were John Adams and Thomas Jefferson, who were conducting diplomacy in Europe; Patrick Henry, a localist suspicious of strong central government, remained in Virginia, announcing he “smelled a rat.” As soon as the Constitutional Convention opened on May 25, the delegates made several procedural decisions of the utmost importance. First, they voted “that nothing spoken in the House be printed, or communicated without leave.” The rule was stringently enforced. Sentries guarded the doorways to keep out uninvited visitors, windows stayed shut in the sweltering heat to prevent sound from either entering or leaving the chamber, and members were forbidden to copy the daily journal without official permission. As Madison explained, the secrecy rule saved “both the convention and the community from a thousand erroneous and perhaps mischievous reports.” It also has made it extremely difficult for modern lawyers and judges to determine exactly what the delegates had in mind when they wrote the Constitution (see the Feature Essay “The Elusive Constitution: Search for Original Intent,” pp. 148–149). In a second procedural move, the delegates decided to vote by state, but, in order to avoid the kinds of problems that had plagued the Confederation, they ruled that key proposals needed the support of only a majority instead of the nine states required under the Articles.

Inventing a Federal Republic
 Madison understood that whoever sets the agenda controls the meeting. Even before all the delegates had arrived, he drew up a framework for a new federal system known as the Virginia Plan. Madison wisely persuaded Edmund Randolph, Virginia’s popular governor, to present this scheme to the convention on May 29. Randolph claimed that the Virginia Plan merely revised sections of the Articles, but everyone, including Madison, knew better. “My ideas,” Madison confessed, “strike . . . deeply at the old Confederation.” He was determined to restrain the state assemblies, and in the original Virginia Plan, Madison gave the federal government power to veto state laws. The Virginia Plan envisioned a national legislature consisting of two houses, one elected directly by the people, the other chosen by the first house from nominations made by the state assemblies. Representation in both houses was proportional to the state’s

“Have We Fought for This?”


Read the Document




 Military Reports of Shays’s Rebellion

 This 1787 woodcut portrays Daniel Shays with one of his chief officers, Jacob Shattucks. Shays led farmers in western Massachusetts in revolt against a state government that seemed insensitive to the needs of poor debtors. Their rebellion frightened conservative leaders who demanded a strong new federal government.

 population. The Virginia Plan also provided for an executive elected by Congress. Since most delegates at the Philadelphia convention sympathized with the nationalist position, Madison’s blueprint for a strong federal government initially received broad support, and the Virginia Plan was referred to further study and debate. A group of men who allegedly had come together to reform the Confederation found themselves discussing the details of “a national Government . . . consisting of a supreme Legislature, Executive, and Judiciary.” The Virginia Plan had been pushed through the convention so fast that opponents hardly had an opportunity to present their objections. On June 15, they spoke up. William Paterson, a New Jersey lawyer, advanced the so-called New Jersey Plan, a scheme that retained the unicameral legislature in which each state possessed one vote and that at the same time gave Congress extensive new powers to tax and regulate trade. Paterson argued that these revisions, while more modest than Madison’s plan, would have greater appeal for the American people. “I believe,” he said, “that a little practical virtue is to be preferred to the finest theoretical principles, which cannot be carried into effect.” The delegates listened politely and then soundly rejected the New Jersey Plan on June 19. Indeed, only New Jersey, New York, and Delaware voted in favor of Paterson’s scheme. Rejection of this framework did not resolve the most controversial issue before the convention. Paterson and others feared

 that under the Virginia Plan, small states would lose their separate identities. These delegates maintained that unless each state possessed an equal vote in Congress, the small states would find themselves at the mercy of their larger neighbors. This argument outraged the delegates who favored a strong federal government. It awarded too much power to the states. “For whom [are we] forming a Government?” Wilson cried. “Is it for men, or for the imaginary beings called States?” It seemed absurd to claim that the sixty-eight thousand people of Rhode Island should have the same voice in Congress as Virginia’s seven hundred forty-seven thousand inhabitants.

Compromise Saves the Convention
 Mediation clearly offered the only way to overcome what Roger Sherman, a Connecticut delegate, called “a full stop.” On July 2, a “grand committee” of one person from each state was elected by the convention to resolve persistent differences between the large and small states. Franklin, at age 81 the oldest delegate, served as chair. The two fiercest supporters of proportional representation based on population, Madison and Wilson, were left off the grand committee, a sure sign that the small states would salvage something from the compromise.



 CHAPTER 6

THE REPUBLICAN EXPERIMENT

Compromising on Slavery
Read the Document


The New Jersey Plan (1787)


 William Paterson (1745–1806) was a distinguished lawyer, statesman, and Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court from New Jersey. While serving as a delegate to the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia in 1787, Paterson proposed the New Jersey Plan for a unicameral legislative body with equal representation from each state. Paterson’s legislative proposal was rejected in favor of the Great Compromise, which provided for two legislative bodies: a Senate with equal representation for each state, and a House of Representatives with representation based on population.

 The committee recommended that the states be equally represented in the upper house of Congress, while representation was to be proportionate in the lower house. Only the lower house could initiate money bills. Franklin’s committee also decided that one member of the lower house should be selected for every thirty thousand inhabitants of a state. Southern delegates insisted that this number include slaves. In the so-called three-fifths rule, the committee agreed that for the purpose of determining representation in the lower house, slaves would be counted, but not as much as free persons. For every five slaves, a congressional district received credit for three free voters, a deal that gave the South much greater power in the new government than it would have otherwise received. As with most compromise solutions, the one negotiated by Franklin’s committee fully satisfied no one. It did, however, overcome a major impasse, and after the small states gained an assured voice in the upper house, the Senate, they cooperated enthusiastically in creating a strong central government.

 During the final days of August, a deeply disturbing issue came before the convention. It was a harbinger of the great sectional crisis of the nineteenth century. Many northern representatives detested the slave trade and wanted it to end immediately. They despised the three-fifths ruling that seemed to award slaveholders extra power in government simply because they owned slaves. “It seemed now to be pretty well understood,” Madison jotted in his private notes, “that the real difference of interest lay, not between the large and small but between the N. and Southn. States. The institution of slavery and its consequences formed a line of discrimination.” Whenever northern delegates—and on this point they were by no means united—pushed too aggressively, Southerners threatened to bolt the convention, thereby destroying any hope of establishing a strong national government. Curiously, even recalcitrant Southerners avoided using the word slavery. They seemed embarrassed to call the institution by its true name, and in the Constitution itself, slaves were described as “other persons,” “such persons,” “persons held to Service or Labour,” in other words, as everything but slaves. A few northern delegates such as Roger Sherman of Connecticut sought at every turn to mollify the Southerners, especially the South Carolinians who spoke so passionately about preserving slavery. Gouverneur Morris, a Pennsylvania representative, would have none of it. He regularly reminded the convention that “the inhabitant of Georgia and S.C. who goes to the Coast of Africa, and in defiance of the most sacred laws of humanity tears away his fellow creatures from their dearest connections and damns them to the most cruel bondage, shall have more votes in a Government instituted for the protection of the rights of mankind, than the Citizen of Pa. or N. Jersey.” Largely ignoring Morris’s stinging attacks, the delegates reached an uneasy compromise on the continuation of the slave trade. Southerners feared that the new Congress would pass commercial regulations adversely affecting the planters—taxes on the

Watch the Video


Slavery and the Constitution


 Many scholars consider the original U.S. Constitution to be a “pro-slavery document” since its articles protected the international slave trade and, through the “3/5s clause,” awarded states extra representation based on the number of slaves that they held.

“Have We Fought for This?”




REVOLUTION OR REFORM? THE ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION AND THE CONSTITUTION COMPARED
Political Challenge Mode of ratification or amendment Number of houses in legislature Mode of representation 
Articles of Confederation
 Require confirmation by every state legislature One Two to seven delegates represent each state; each state holds only one vote in Congress

 Mode of election and term of office

 Delegates appointed annually by state legislatures

Executive


 No separate executive: delegates annually elect one of their number as president, who possesses no veto, no power to appoint officers or to conduct policy. Administrative functions of government theoretically carried out by Committee of States, practically by various single-headed departments Most adjudication left to state and local courts; Congress is final court of appeal in disputes between states States alone can levy taxes; Congress funds the Common Treasury by making requisitions for state contributions Congress regulates foreign commerce by treaty but holds no check on conflicting state regulations

Judiciary


Taxation


 Regulation of commerce

 export of rice and tobacco, for example. They demanded, therefore, that no trade laws be passed without a two-thirds majority of the federal legislature. They backed down on this point, however, in exchange for guarantees that Congress would not interfere with the slave trade until 1808 (see Chapter 8). The South even came away with a clause assuring the return of fugitive slaves. “We have obtained,” Charles Cotesworth Pinckney told the planters of South Carolina, “a right to recover our slaves in whatever part of America they may take refuge, which is a right we had not before.” Although these deals disappointed many Northerners, they conceded that establishing a strong national government was of greater immediate importance than ending the slave trade. “Great as the evil is,” Madison wrote, “a dismemberment of the union would be worse.”

The Last Details
 On July 26, the convention formed a Committee of Detail, a group that prepared a rough draft of the Constitution. After the committee completed its work—writing a document that still, after so

Constitution
 Requires confirmation by three-fourths of state conventions or legislatures Two Two senators represent each state in upper house; each senator holds one vote. One representative to lower house represents every thirty thousand people (in 1788) in a state; each representative holds one vote Senators chosen by state legislatures for six-year term (direct election after 1913); representatives chosen by vote of citizens for two-year term Separate executive branch: president elected by electoral college to four-year term; granted veto, power to conduct policy and to appoint ambassadors, judges, and officers of executive departments established by legislation

 Separate branch consisting of Supreme Court and inferior courts established by Congress to enforce federal law Federal government granted powers of taxation Congress regulates foreign commerce by treaty; all state regulations must obtain congressional consent

 many hours of debate, preserved the fundamental points of the Virginia Plan—the delegates reconsidered each article. The task required the better part of a month. During these sessions, the members of the convention concluded that the president, as they now called the executive, should be selected by an electoral college, a body of prominent men in each state chosen by local voters. The number of “electoral” votes held by each state equaled its number of representatives and senators. This awkward device guaranteed that the president would not be indebted to the Congress for his office. Whoever received the second largest number of votes in the electoral college automatically became vice president. In the event that no person received a majority of the votes, the election would be decided by the lower house—the House of Representatives—with each state casting a single vote. Delegates also armed the chief executive with veto power over legislation as well as the right to nominate judges. Both privileges, of course, would have been unthinkable a decade earlier, but the state experiments revealed the importance of having an independent executive to maintain a balanced system of republican government.

 Complete the Assignment The Elusive Constitution: Search for Original Intent on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


The Elusive Constitution
Search for Original Intent


 This nineteenth-century engraving shows how the Pennsylvania State House would have looked in 1776. After the Revolution and the drafting of the Constitution, the building became known as Independence Hall. During the hot summer of 1787, delegates kept the windows closed so that no one on the street could hear the debates.

M


 any prominent national leaders, alarmed at a perceived “judicial imperialism” in recent activist courts, have urged that judges interpret the Constitution strictly according to the “intent of the Framers.” Arguing that a “jurisprudence of original intent” is the “only legitimate basis for constitutional decision making,” intentionalists demand that judges measure decisions against a “demonstrable consensus among the Framers and ratifiers as to principles stated or implied in the Constitution.” Yet when one considers circumstances surrounding the Constitution’s framing, demonstration of the Founders’ intent proves elusive indeed. Delegates

 to the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia in 1787 deliberately veiled the purpose of the convention in secrecy to avoid pressure by local constituencies who harbored deep suspicions concerning strong central government. Newspapers, barred from access to the convention, printed only occasional rumors. Delegates refused to speak or correspond with outsiders concerning the proceedings. The strictness with which delegates observed the rule of secrecy not only restricted contemporary knowledge of what transpired but has also limited the number of sources in which subsequent generations may search for original intent. Only three members preserved complete accounts of

 convention debates. These records remained unpublished for more than thirty years, forcing the first generation of lawyers and federal judges to rely on the words of the Constitution alone for clues to the Framers’ intent. The publication of the three accounts did not necessarily make the delegates’ intent more accessible. The Journal, Acts and Proceedings of the Convention Assemblies in Philadelphia, recorded by the convention secretary, William Jackson, provided only a chronological listing of motions, resolutions, and vote tallies. His unpublished manuscript of convention debates, which could have fleshed out the published Journal’s “mere skeleton” of the proceedings, was lost.

 The notes of New York delegate Robert Yates appeared in 1821 as Secret Proceedings and Debates of the Convention Assembled at Philadelphia, but the circumstances of their publication rendered them thoroughly unreliable. Their editor, the former French minister Citizen Edmond Genêt, attained notoriety in the 1790s when he violated American neutrality in the Anglo-French war by commissioning American privateers against British shipping. Genêt supported states’ rights and popular government and manipulated Yates’s notes to support his views. A comparison of Secret Proceedings with the two surviving pages of Yates’s manuscript reveals that Genêt altered or deleted more than half the original text. If the intent of the delegates survives anywhere, Madison’s Notes of Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 provides its likeliest repository. The “father of the Constitution,” as contemporaries called him, carefully preserved notes on convention proceedings and took every measure to ensure their accuracy. Recognizing his own limitations as a stenographer, Madison did not try to record everything said but sought manuscript copies of delegates’ speeches that he incorporated into his notes at the end of each day. Madison also waited until the end of each day to record his own speeches, every one of which was extemporaneous, from memory. At the convention’s end, he obtained a manuscript copy of secretary Jackson’s notes, which he used to supplement and correct his own. Though Madison tinkered at times with his notes over the next thirty years, recent analysis

 has demonstrated that none of these minor corrections impaired the faithfulness of the text. Yet in spite of the meticulous care that Madison lavished on his notes, they remain, at best, incomplete repositories of the Framers’ original intent. Each day’s notes contain only a few minutes of oral discourse, whereas actual delivery occupied between five and seven hours. Furthermore, written manuscripts of speeches may have approximated only roughly what the debaters actually said. Madison’s speech on the benefits of a large republic, for example, occupies two closely reasoned pages in his notes. Yet others who took notes seem to have recorded a much shorter and far less impressive oral version. Such discrepancies raise important questions. How did the Framers understand the actual speeches on the convention floor? How did their understanding shape their intentions? How much of their intent is lost in the vast omissions? These questions take on even greater significance when one considers that the Constitution was forged through a series of compromises among representatives whose interests and intentions differed widely. No delegate was completely satisfied, and the finished document permitted some functions none had intended. Madison himself complained, for example, that the principle of judicial review “was never intended and can never be proper.” Moreover, he thought it would be a mistake to search for the original intent of convention delegates. The delegates’ intent could never possibly determine constitutional interpretation, he argued, for “the only authoritative intentions

 were those of the people of the States, as expressed thro’ the Conventions which ratified the Constitution.” Yet the works most commonly cited from the time of state ratification raise problems with the application of this principle as well. Stenographers who recorded the Debates of the Several State Conventions on the Adoption of the Federal Constitution did not possess skills adequate to their task, and Federalist partisans edited the speeches with abandon in order to promote their own views. Evidence also suggests that Jonathan Eliot, the journalist who published the debates in 1836, altered them further. Given the limitations of sources most often cited by modern judges and lawyers, the original intent of most Framers remains as elusive today as it was for the first generation who had no access to those documents. The Constitution’s often ambiguous wording, which furnished the sole guide to the Framers’ intent in their day, remains the best recourse in our own.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why do some lawyers and politicians still emphasize the Constitution’s “original meaning” despite how the country has changed since 1787? 2. How could one try to determine the “original meaning” of the Constitution’s Framers? 3. Why did James Madison believe that it would be a mistake to try to search for the original intent of the delegates to the Constitutional Convention? 




 CHAPTER 6

THE REPUBLICAN EXPERIMENT

 As the meeting was concluding, some delegates expressed concern about the absence in the Constitution of a bill of rights. Such declarations had been included in most state constitutions, and Virginians such as George Mason insisted that the states and their citizens needed explicit protection from possible excesses by the federal government. While many delegates sympathized with Mason’s appeal, they noted that the hour was late and, in any case, that the proposed Constitution provided sufficient security for individual rights. During the hard battles over ratification, the delegates to the convention may have regretted passing over the issue so lightly.

We, the People
 The delegates adopted an ingenious procedure for ratification. Instead of submitting the Constitution to the various state legislatures, all of which had a vested interest in maintaining the status quo and most of which had two houses, either of which could block approval, they called for the election of thirteen state conventions especially chosen to review the new federal government. The delegates may have picked up this idea from the Massachusetts experiment of 1780. Moreover, the Constitution would take effect after the assent of only nine states. There was no danger, therefore, that the proposed system would fail simply because a single state like Rhode Island withheld approval. The convention asked Gouverneur Morris of Pennsylvania, a delegate noted for his urbanity, to make final stylistic changes in the wording of the Constitution. When Morris examined the working draft, he discovered that it spoke of the collection of states forming a new government. This wording presented problems. Ratification required only nine states. No one knew whether all the states would accept the Constitution, and if not, which nine would. A strong possibility existed that several New England states would reject the document. Morris’s brilliant phrase “We the People of the United States” eliminated this difficulty. The new nation was a republic of the people, not of the states. On September 17, thirty-nine men signed the Constitution. A few members of the convention, like Mason, could not support the document. Others had already gone home. For more than three months, Madison had served as the convention’s driving intellectual force. He now generously summarized the experience: “There never was an assembly of men, charged with a great and arduous trust, who were more pure in their motives, or more exclusively or anxiously devoted to the object committed to them.”

Whose Constitution? Struggle
 for Ratification What issues separated Federalists from Antifederalists during debates over ratification? Supporters of the Constitution recognized that ratification would not be easy. After all, the convention had been authorized only to revise the Articles, but instead it produced a new plan that fundamentally altered relations between the states and the central government. The delegates dutifully dispatched copies of the Constitution to the Congress of Confederation, then meeting in

 New York City, and that powerless body referred the document to the separate states without any specific recommendation. The fight for ratification had begun.

Federalists and Antifederalists
 Proponents of the Constitution enjoyed great advantages over the unorganized opposition. In the contest for ratification, they took no chances. Their most astute move was the adoption of the label Federalist. The term cleverly suggested that they stood for a confederation of states rather than for the creation of a supreme national authority. In fact, they envisioned the creation of a strong centralized national government capable of fielding a formidable army. Critics of the Constitution, who tended to be somewhat poorer, less urban, and less well educated than their opponents, cried foul, but there was little they could do. They were stuck with the name Antifederalist, a misleading term that made their cause seem a rejection of the very notion of a federation of the states. The Federalists recruited the most prominent public figures of the day. In every state convention, speakers favoring the Constitution were more polished and more fully prepared than were their opponents. In New York, the campaign to win ratification sparked publication of The Federalist, a brilliant series of essays written by Madison, Hamilton, and Jay during the fall and winter of 1787 and 1788. The nation’s newspapers threw themselves overwhelmingly behind the new government. In fact, few journals even bothered to carry Antifederalist writings. In some states, the Federalists adopted tactics of questionable propriety in order to gain ratification. In Pennsylvania, for example, they achieved a legal quorum for a crucial vote by dragging several opposition delegates into the meeting from the streets. In New York, Hamilton intimidated upstate Antifederalists with threats that New York City would secede from the state unless the state ratified the Constitution. In these battles, the Antifederalists articulated a political philosophy that had broad popular appeal. They spoke the language of the Commonwealthmen (see Chapter 4). Like the extreme republicans who drafted the first state constitutions, the Antifederalists were deeply suspicious of political power. During the debates over ratification, they warned that public officials, however selected, would be constantly scheming to expand their authority. The preservation of individual liberty required constant vigilance. It seemed obvious that the larger the republic, the greater the opportunity for political corruption. Local voters could not possibly know what their representatives in a distant national capital were doing. The government outlined in the Constitution invited precisely the kinds of problems that Montesquieu had described in his famous essay, The Spirit of the Laws. “In so extensive a republic,” one Antifederalist declared, “the great officers of government would soon become above the control of the people, and abuse their power.” Antifederalists demanded direct, personal contact with their representatives. They argued that elected officials should reflect the character of their constituents as closely as possible. It seemed unlikely that in large congressional districts, the people would be able to preserve such close ties with their representatives. According to the Antifederalists, the Constitution favored persons wealthy enough to have forged a reputation that extended beyond a single community. Samuel Chase told the members of the Maryland

Whose Constitution? Struggle for Ratification


Read the Document




Federalist Paper No. 51 (Feb. 6, 1788)


NEW HAMPSHIRE 9th

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

Lake Superior


June 21, 1788


 MAINE (part of Mass.)

H
 ke La

 MASSACHUSETTS

Lake Michigan


 n uro

NEW YORK

 r io e Onta Lak

Feb. 16, 1788


 11th

RHODE ISLAND

July 26, 1788


 eE L ak

 13th May 29, 1790

 r ie

CONNECTICUT PENNSYLVANIA

 5th

 2nd

Jan. 9, 1788


Dec. 12, 1787


NEW JERSEY 3rd

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Dec. 18, 1787
 DELAWARE i Oh

 1st

 VIRGINIA

.
 oR

Dec. 8, 1787


 10th June 25, 1788

 MARYLAND

NORTH CAROLINA

Apr. 26, 1788


 7th

SPANISH LOUISIANA R.

 12th

 iss ipp i

Nov. 21, 1789


Mi
 ss

SOUTH CAROLINA





 300 miles 300 kilometers

 8th May 23, 1788 GEORGIA

 Majority for ratification

 4th

 Majority against ratification

Jan. 2, 1788


 Disputed with Spain

Divided


 SPANI

 No returns

SH F LOR

 1st

 IDA

 Order in which the states ratified

RATIFICATION OF THE CONSTITUTION
Advocates of the new Constitution called themselves Federalists, and those who opposed its ratification were known as Antifederalists. 
 ratifying convention that under the new system, “the distance between the people and their representatives will be so great that there is no probability of a farmer or planter being chosen . . . only the gentry, the rich, and the well-born will be elected.” Federalist speakers mocked their opponents’ localist perspective. The Constitution deserved general support precisely because it ensured that future Americans would be represented by “natural aristocrats,” individuals possessing greater insights, skills, and training than did the ordinary citizen. These talented leaders, the Federalists insisted, could discern the interests of the entire population. Historians have generally accepted the Federalist critique. It would be a mistake, however, to see the Antifederalists as “losers” or as persons who could not comprehend social and economic change. Although their rhetoric echoed an older moral

 view of political culture, they accepted more easily than did many Federalists a liberal marketplace in which ordinary citizens competed as equals with the rich and well-born. They believed the public good was best served by allowing individuals like themselves to pursue their own private interests. That is what they had been doing on the local level during the 1780s, and they resented the imposition of elite controls over their affairs. Although the Antifederalists lost the battle over ratification, their ideas about political economy later found many champions in the age of Andrew Jackson. The Constitution drew support from many different types of people. In fact, historians have been unable to discover sharp correlations between wealth and occupation on the one hand and attitudes toward the proposed system of central government on the other. In general, Federalists lived in more commercialized areas than did their opponents. In the cities, artisans as well as



 CHAPTER 6

THE REPUBLICAN EXPERIMENT

 merchants called for ratification, while those farmers who were only marginally involved in commercial agriculture frequently voted Antifederalist. Despite passionate pleas from Patrick Henry and other Antifederalists, most state conventions quickly adopted the Constitution. Delaware acted first (December 7, 1787), and within eight months of the Philadelphia meeting, eight of the nine states required to launch the government had ratified the document. The contests in Virginia (June 1788) and New York (July 1788) generated bitter debate, but they too joined the union, leaving only North Carolina and Rhode Island outside the United States. Eventually (November 21, 1789, and May 29, 1790), even these states ratified the Constitution. Still, the vote had been very close. The Constitution was ratified in New York by a tally of 30 to 27, in Massachusetts by 187 to 168, and in Virginia by 89 to 79. A swing of a few votes in several key states could have defeated the new government. While the state conventions sparked angry rhetoric, Americans soon closed ranks behind the Constitution. An Antifederalist who represented one Massachusetts village explained that “he had opposed the adoption of this Constitution; but that he had been overruled . . . by a majority of wise and understanding men [and that now] he should endeavor to sow the seeds of union and peace among the people he represented.”

Read the Document


The Bill of Rights (1789)


Adding the Bill of Rights
 The first ten amendments to the Constitution are the major legacy of the Antifederalist argument. In almost every state convention, opponents of the Constitution pointed to the need for greater protection n of individual liberties, rights that people presumably had possessed in a state of nature. “It is necessary,” wrote one Antifederalist, “that the sober and industrious part of the community should be defended from the rapacity and violence of the vicious and idle. A bill of rights, therefore, ought to set forth the purposes for which the compact is made, and serves to secure the minority against the usurpation and tyranny of the majority.” The list of fundamental rights varied from state to state, but most Antifederalists demanded specific guarantees for jury trial and freedom of religion. They wanted prohibitions against cruel and unusual punishments. There was also considerable, though not universal, support for freedom of speech and freedom of the press. Madison and others regarded the proposals with little enthusiasm. In The Federalist No. 84, Hamilton bluntly reminded the American people that “the constitution is itself . . . a BILL OF RIGHTS.” But after the adoption of the Constitution had been assured, Madison moderated his stand. If nothing else, passage of a bill of rights would appease able men such as George Mason and Edmund Randolph, who might otherwise remain alienated from the new federal system. “We have in this way something to gain,” Madison concluded, “and if we proceed with caution, nothing to lose.” The crucial consideration was caution. A number of people throughout the nation advocated calling a second constitutional convention, one that would take Antifederalist criticism into account. Madison wanted to avoid such a meeting, and he feared that some members of the first Congress might use a bill of rights as an excuse to revise the entire Constitution or to promote a second convention.

 The first ten amendments of the U.S. Constitution are known as the Bill of Rights. Proposed by James Madison in 1789, the rights guaranteed in these amendments helped calm the fears of Antifederalists who believed that the new Constitution gave the central government too much power.

 Madison carefully reviewed these recommendations as well as the various declarations of rights that had appeared in the early state constitutions, and on June 8, 1789, he placed before the House of Representatives a set of amendments designed to protect individual rights from government interference. Madison told the members of Congress that the greatest dangers to popular liberties came from “the majority [operating] against the minority.” A committee compressed and revised his original ideas into ten amendments that were ratified and became known collectively as the Bill of Rights. For many modern Americans these amendments are the most important section of the Constitution. Madison had hoped that additions would be inserted into the text of the Constitution at the appropriate places, not tacked onto the end, but he was overruled. The Bill of Rights protected the freedoms of assembly, speech, religion, and the press; guaranteed speedy trial by an impartial jury; preserved the people’s right to bear arms; and prohibited unreasonable searches. Other amendments dealt with legal procedure. Some opponents of the Constitution urged Congress to provide greater safeguards for states’ rights, but Madison had no intention of backing away from a strong central government. Only the Tenth Amendment addressed the states’ relation to the federal system. This crucial article, designed to calm Antifederalist fears, specified that those “powers not delegated to the United States by the

STUDY RESOURCES

 Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.” On September 25, 1789, the Bill of Rights passed both houses of Congress, and by December 15, 1791, the amendments had been ratified by three-fourths of the states. Madison was justly proud of his achievement. He had effectively secured individual rights without undermining the Constitution. When he asked his friend Jefferson for his opinion of the Bill of Rights, Jefferson responded with typical republican candor: “I like [it] . . . as far as it goes; but I should have been for going further.”

Conclusion: Success Depends on
 the People By 1789, one phase of American political experimentation had come to an end. During these years, the people gradually, often haltingly, learned that in a republican society, they themselves were sovereign. They could no longer blame the failure of government on inept monarchs or greedy aristocrats. They bore a great responsibility. Americans had demanded a government of the people only



 to discover during the 1780s that in some situations, the people could not be trusted with power, majorities could tyrannize minorities, and the best of governments could abuse individual rights. Contemporaries had difficulty deciding just what had been accomplished. A writer in the Pennsylvania Packet thought the American people had preserved order. “The year 1776 is celebrated,” the newspaper observed, “for a revolution in favor of liberty. The year 1787 . . . will be celebrated with equal joy, for a revolution in favor of Government.” But some aging Patriots grumbled that perhaps order had been achieved at too high a price. In 1788, Richard Henry Lee remarked, “Tis really astonishing that the same people, who have just emerged from a long and cruel war in defense of liberty, should now agree to fix an elective despotism upon themselves and their posterity.” But most Americans probably would have accepted Franklin’s optimistic assessment. As he watched the delegates to the Philadelphia convention come forward to sign the Constitution, he noted that there was a sun carved on the back of George Washington’s chair. “I have,” the aged philosopher noted, “… often in the course of the session . . . looked at [the sun] behind the President without being able to tell whether it was rising or setting; but now at length I have the happiness to know that it is a rising and not a setting sun.”

Study Resources
 Take the Study Plan for Chapter 6 The Republican Experiment on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1776
Second Continental Congress authorizes colonies 


 to create republican governments (May); Eight states draft new constitutions; two others already enjoy republican government by virtue of former colonial charters Congress accepts Articles of Confederation after long debate (November) Massachusetts finally ratifies state constitution

 1781 States ratify Articles of Confederation following

 settlement of Virginia’s western land claims; British army surrenders at Yorktown (October) States fail to ratify proposed Impost tax

 1783 Newburgh Conspiracy thwarted (March); Society of the Cincinnati raises a storm of criticism; Treaty of peace signed with Great Britain (September)

 1785 Land Ordinance for Northwest Territory passed

 by Congress Jay-Gardoqui negotiations over Mississippi navigation anger southern states; Annapolis Convention suggests second meeting to revise the Articles of Confederation (September); Shays’s Rebellion frightens American leaders

 1787–1788 The federal Constitution is ratified by

 all states except North Carolina and Rhode Island Bill of Rights (first ten amendments to the Constitution) ratified by states



 CHAPTER 6

CHAPTER REVIEW

CHAPTER REVIEW

Living in the Shadow of Revolution
 During the 1780s, why were Americans so sensitive to the dangers of “aristocratic display”? Although some families had become newly wealthy during the Revolutionary War, most Americans had also become fervent republicans who associated any traces of aristocratic display by the rich with the privileges that British noblemen had claimed during the colonial period. They believed that a revolution waged against monarchy should not produce a new aristocracy that was legally or even visibly distinguished from its fellow citizens. (p. 132)

The States: Experiments in Republicanism
Gre


 Following independence, why did the states insist on drafting written constitutions?

 at

Strengthening Federal Authority
 PENNSYLVANIA 17 82

Ceded by
Conn. 1800


Ceded by New York
 i Oh

Y ork


 Some Americans worried that the scramble for material wealth would undermine republican values in the new nation. Disparities in wealth made some worry that a hereditary aristocracy might grow up to dominate government. Elites worried that democratic excesses would lead to men without property, and the personal independence and stability that came with it, rising to power. Enslaved African Americans and most women were denied the rights to property and the independence required to become full citizens of a republican society. (p. 131)

.
 oR

 ew

 What were the limits of equality in the “republican” society of the new United States?

 western lands. Only after Virginia ceded its claims could Congress draft the Northwest Ordinance, which provided an orderly plan for settling the Ohio Valley. The weak Congress was not even able to force the British to live up to their obligations under the Treaty of Paris of 1783. (p. 137)

 ed

 by N

D.C.


 VIRGINIA

 What did the nationalists call for and how did they aim to achieve their initiatives?

Territory of Virginia d
Cumberland
 until 1792 Gap (Kentucky) Ce

Defining Republican Culture


NORTH CAROLINA

 In the early 1780s, nationalists wanted to persuade the states to amend the Articles of Confederation to create a centralized fiscal system that would allow Congress to levy import taxes and use the revenue to reduce the national debt. Extreme nationalists may even have contemplated using the army to force the states to amend the Articles if necessary. (p. 141)

Ceded by North Carolina
(Tennessee)


State of
Franklin


SOUTH CAROLINA

 d by Georgia

 db S

 GEORGIA

 i

“Have We Fought for This?”
 Why did Constitutional delegates compromise on representation and slavery? James Madison’s Virginia Plan for the Constitution called for representation in both houses of Congress to be proportional to a state’s population. Small states objected that this would put them at the mercy of larger states. Southern states feared that more populous northern states might vote to outlaw slavery. To prevent a breakdown, the delegates compromised. Each state would have an equal number of representatives in the Senate and slaves would be counted as three-fifths of a person when determining representation for the federal government. (p. 143)

L


 Americans believed that Britain’s unwritten constitution had not protected the colonies against oppression. After independence, therefore, they demanded that their state constitutions explicitly define the rights of the people and the power of their rulers. (p. 136)

 WISCONSIN

Whose Constitution? Struggle for Ratification


 MICHIGAN

Stumbling Toward A New National Government
 Why did many Americans regard the Articles of Confederation as inadequate? During the Revolution, Americans showed little interest in establishing a strong national government. Under the Articles of Confederation (1777), an underfunded Congress limped along without direction, while the states competed over

 What issues separated Federalists from Antifederalists during debates over ratification? During the debates of 1787–1788, Federalists, who favored stronger national government, defended the Constitution against Antifederalists, who opposed centralized authority. By the end of 1791, enough state conventions had endorsed the Constitution for ratification. To appease the Antifederalists, Congress in 1789 added a Bill of Rights to protect the freedoms of citizens against the power of the national government. (p. 150)

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Republicanism Concept that ultimate political authority is vested in the citizens of the nation. p. 132 African Methodist Episcopal Church Richard Allen founded the African Methodist Episcopal Church in 1816 as the first independent blackrun Protestant church in the United States. The AME Church was active in the abolition movement and founded educational institutions for free blacks. p. 134 Natural rights Fundamental rights over which the government should exercise no control. p. 136 
 Articles of Confederation Ratified in 1781, this document was the United States’ first constitution, providing a framework for national government. The articles limited central authority by denying the national government any taxation or coercive power. p. 138 Northwest Ordinance Legislation in 1787 that established governments in America’s northwest territories, defined a procedure for their admission to the Union as states, and prohibited slavery north of the Ohio River. p. 141

STUDY RESOURCES

 Shays’s Rebellion Armed insurrection of farmers in western Massachusetts led by Daniel Shays. Intended to prevent state courts from foreclosing on debtors unable to pay their taxes, the rebellion was put down by the state militia. Nationalists used the event to call a constitutional convention to strengthen the national government. p. 144 Virginia Plan Offered by James Madison and the Virginia delegation at the Constitutional Convention, this proposal called for a strong executive office and two houses of Congress, each with representation proportional to a state’s population. p. 144

Federalist
 p. 150



 Supporter of the Constitution who advocated its ratification.

 Antifederalists Critics of the Constitution who were concerned that it included no specific provisions to protect natural and civil rights. p. 150 Bill of Rights The first ten amendments to the Constitution, adopted in 1791 to preserve the rights and liberties of individuals. p. 152

 Three-fifths rule Constitutional provision that for every five slaves a state would receive credit for three free voters indetermining seats for the House of Representatives. p. 146

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
What factors kept African Americans and women from achieving full political equality in the United States following the Revolution? 
 2. During the Revolution and immediately afterward, why would so many Americans have opposed the establishment of a strong national government?

 3. Why did Thomas Jefferson fear that the new Constitution compromised the republican ideal of government by the people?

 4. Since the Federalists and Antifederalists both believed in a republican form of government, why could they not agree on the new Constitution?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 6 on MyHistoryLab Living in the Shadow of Revolution ◾

Read the Document


Read the Document


The New Jersey Plan (1787) p. 146


Watch the Video


Slavery and the Constitution p. 146


Phillis Wheatley, Religious and


◾


Moral Poems p. 135


Stumbling Toward a New National Government
◾
Read the Document


The Articles of Confederation


Complete the Assignment


The Elusive Constitution:
Search for Original Intent p. 148


(1777) p. 138


Whose Constitution? Struggle for Ratification
Read the Document


Northwest Ordinance (July 3, 1787)


 p. 139

◾


Read the Document


View the Map


Western Land Claims Ceded
 by the States p. 140

Federalist Paper No. 51 (Feb. 6,


1788) p. 151
Read the Document


The Bill of Rights (1789) p. 152


“Have We Fought for This?”
◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment
◾


Read the Document


Rebellion p. 145


 Military Reports of Shays’s



Democracy and Dissent:
The Violence of Party Politics,
1788–1800


Contents and Learning Objectives
FORCE OF PUBLIC OPINION PG. 156

POPULAR POLITICAL CULTURE PG. 169

 How did the ideas of Jeffersonians differ from that of the Federalists?

 Why was it hard for Americans to accept political dissent as a part of political activity?

PRINCIPLE AND PRAGMATISM: ESTABLISHING A NEW GOVERNMENT PG. 158

THE ADAMS PRESIDENCY PG. 171

 Why was George Washington unable to overcome division within the new government?

CONFLICTING VISIONS: JEFFERSON AND HAMILTON PG. 159
Why did Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson find it so difficult to cooperate as members of Washington’s cabinet? 
HAMILTON’S PLAN FOR PROSPERITY AND SECURITY PG. 161
Why did many Americans oppose Alexander Hamilton’s blueprint for national prosperity? 
 Why were some Federalists willing to sacrifice political freedoms for party advantage?

THE PEACEFUL REVOLUTION: THE ELECTION OF 1800 PG. 174
What did Jefferson mean when he claimed in his first inaugural address that “We are all republicans; we are all federalists”? ◾ FEATURE ESSAY Defense of Superiority: The Impact of Nationalism on Perceptions of the Environment 
CHARGES OF TREASON: THE BATTLE OVER FOREIGN AFFAIRS PG. 163
How did foreign affairs affect domestic politics during the 1790s? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

