Chapter 18 The Industrial Society


A
Machine Culture  In 1876, Americans celebrated their first century of independence. Survivors of a recent civil war, they observed the centenary proudly and rather self-consciously, in song and speech, and above all in the grand Centennial Exposition held in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Spread over several hundred acres, the exposition occupied 180 buildings and attracted nine million visitors, about one-fifth of the country’s population at the time. Significantly, it focused more on the present than the past. Fairgoers strolled through exhibits of life in colonial times, then hurried off to see the main attractions: machines, inventions, and products of the new industrial era. They saw linoleum, a new, easy-to-clean floor covering. For the first time, they tasted root beer, supplied by a young druggist named Charles Hires, and the exotic banana, wrapped in foil and selling for a dime. They saw their first bicycle, an awkward highwheeled contraption with solid tires. A Japanese pavilion generated widespread interest in the culture of Japan. There was also a women’s building, the first ever in a major exposition. Inside were displayed paintings and sculpture by women artists, along with rows of textile machinery staffed by female operators.

 In the entire exposition, machinery was the focus, and Machinery Hall was the most popular building. Here were the products of an ever- improving civilization. Long lines of the curious waited to see the telephone, Alexander Graham Bell’s new device. (“My God, it talks!” the emperor of Brazil exclaimed.) Thomas A. Edison displayed several recent inventions, while nearby, whirring machines turned out bricks, chewing tobacco, and other products. Fairgoers saw the first public display of the typewriter, Elisha Otis’s new elevator, and the Westinghouse railroad air brake. But above all, they crowded around the mighty Corliss engine, the focal point of the exposition. A giant steam engine, it dwarfed everything else in Machinery Hall, its twin vertical cylinders towering almost four stories in the air. Alone, it supplied power for the eight thousand other machines, large and small, on the exposition grounds. Poorly designed, the Corliss was soon obsolete, but for the moment it captured the nation’s imagination. It symbolized swift movement toward an industrial and urban society. John Greenleaf Whittier, the aging rural poet, likened it to the snake in the Garden of Eden and refused to see it.

 The Corliss engine, a “mechanical marvel” at the Centennial Exposition, was a prime example of the giantism so admired by the public.



 CHAPTER 18

THE INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY

 s Whittier feared, the United States was fast becoming an industrial society. Developments earlier in the century laid the basis, but the most spectacular advances in industrialization came during the three decades after the Civil War. At the start of the war, the country lagged well behind industrializing nations such as Great Britain, France, and Germany. By 1900, it had vaulted far into the lead, with a manufacturing output that exceeded the combined output of its three European rivals. Over the same years, cities grew, technology advanced, and farm production rose. Developments in manufacturing, mining, agriculture, transportation, and communications changed society. In this change, railroads, steel, oil, and other industries, all shaped by the hands of labor, played a leading role. Many Americans eagerly welcomed the new directions. William Dean Howells, a leading novelist, visited the Centennial Exposition and stood in awe before the Corliss. Comparing it to the paintings and sculpture on display, Howells preferred the machine: “It is in these things of iron and steel,” he said, “that the national genius most freely speaks.”

A


Industrial Development
 What enabled the United States to build an industrial economy? American industry owed its remarkable growth to several considerations. It fed on an abundance of natural resources: coal, iron, timber, petroleum, and waterpower. An iron manufacturer likened the nation to “a gigantic bowl filled with treasure.” Labor was also abundant, drawn from American farm families and the hosts of European immigrants who flocked to American mines, cities, and factories. Nearly eight million immigrants arrived in the 1870s and 1880s; another fifteen million came between 1890 and 1914—large figures for a nation whose total population in 1900 was about seventy-six million people. The burgeoning population led to expanded markets, which new devices such as the telegraph and telephone helped to exploit. The swiftly growing urban populations devoured goods, and the railroads, spreading pell-mell across the land, linked the cities together and opened a national market. Within its boundaries, the United States had the largest free trade market in the world, while tariff barriers partially protected its producers from outside competition. Expansive market and labor conditions buoyed the confidence of investors, European and American, who provided large amounts of capital. Technological progress, so remarkable in these years, doomed some older industries (tallow, for example) but increased productivity in others, such as the kerosene industry, and created entirely new industries as well. Through inventions such as the harvester and the combine, it also helped foster a firm agricultural base, on which industrialization depended. Eager to promote economic growth, government at all levels—federal, state, and local—gave manufacturers money, land, and other resources. Other benefits, too, flowed from the American system of government: stability, commitment to the concept of private property, and, initially at least, a reluctance to regulate industrial activity. Unlike their European counterparts, American manufacturers faced few legal or social barriers, and

 their main domestic rivals, the southern planters, had lost political power in the Civil War. In this atmosphere, entrepreneurs flourished. Taking steps crucial for industrialization, they organized, managed, and assumed the financial risks of the new enterprises. Admirers called them captains of industry; foes labeled them robber barons. To some degree, they were both—creative and acquisitive. If sometimes they seemed larger than life, it was because they dealt in concepts, distances, and quantities often unknown to earlier generations. Industrial growth, it must be remembered, was neither a simple nor steady nor inevitable process. It involved human decisions and brought with it large social benefits and costs. Growth varied from industry to industry and from year to year. It was concentrated in the Northeast, where in 1890, more than 85 percent of America’s manufactured goods originated. The more sparsely settled West provided raw materials, while the South, although making major gains in iron, textiles, and tobacco, had to rebuild after wartime devastation. In 1890, the industrial production of the entire South amounted in value to about half that of the state of New York. Still, industrial development proceeded at an extraordinary pace. Between 1865 and 1914, the real gross national product—the total monetary value of all goods and services produced in a year, with prices held stable—grew at a rate of more than 4 percent a year, increasing about eightfold overall. As Robert Higgs, an economic historian, noted, “Never before had such rapid growth continued for so long.”

An Empire on Rails
 How and why did the railroad system grow? Genuine revolutions happen rarely, but a major one occurred in the nineteenth century: a revolution in transportation and communications. When the nineteenth century began, people traveled and communicated much as they had for centuries before; when it ended, the railroad, the telegraph, the telephone, and the oceangoing steamship had wrought enormous changes. The steamship sliced in half the time of the Atlantic crossing and, not dependent on wind and tide, introduced new regularity in the movement of goods and passengers. The telegraph, flashing messages almost instantaneously along miles of wire (four hundred thousand miles of it in the early 1880s), transformed communications, as did the telephone a little later. But the railroad worked the largest changes of all. Along with Bessemer steel, it was the most significant technical innovation of the century.

“Emblem of Motion and Power”
 The railroad dramatically affected economic and social life. Economic growth would have occurred without it, of course; canals, inland steamboats, and the country’s superb system of interior waterways already provided the outlines of an effective transportation network. But the railroad added significantly to the network and contributed advantages all its own. Those advantages included more direct routes, greater speed, greater safety and comfort than other modes of land travel, more dependable schedules, a larger volume of traffic, and year-round

An Empire on Rails


 service. A day’s land travel on stagecoach or horseback might cover fifty miles. The railroad covered fifty miles in about an hour, seven hundred miles in a day. It went where canals and rivers did not go—directly to the loading platforms of great factories or across the arid West. As construction crews pushed tracks onward, vast areas of the continent opened for settlement. Consequently, American railroads differed from European ones. In Europe, railroads were usually built between cities and towns that already existed; they carried mostly the same goods that earlier forms of transportation had. In the United States, they did that and more: They often created the very towns they then served, and they ended up carrying cattle from Texas, fruit from Florida, and other goods that had never been carried before. Linking widely separated cities and villages, the railroad ended the relative isolation and self-sufficiency of the country’s “island communities.” It tied people together, brought in outside products, fostered greater interdependence, and encouraged economic specialization. Under its stimulus, Chicago supplied meat to the nation, Minneapolis supplied grain, and St. Louis, beer. For these and other communities, the railroad made possible a national market and in so doing pointed the way toward mass production and mass consumption, two of the hallmarks of twentieth-century society. It also pointed the way toward later business development. The railroad, as Alfred D. Chandler, a historian of business, has written,



 was “the nation’s first big business”; it worked out “the modern ways of finance, management, labor relations, competition, and government regulation.” A railroad corporation, far-flung and complex, was a new kind of business. It stretched over thousands of miles, employed thousands of people, dealt with countless customers, and required a scale of organization and decision making unknown in earlier business. Railroad managers never met most customers or even many employees; thus arose new problems in marketing and labor relations. Year by year, railroad companies consumed large quantities of iron, steel, coal, lumber, and glass, stimulating growth and employment in numerous industries. No wonder, then, that the railroad captured so completely the country’s imagination. Walt Whitman, a poet who celebrated American achievement, chanted the locomotive’s praises: Thy black cylindric body, golden brass and silvery steel, .................. Thy great protruding head-light fix’d in front, Thy knitted frame, thy springs and valves, the tremulous twinkle of thy wheels, Type of the modern—emblem of motion and power—pulse of the continent, .................. Fierce-throated beauty!

Watch the Video Railroads and Expansion


 Like no form of transportation before it, the railroad could meet the challenge presented by the varied topography of the land west of the Mississippi River—from the Great Plains to the vast deserts, from the deep gorges to the Rocky Mountains.



 CHAPTER 18

THE INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY

 Almost 90 percent of the federal land grants lay in twenty states west of the Mississippi River. Federal land grants helped build 18,738 miles of track, less than 8 percent of the system. The land was frequently distant and difficult to market. Railroad companies sometimes sold it to raise cash, but more often they used it as security for bonds or loans. Beyond doubt, the grants of cash and land promoted waste and corruption. The companies built fast and wastefully, eager to collect the subsidies that went with each mile of track. Wanting quick profits, some owners formed separate construction companies to which they awarded lavish contracts. In this way, the notorious Crédit Mobilier, a construction company controlled by an inner ring on the Union Pacific, enriched its owners in the 1860s, while the Contract and Finance Company did the same on the Central Pacific. The Crédit Mobilier bribed congressmen and state legislators to avoid investigation of its activities. The grants also enabled railroads to build into territories that were pledged to the Indians, thus contributing to the wanton destruction of Indian life. Yet, on balance, the grants probably worked more benefits than evils. As Congress had hoped, the grants were the lure for railroad building across the rugged, unsettled West, where it would be years before the railroads’ revenues would repay their construction. Farmers, ranchers, and merchants poured into the newly opened areas, settling the country and boosting the value of government and private land nearby. The grants seemed necessary in a nation which, unlike Europe, expected private enterprise to build the railroads. In return for government aid, Congress required the railroads to carry government freight, troops, and

 For nearly a hundred years—the railroad era lasted through the 1940s—children gathered at depots, paused in the fields to wave as the fast express flashed by, listened at night to far-off whistles, and wondered what lay down the tracks. They lived in a world grown smaller.

Building the Empire
 When Lee surrendered at Appomattox in 1865, the country already had thirty-five thousand miles of track, and much of the railroad system east of the Mississippi River was in place. Farther west, the rail network stood poised on the edge of settlement. Although southern railroads were in shambles from the war, the United States had nearly as much railroad track as the rest of the world. After the Civil War, rail construction increased by leaps and bounds. From 35,000 miles in 1865, the network expanded to 93,000 miles in 1880; 166,000 in 1890; and 193,000 in 1900— more than in all Europe, including Russia. Mileage peaked at 254,037 miles in 1916, just before the industry began its long decline into the mid-twentieth century. To build such an empire took vast amounts of capital—more than $4.5 billion by 1880, before even half of it was complete. American and European investors provided some of the money; government supplied the rest. In all, local governments gave railroad companies about $300 million, and state governments added $228 million more. The federal government loaned nearly $65 million to a half dozen western railroads and donated millions of acres of the public domain. Between 1850 and 1871, some eighty railroads received more than 170 million acres of land.

South
 er n

Pacific


WASH. TERR.

 MAINE

MONTANA TERRITORY
ic acif 
 MINN.

 VT.

Northern P


OREGON IDAHO TERRITORY

WYOMING TERRITORY

N.H. MASS.

 WIS.

DAKOTA TERRITORY

N.Y.


 PA.

 NEBRASKA

 CALIF.

Union Pac
 ific

Central Pacific


 NEVADA r he ut So

 n

Pacific


UTAH TERRITORY COLORADO TERRITORY

ILL. KANS.

R.I.
 CONN.

 MICH.

 MO.

 OHIO

 IND.

MD. W. VA.

N.J.
 DEL.

WASHINGTON, D.C. VA.

 KY.

Santa Fe


N.C.
Atlantic an
 i d Pac fic

 OKLA.

 TENN.

 ARK.

ARIZONA NEW MEXICO TERRITORY TERRITORY

S.C.
MISS. ALA.

 GA.

LA. TEXAS
Land reserved for grants to railroads 
 FLA.

 Approximate area of land actually received by railroads Area forfeited by railroads





 400 miles

 400 kilometers

FEDERAL LAND GRANTS TO RAILROADS AS OF 1871
Besides land, the government provided loans of $16,000 for each mile built on level ground, $32,000 for each mile built on hilly terrain, and $48,000 for each mile in high mountain country. 
An Empire on Rails




 and its owner, Cornelius Vanderbilt—the “Commodore”—a crusty old multimillionaire from the shipping business. 1830–1840 Nearly seventy years old when he first entered railroading, Vanderbilt wasted no 1841–1850 time. In 1867, he took over the New York Central and merged it with other lines to pro1851–1860 vide a track from New York City to Buffalo and Chicago. When he died in 1877, his Central 1861–1870 operated more than 4,500 miles of track. J. Edgar Thomson and Thomas A. Scott 1871–1880 built the fourth trunk line, the Pennsylvania Railroad, which initially ran from Philadelphia 1881–1890 to Pittsburgh. Restless and energetic, they dreamed of a rail empire stretching through 1891–1900 the South and West. An aggressive business leader, Scott expanded the Pennsylvania sys1901–1910 tem to Cincinnati, Indianapolis, St. Louis, and Chicago in 1869; New York City in 1871; and 1911–1920 Baltimore and Washington soon thereafter. In the war-damaged South, consolidation 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 70,000 took longer. As Reconstruction waned, northMiles of Track ern and European capital rebuilt and inteSource: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970, Bicentennial grated the southern lines, especially during the Edition, Washington, DC, 1975. 1880s, when rail construction in the South led the nation. By 1900, the South had five large mail at substantially reduced rates—resulting in savings to the systems linking its major cities and farming and industrial regions. government of almost $1 billion between 1850 and 1945. In no Four decades after the secession crisis, these systems tied the South other cases of federal subsidies to carriers—canals, highways, and into a national transportation network. airlines—did Congress exact specific benefits in return. Over that rail system, passengers and freight moved in relative speed, comfort, and safety. Automatic couplers (1867), air brakes (1869), refrigerator cars (1867), dining cars, heated cars, electric Linking the Nation via Trunk Lines switches, and stronger locomotives transformed railroad service. George Pullman’s lavish sleeping cars became popular. Handsome The early railroads may seem to have linked different regions, but depots, such as New York’s Grand Central and Washington’s Union in fact they did not. Built with little regard for through traffic, they Station, were erected at major terminals. Passenger miles per year were designed more to protect local interests than to tap outside increased from five billion in 1870 to sixteen billion in 1900. markets. Many extended less than fifty miles. To avoid cooperIn November 1883, the railroads even changed time. Ending ating with other lines, they adopted conflicting schedules, built the crazy quilt jumble of local times that caused scheduling difseparate depots, and above all, used different gauges. Gauges, the ficulties, the American Railway Association divided the country distance between the rails, ranged from 4 feet 8½ inches, which into four time zones and adopted the modern system of standard became the standard gauge, to 6 feet. Without special equipment, time. Congress took thirty-five years longer; it adopted standard trains of one gauge could not run on tracks of another. time in 1918, in the midst of World War I. The Civil War showed the value of fast long-distance transportation, and after 1865, railroad managers worked to provide it. In a burst of consolidation, the large companies swallowed the small; integrated Rails Across the Continent rail networks became a reality. Railroads also adopted standard schedules, signals, and equipment and finally, in 1886, the standard gauge. The dream of a transcontinental railroad, linking the Atlantic and In 1866, in a dramatic innovation to speed traffic, railroad companies Pacific Oceans, stretched back many years but had always been introduced fast freight lines that pooled cars for service between cities. lost to sectional quarrels over the route. In 1862 and 1864, with In the Northeast, four great trunk lines took shape, all the South out of the picture, Congress moved to build the first intended to link eastern seaports with the rich traffic of the Great transcontinental railroad. It chartered the Union Pacific Railroad Lakes and western rivers. Like a massive river system, trunk lines Company to build westward from Nebraska and the Central Pacific drew traffic from dozens of tributaries (feeder lines) and carried Railroad Company to build eastward from the Pacific coast. For each it to major markets. The Baltimore and Ohio (B & O), which mile built, the two companies received from Congress 20 square reached Chicago in 1874, was one; the Erie Railroad, which ran miles of land in alternate sections along the track. For each mile, from New York to Chicago, was another. The Erie competed bitthey also received a thirty-year loan of $16,000, $32,000, or $48,000, terly with the New York Central Railroad, the third trunk line, depending on the difficulty of the terrain over which they built. RAILROAD CONSTRUCTION, 1830–1920



 CHAPTER 18

THE INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY

PACIFIC TIME

MOUNTAIN TIME

CENTRAL TIME

EASTERN TIME

Seattle
Portland


Boston


St. Paul


 tral Cen Sacramento

 fic Paci

Detroit


Promontory
Point


Union P
 acific

Indianapolis


Denver
San
Francisco


Cincinnati


Kansas
City


Kansas Pacific


Missouri
Pacific


 a Fe & eka Sant

Washington, D.C.


St. Louis


Memphis


 hi so n

, Top


New York


Pittsburgh


Omaha


Salt Lake
City


Los Angeles


Philadelphia


Chicago


 c At

Birmingham


Wilmington
Atlanta


Charleston
Savannah


Fort Worth
El Paso


New Orleans


Railroads in
Operation
By 1870






 500 miles 500 kilometers

By 1890


 RAILROADS, 1870 AND 1890

 In the last quarter of the nineteenth century, railroads expanded into Texas, the far Southwest, and the Northwest, carrying settlers, businesses, and government to the far-flung areas.

 Construction began simultaneously at Omaha and Sacramento in 1863, lagged during the war, and moved vigorously ahead after 1865. It became a race, each company vying for land, loans, and potential markets. General Grenville M. Dodge, a tough Union army veteran, served as construction chief for the Union Pacific, while Charles Crocker, a former Sacramento dry goods merchant, led the Central Pacific crews. Dodge organized an army of ten thousand workers, many of them ex-soldiers and Irish immigrants. Pushing rapidly westward, he encountered frequent attacks from Native Americans defending their lands, but he had the advantage of building over flat prairie. Crocker faced more trying conditions in the high Sierra Nevada along California’s eastern border. After several experiments, he decided that Chinese laborers worked best, and he hired six thousand of them, most brought directly from China. “I built the Central Pacific,” Crocker enjoyed boasting, but the Chinese crews in fact did the awesome work. Under the most difficult conditions, they dug, blasted, and pushed their way slowly east. On May 10, 1869, the two lines met at Promontory, Utah, near the northern tip of the Great Salt Lake. Dodge’s crews had built 1,086 miles of track, Crocker’s 689. The Union Pacific and Central

 Pacific presidents hammered in a golden spike (both missed it on the first try), and the dreamed-of connection was made. The telegraph flashed the news east and west, setting off wild celebrations. A photograph was taken, but it included none of the Chinese who had worked so hard to build the road; they were all asked to step aside. The transcontinental railroad symbolized American unity and progress. Along with the Suez Canal, completed the same year, it helped knit the world together. Three more railroads reached the coast in 1883: the Northern Pacific, running from Minnesota to Oregon; the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe, connecting Kansas City and Los Angeles; and the powerful Southern Pacific, running from San Francisco and Los Angeles to New Orleans. Ten years later, James J. Hill’s superbly built Great Northern Railway extended from Minneapolis–St. Paul to Seattle, Washington.

Problems of Growth
 Overbuilding during the 1870s and 1880s caused serious problems for the railroads. Lines paralleled each other, and where they did not, speculators such as Jay Gould often laid one down to force a rival line to buy it at inflated prices. While many managers

An Industrial Empire


 worked to improve service, Gould and others bought and sold railroads like toys, watered their stock, and milked their assets. By 1885, almost one-third of railroad stock represented “water,” that is, stock distributed in excess of the real value of the assets. Competition was severe, and managers fought desperately for traffic. They offered special rates and favors: free passes for large shippers; low rates on bulk freight, carload lots, and long hauls; and, above all, rebates—secret, privately negotiated reductions below published rates. Fierce rate wars broke out frequently, convincing managers that ruthless competition helped no one. Rebates made more enemies than friends. Managers such as Albert Fink, the brilliant vice president of the Louisville & Nashville, tried first to arrange pooling agreements, a way to control competition by sharing traffic. Fink directed the Eastern Trunk Line Association (1877), which divided westbound traffic among the four trunk lines. Similar associations pooled traffic in the South and West, but none survived the intense pressures of competition. Legally unenforceable, pools were handshake agreements among individuals who did not always keep their word. Customers grew adept at bargaining for rebates and other privileges, and railroads rarely felt able to refuse them. Failing to cooperate, railroad owners next tried to consolidate. Through purchase, lease, and merger, they gobbled up competitors and built “self-sustaining systems” that dominated entire regions. But many of the systems, expensive and unwieldy, collapsed in the Panic of 1893. By mid-1894, a quarter of the railroads were bankrupt. The victims of the panic included such legendary names as the Erie, B & O, Santa Fe, Northern Pacific, and Union Pacific. Needing money, railroads turned naturally to bankers, who finally imposed order on the industry. J. Pierpont Morgan, head of the New York investment house of J. P. Morgan and Company, took the lead. Massively built, with eyes so piercing they seemed like the headlights of an onrushing train, Morgan was the most powerful figure in American finance. He liked efficiency, combination, and order. He disliked “wasteful” competition. In 1885, during a bruising rate war between the New York Central and the Pennsylvania, Morgan invited the combatants to a conference aboard his palatial steam yacht, Corsair. Cruising on Long Island Sound, he arranged a trafficsharing agreement and collected a million-dollar fee. Bringing peace to an industry could be profitable. It also satisfied Morgan’s passion for stability. After 1893, Morgan and a few other bankers refinanced ailing railroads, and in the process they took control of the industry. Their methods were direct: Fixed costs and debt were ruthlessly cut, new stock was issued to provide capital, rates were stabilized, rebates and competition were eliminated, and control was vested in a “voting trust” of handpicked trustees. Between 1894 and 1898, Morgan reorganized—critics said “Morganized”—the Southern Railway, the Erie, the Northern Pacific, and the B & O. In addition, he took over a half dozen other important railroads. By 1900, he was a dominant figure in American railroading. As the new century began, the railroads had pioneered the patterns followed by most other industries. Seven giant systems controlled nearly two-thirds of the mileage, and they in turn answered to a few investment banking firms such as the House of Morgan. For good and ill, a national transportation network, centralized and relatively efficient, was now in place.



An Industrial Empire
 What were the main characteristics of the new steel and oil industries? The new industrial empire was based on a number of dramatic innovations, including steel, oil, and inventions of all kinds that transformed ordinary life. In this process, steel was as important as the railroads. Harder and more durable than other kinds of iron, steel wrought changes in manufacturing, agriculture, transportation, and architecture. It permitted construction of longer bridges, taller buildings, stronger railroad track, deadlier weapons, better plows, heavier machinery, and faster ships. Made in great furnaces by strong men, it symbolized the tough, often brutal nature of industrial society. From the 1870s onward, steel output became the worldwide accepted measure of industrial progress, and nations around the globe vied for leadership. The Bessemer process, developed in the late 1850s by Henry Bessemer in England and independently by William Kelly in the United States, made increased steel production possible. Both Bessemer and Kelly discovered that a blast of air forced through molten iron burned off carbon and other impurities, resulting in steel of a more uniform and durable quality. The discovery transformed the industry. While earlier methods produced amounts a person could lift, a Bessemer converter handled 5 tons of molten metal at a time. The mass production of steel was now possible.

Carnegie and Steel
 Bessemer plants demanded extensive capital investment, abundant raw materials, and sophisticated production techniques. Using chemical and other processes, the plants required research INTERNATIONAL STEEL PRODUCTION, 1880–1914 Millions of tons









Germany


France


Great
Britain


Russia


United
States




 CHAPTER 18

THE INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY

 departments, which became critical components of later American industries. Costly to build, they limited entry into the industry to the handful who could afford them. Great steel districts arose in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Alabama—in each case around large coal deposits that fueled the huge furnaces. Pittsburgh became the center of the industry, its giant mills employing thousands of workers. Output shot up. In 1874, the United States produced less than half the amount of pig iron produced in Great Britain. By 1890, it took the lead, and in 1900, it produced four times as much as Britain. Iron ore abounded in the fabulous deposits near Lake Superior, the greatest deposits in the world. In the mines of the Mesabi Range in Minnesota, giant steam shovels loaded ore onto railroad cars for transport to ships on the Great Lakes. Powered lifts, self-loading devices, and other innovations sped the process. “By the turn of the century,” historian Peter Temin noted, “the transport of Lake ores had become an intricate ballet of large and complex machines.” Like the railroads, steel companies grew larger and larger. In 1880, only nine companies could produce more than 100,000 tons a year. By the early 1890s, several companies exceeded 250,000 tons, and two—including the great Carnegie Steel Company—produced more than one million tons a year. As operations expanded, managers needed more complex skills. Product development, marketing, and consumer preferences became important. Competition was fierce, and steel companies, like the railroads, tried secret agreements, pools, and consolidation. During the 1880s and 1890s, they moved toward vertical integration, a type of organization in which a single company owns and controls the entire process from the unearthing of the raw materials to the manufacture and sale of the finished product. Such companies combined coal and iron mines, transportation companies, blast furnaces, and rolling mills into integrated networks. Andrew Carnegie emerged as the undisputed master of the industry. Born in Scotland, he came to the United States in 1848 at the age of twelve. Settling near Pittsburgh, he went to work as a bobbin boy in a cotton mill, earning $1.20 a week. He soon took a job in a telegraph office, where in 1852 his hard work and skill caught the eye of Thomas A. Scott of the Pennsylvania Railroad. Starting as Scott’s personal telegrapher, Carnegie spent a total of twelve years on the Pennsylvania, a training ground for company managers. By 1859, he had become a divisional superintendent. He was twenty-four years old. Soon rich from shrewd investments, Carnegie plunged into the steel industry in 1872. On the Monongahela River south of Pittsburgh, he built the giant J. Edgar Thomson Steel Works, named after the president of the Pennsylvania Railroad, his biggest customer. With his warmth and salesmanship, he attracted able partners and subordinates such as Henry Clay Frick and Charles M. Schwab, whom he drove hard and paid well. Although he had written magazine articles defending the rights of workers, Carnegie kept the wages of the laborers in his mills low and disliked unions. With the help of Frick, he crushed a violent strike at his Homestead works in 1892 (see p. 434). In 1878, he won the steel contract for the Brooklyn Bridge. During the next decade, as city building boomed, he converted the huge Homestead works near Pittsburgh to the manufacture of structural beams and angles, which went into the New York City elevated railway, the first skyscrapers, and the Washington

Read the Document Andrew Carnegie,
“Wealth” (1889)


 The machinery dwarfs the workers in this colored engraving of steel making using the Bessemer process at Andrew Carnegie’s Pittsburgh steel works. Men worked twelve hours a day in the blazing heat and deafening roar of the machines.

 Monument. Carnegie profits mounted: from $2 million in 1888 to $40 million in 1900. That year, Carnegie Steel alone produced more steel than Great Britain. Employing twenty thousand people, it was the largest industrial company in the world. In 1901, Carnegie sold it. Believing that wealth brought social obligations, he wanted to devote his full time to philanthropy. He found a buyer in J. Pierpont Morgan, who in the late 1890s had put together several steel companies, including Federal Steel, Carnegie’s chief rival. Carnegie Steel had blocked Morgan’s well-known desire for control, and in mid-1900, when a war loomed between the two interests, Morgan decided to buy Carnegie out. In early January 1901, Morgan told Charles M. Schwab, “Go and find his price.” Schwab cornered Carnegie on the golf course; Carnegie listened, and the next day he handed Schwab a note, scribbled in blunt pencil, asking almost a half billion dollars. Morgan glanced at it and said, “I accept this price.”

An Industrial Empire


 Drawing other companies into the combination, on March 3, 1901, Morgan announced the creation of the United States Steel Corporation. The new firm was capitalized at $1.4 billion, the first billion-dollar company. It absorbed more than 200 other companies, employed 168,000 people, and produced 9 million tons of iron and steel a year. It controlled three-fifths of the country’s steel business. Soon there were other giants, including Bethlehem Steel, Republic Steel, and National Steel. As the nineteenth century ended, steel products—rare just thirty years before—had altered the landscape. Huge firms, investment bankers, and professional managers dominated the industry.

Rockefeller and Oil
 Petroleum worked comparable changes in the economic and social landscape, although mostly after 1900. Distilled into oil, it lubricated the machinery of the industrial age. There seemed little use for gasoline (the internal combustion engine had only just been developed), but kerosene, another major distillate, brought inexpensive illumination into almost every home. Whale oil, cottonseed oil, and even tallow candles were expensive to burn; consequently, many people went to bed at nightfall. Kerosene lamps opened the evenings to activity, altering the patterns of life. Like other changes in these years, the oil boom happened with surprising speed. In the mid-1850s, petroleum was a bothersome, smelly fluid that occasionally rose to the surface of springs and streams. Clever entrepreneurs bottled it in patent medicines; a few scooped up enough to burn. Other entrepreneurs soon found that drilling reached pockets of oil beneath the earth. In 1859, Edwin L. Drake drilled the first oil well near Titusville in northwest Pennsylvania, and the “black gold” fever struck. Chemists soon discovered ways to transform petroleum into lubricating oil, grease, paint, wax, varnish, naphtha, and paraffin. Within a few years, there was a world market in oil. At first, growth of the oil industry was chaotic. Early drillers and refiners produced for local markets, and since drilling wells and even erecting refineries cost little, competition flourished. Output fluctuated dramatically; prices rose and fell, with devastating effect. Refineries—usually a collection of wooden shacks and tanks— were centered in Cleveland and Pittsburgh, near the original oilproducing regions. A young merchant from Cleveland named John D. Rockefeller imposed order on the industry. “I had an ambition to build,” he later recalled, and beginning in 1863 at the age of twenty-four, he built the Standard Oil Company, soon to become one of the titans of corporate business. Like Morgan, Rockefeller considered competition wasteful, small-scale enterprise inefficient, and consolidation the path of the future. Consolidation “revolutionized the way of doing business all over the world,” he said. “The time was ripe for it. It had to come, though all we saw at the moment was the need to save ourselves from wasteful conditions.” Methodically, Rockefeller absorbed or destroyed competitors in Cleveland and elsewhere. As ruthless in his methods as Carnegie, he lacked the steel master’s spontaneous charm. He was distant and taciturn, a man of deep religious beliefs who taught Bible classes at Cleveland’s Erie Street Baptist Church. Like Carnegie, he demanded efficiency, relentless cost cutting, and the



 latest technology. He attracted exceptional lieutenants—although, as one said, he could see farther ahead than any of them, “and then see around the corner.” “Nothing in haste, nothing ill-done,” Rockefeller often said to himself. “Your future hangs on every day that passes.” Paying careful attention to detail, he counted the stoppers in barrels, shortened barrel hoops to save metal, and, in one famous incident, reduced the number of drops of solder on kerosene cans from forty to thirty-nine. In large-scale production, Rockefeller realized, even small reductions meant huge savings. Research uncovered other ways of lowering costs and improving products, and Herman Frasch, a brilliant Standard Oil chemist, solved problem after problem in the refining of oil. In the end, Rockefeller triumphed over his competitors by marketing products of high quality at the lowest unit cost. But he employed other, less savory methods as well. He threatened rivals and bribed politicians. He employed spies to harass the customers of competing refiners. Above all, he extorted railroad rebates that lowered his transportation costs and undercut competitors. By 1879, he controlled 90 percent of the country’s entire oil-refining capacity. Vertically integrated, Standard Oil owned wells, timberlands, barrel and chemical plants, refineries, warehouses, pipelines, and fleets of tankers and oil cars. Its marketing organization served as the model for the industry. Standard exported oil to Asia, Africa, and South America; its five-gallon kerosene tin, like Coca-Cola bottles and cans of a later era, was a familiar sight in the most distant parts of the world. To manage it all, the company developed a new plan of business organization, the trust, which had profound significance for American business. In 1881, Samuel C. T. Dodd, Standard’s attorney, set up the Standard Oil Trust, with a board of nine trustees empowered “to hold, control, and manage” all Standard’s properties. Stockholders exchanged their stock for trust certificates, on which dividends were paid. On January 2, 1882, the first of the modern trusts was born. As Dodd intended, it immediately centralized control of Standard’s far-flung empire. Competition almost disappeared; profits soared. A trust movement swept the country as industries with similar problems— whiskey, lead, and sugar, among others—followed Standard’s example. The word trust became synonymous with monopoly, amid vehement protests from the public. Antitrust became a watchword for a generation of reformers from the 1880s through the era of Woodrow Wilson. But Rockefeller’s purpose had been management of a monopoly, not monopoly itself, which he had already achieved. During the 1890s, Rockefeller helped pioneer another form of industrial consolidation, the holding company. Taking advantage of an 1889 New Jersey law that allowed companies to purchase other companies, he moved Standard Oil to New Jersey and bought up his own subsidiaries to form a holding company. The trust, he had learned, was somewhat cumbersome, and it was under attack in Congress and the courts. Holding companies offered the next step in industrial management. They were simply large-scale mergers, in which a central corporate organization purchased the stock of the member companies and established direct formal control.



 CHAPTER 18

THE INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY

 Some of the inventions transformed communications. In 1866, Cyrus W. Field improved the transatlantic cable linking the telegraph networks of Europe and the United States. By the early 1870s, land and submarine cables ran to Brazil, Japan, and the China coast; in the next two decades, they reached Africa and spread across South America. Diplomats and business leaders could now “talk” to their counterparts in Berlin or Hong Kong. Even before the telephone, the cables quickened the pace of foreign affairs, revolutionized journalism, and allowed businesses to expand and centralize. The typewriter (1867), stock ticker (1867), cash register (1879), calculating machine (1887), and adding machine (1888) helped business transactions. High-speed spindles, automatic looms, and electric sewing machines transformed the clothing industry, which for the first time in history turned out ready-made clothes for the masses. In 1890, the Census Bureau first used machines to sort and tabulate data on punched cards, a portent of a new era of informaThe Business of Invention tion storage and processing. In 1879, George Eastman patented a process for coating gelatin “America has become known the world around as the home of on photographic dry plates, which led to celluloid film and motion invention,” boasted the commissioner of patents in 1892. It had pictures. By 1888, he was marketing the Kodak camera, which not always been so; until the last third of the nineteenth cenweighed 35 ounces, took 100 exposures, and cost $25. Even though tury, the country had imported most of its technology. Then an early Kodaks had to be returned to the factory, camera and all, for extraordinary group of inventors and tinkerers—”specialists in film developing, they revolutionized photography. Now almost anyinvention,” Thomas A. Edison called them—began to study the one could snap a picture. world around them. Some of their inventions gave rise to new Other innovations changed the diet. There were new processes industries; a few actually changed the quality of life. for flour, canned meat, vegetables, condensed milk, and even beer In the very act of inventing, Edison and others drew on a (from an offshoot of Louis Pasteur’s discoveries about bacteria). deeper “invention,” a realization that people could mold nature Packaged cereals appeared on breakfast tables. Refrigerated railroad to their own ends. They could create out of “first nature,” as one cars, ice-cooled, brought fresh fruit from Florida and California to environmental historian has noted, a “second nature,” shaped as they wished. all parts of the country. In the 1870s, Gustavus F. Swift, a Chicago The number of patents issued to inventors reflected the trend. meat packer, hit on the idea of using the cars to distribute meat During the 1850s, fewer than 2,000 patents were issued each year. nationwide. Setting up “disassembly” factories to butcher meat By the 1880s and 1890s, the figure reached more than 20,000 a (Henry Ford later copied them for his famous “assembly” lines), he year. Between 1790 and 1860, the U.S. Patent Office issued just started an “era of cheap beef,” as a newspaper said. 36,000 patents; in the decade of the 1890s alone, it issued more No innovation, however, rivaled the importance of the telethan 200,000. phone and the use of electricity for light and power. The telephone was the work of Alexander Graham Bell, a shrewd PATENTS ISSUED, BY DECADE, 1850–1899 and genial Scot who settled in Boston in 1871. 221,277 Interested in the problems of the deaf, Bell experimented with ways to transmit speech electrically, 195,104 and after several years he had developed electrified metal disks that, much like the human ear, converted sound waves to electrical impulses and back again. On March 10, 1876, he transmitted the first sentence over a telephone: “Mr. Watson, come here; I want 124,672 you.” Later that year, he exhibited the new device to excited crowds at the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia. 64,302 In 1878—the year a telephone was installed in the White House—the first telephone exchange opened in New Haven, Connecticut. Fighting off 19,591 competitors who challenged the patent, the young Bell Telephone Company dominated the growing industry. By 1895, there were about 310,000 phones; 1850–1859 1860–1869 1870–1879 1880–1889 1890–1899 a decade later, there were ten million—about one for every ten people. American Telephone and Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to Telegraph Company, formed by the Bell interests in 1970, Bicentennial Edition, Washington, DC, 1975. Other companies followed suit, including American Sugar Refining, the Northern Securities Company, and the National Biscuit Company. Merger followed merger. By 1900, 1 percent of the nation’s companies controlled more than one-third of its industrial production. A decade later, a congressional investigation showed that two individuals, Rockefeller and Morgan, between them controlled businesses worth more than $22 billion. In 1897, Rockefeller retired with a fortune of nearly $900 million, but for Standard Oil and petroleum in general, the most expansive period was yet to come. The great oil pools of Texas and Oklahoma had not yet been discovered. Plastics and other oil-based synthetics were several decades in the future. There were only four usable automobiles in the country, and the day of the gasoline engine, automobile, and airplane lay just ahead.

An Industrial Empire




 In 1896, records made of hard rubber and shellac appeared on the market; the following year, a phonograph sold for $20. In 1904, someone had the idea of recording on both sides of the disk, and the phonograph record in its modern form was born. For the first time in history, people could listen again and again to a favorite symphony or piano solo. The phonograph made human experience repeatable in a way never before possible. In 1879 came an even larger triumph, the incandescent lamp. Sir Joseph William Swan, an English inventor, had already experimented with the carbon filament, but Edison’s task involved more than finding a durable filament. He set out to do nothing less than change light. A trial-and-error inventor, Edison tested sixteen hundred materials before producing, late in 1879, the carbon filament he wanted. Then he had to devise a complex system of conductors, meters, and generators by which electricity could be divided and distributed to homes and businesses. With the financial backing of J. P. Morgan, he organized the Edison Illuminating Company and built the Pearl Street power station in New York City, the testing ground of the new apparatus. On In the late 1870’s the electric light and power transfer were only at inventive stages, having been September 4, 1882, as Morgan and others explored unsuccessfully by a number of inventors. At that time Thomas Edison, with his ideas and watched, Edison threw a switch and lit proven analytical abilities, undertook the problem. It was Edison’s interest in technological systems that the House of Morgan, the stock exchange, led him to a general system of incandescent lighting in the fall of 1878. the New York Times, and a number of other buildings. Amazed, a Times reporter marveled that writ1885, became another of the vast holding companies, consolidating ing stories in the office at night “seemed almost like writing in more than a hundred local systems. daylight.” Power stations soon opened in Boston, Philadelphia, If the telephone dissolved communication barriers as old as and Chicago. By 1900, there were 2,774 stations, lighting some the human race, Thomas Alva Edison, the “Wizard of Menlo Park,” two million electric lights around the country. In a nation alive invented processes and products of comparable significance. Born with light, the habits of centuries changed. A flick of the switch lit in 1847, Edison had little formal education, although he was an homes and factories at any hour of the day or night. avid reader. Like Carnegie, he went into the new field of telegraphy. In a rare blunder, Edison based his system on low-voltage direct Tinkering in his spare time, he made several important improvecurrent, which could be transmitted only about two miles. George ments, including a telegraph capable of sending four messages over a Westinghouse, the inventor of the railroad air brake, demonstrated single wire. Gathering teams of specialists to work on specific probthe advantages of high-voltage alternating current for transmission lems, Edison built the first modern research laboratory at Menlo over great distances. In 1886, he formed the Westinghouse Electric Park, New Jersey. It may have been his most important invention. Company and with the inventor Nikola Tesla, a Hungarian immiThe laboratory, Edison promised, would turn out “a minor grant, developed an alternating-current motor that could convert invention every ten days and a big thing every six months or so.” electricity into mechanical power. Electricity could light a lamp In 1877, it turned out a big thing. Worried about a telephone’s high or illuminate a skyscraper, pull a streetcar or drive an entire railcost, Edison set out to invent a “telephone repeater,” which became road, run a sewing machine or power a mammoth assembly line. the phonograph. Those unable to afford a phone, he thought, could Transmitted easily over long distances, it freed factories and citrecord their voices for replay from a central telephone station. Using ies from location near water or coal. Electricity, in short, brought tin foil wrapped around a grooved, rotating cylinder, he shouted the a revolution. verses of “Mary Had a Little Lamb” and then listened in awe as the Buried under pavement or strung from pole to pole, wires machine played them back. “I was never so taken aback in all my of every description—trolley, telephone, and power—marked the life,” he later said. “Everybody was astonished. I was always afraid of birth of the modern city. things that worked the first time.” Read the Document Thomas Edison, “The Success of the Electric Light”

 Complete the Assignment Shopping in a New Society on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


Shopping in a New Society


 Macy’s was founded by Rowland Hussey Macy, who between 1843 and 1855 opened four retail dry goods stores, including the original Macy’s store in downtown Haverhill, Massachusetts, established in 1851 to serve the mill industry employees of the area.

O


 f all the innovations that changed the way people lived between the 1870s and 1920s, one of the most important was the rise and development of the department store, those sprawling urban empires of goods and services that fueled the mass consumption of the new society. A significant invention in itself, the department store took advantage of myriad other changes in American and

 European society, especially the industrial transformation that led to the mass production of consumer goods in varieties and amounts never seen before. That industrial revolution in turn drew on breakthroughs in transportation, including a vast railroad network that linked cities and villages and ended the relative isolation and selfsufficiency of the nation’s “island communities.” The railroads tied people

 together, brought in products from outside, fostered greater interdependence, and encouraged economic specialization. In the cities, new streetcar systems, another revolution in transportation, carried shoppers directly to stores, workplaces, and other destinations, regardless of the weather. As a New York City department store suggested one winter, “Ladies, if walking is

 too bad, just take the cars.” The advice took hold. The word “commuter” first entered the language in the 1870s. As machines turned out a plethora of new products, it became vital to sell them, and a “new science of marketing” spread. Printer’s Ink, the first major advertising journal, began publishing in 1881. The rotary press, invented in 1875, initiated a new era in newspaper advertising. Woodcuts, halftones, and photoengraving added illustrations to catch the consumer’s eye. Liking the results, businesses spent more on advertising every year. In 1870, they spent about $50 million; in 1900, about $95 million; in 1920, over $500 million. (By the 1970s, it was $22.4 billion.) Ads and billboards sprouted up everywhere, touting cigarettes, cars, perfumes, and cosmetics. Advertising agents, using new statistical sampling techniques, developed modern concepts of market testing and research. “When people see your name constantly in the paper,” Printer’s Ink argued, “they begin to believe they know you and it is but a short step from advertising to patronage.” Reflecting common values, department stores flourished in Europe as well as in America, particularly in Paris. Emile Zola, the famed French novelist, said the department store democratized luxury, offering the public for the first time in history free admission to displays of material goods. “Shop,” he and others pointed out, had become a verb. In the United States, R. H. Macy in New York City, John Wanamaker in Philadelphia, and Marshall Field in Chicago turned the department store into a national institution. There, people learned to “browse,” a relatively new concept, and to buy. Innovations in pricing, display, and advertising helped customers develop wants they had not known they had. In 1870, Wanamaker took out the first full-page newspaper ad, and by 1891, Macy, too, had turned to fullpage advertisements, often placed on pages next to an article of special interest to women.

 The ads were hard to resist: Follow the crowd [an 1885 ad in a New York newspaper said] and it will always take you to R. H. MACY & CO. What better evidence do you wish that ours is The All Around Store of New York City? Ride our bicycles, read our books, cook in our saucepans, dine off our china, wear our silks, get under our blankets, smoke our cigars, drink our wines – Shop at Macy’s – and life will Cost You Less and Yield You More Than You Dreamed Possible. Even the surroundings often evoked a dream. Cash registers, a new invention, rang up every sale, and by the 1880s, electric lights highlighted the goods. Electric elevators and escalators carried shoppers to new heights. Plate-glass windows, a product of discoveries in the technology of glassmaking, flooded the stores with daylight. Windows on the street levels became “show windows,” a term developed in the United States. “Window-shopping,” another new word, became popular. Looking through those windows, store owners soon noted, were women, hundreds of them, and it was around women that they built their businesses. “Woman is a shopper,” as an industry journal noted. “Out of that fact has come the modern department store.” In these years, growing numbers of women worked in factories, telephone exchanges, and business offices, and they could spend their wages on items they desired. By 1880, 2.6 million women were in the work force; in 1890, 4 million. In 1900, more than 5 million women— one fifth of all adult women—worked outside the home. Within limits, of course, that meant money in women’s pockets, and the new department stores tailored their advertising and wares to appeal to women. They also did everything they

 could to make their stores safe, clean, and appealing. In 1892, Macy’s built a new ladies’ waiting room, calling it the “most luxurious and beautiful department devoted to the comfort of ladies to be found in a mercantile establishment in the city.” Soon there were ladies’ lunch rooms; dressing rooms specially lit to show off evening gowns in broad daylight; and shelves of hats, glass, and china with monograms and other special designs. It was not unusual for a department store to stock 1,300 types of women’s shoes. The department store, along with advertising, brand names, and other innovations, brought Americans of all backgrounds into a national market. Even as the country itself grew, a homogeneity of goods bound it together, touching cities and farms, East and West, rich and poor. A common language of consumption turned Americans into a community of consumers, who were surrounded by goods unavailable just decades before and able to purchase them. They had learned to make, want, and buy. These are lessons not forgotten. The department store even today accounts for more than one-tenth of all annual commercial sales in the United States. The spread of the World Wide Web has added, like transportation and communication innovations in an earlier era, another route for consumers to buy the alluring products of the department stores. The so-called “Cyber-Monday” of the 2011 Christmas season enticed those who preferred to shop and spend their money buying goods online. According to the New York Times, on “Cyber-Monday” shoppers bought $1.25 billion worth of goods over the Internet. Somehow, one suspects, this would not have surprised Macy, Wanamaker, and their nineteenth-century colleagues.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
What conditions between the 1870s and 1920s led to the rise of the department store? 2. What changes did department stores bring in people’s lives? 


 CHAPTER 18

THE INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY

The Sellers
 Why were the new methods of advertising so important? The increased output of the industrial age alone was not enough to ensure huge profits. The products still had to be sold, and that gave rise to the new “science” of marketing. Some business leaders—such as Swift in meatpacking, James B. Duke in tobacco, and Rockefeller in oil—built extensive marketing organizations of their own. Others relied on retailers, merchandising techniques, and advertising, developing a host of methods to convince consumers to buy. In 1867, businesses spent about $50 million on advertising; in 1900, they spent more than $500 million, and the figure was increasing rapidly. The first advertising agency, N. W. Ayer and Son, of Philadelphia, began to service businesses in the mid-1870s, and it was followed by numerous imitators. The rotary press (1875) churned out newspapers and introduced a new era in newspaper advertising. Woodcuts, halftones, and photoengraving added illustrations to catch the consumer’s eye. Bringing producer and consumer together, nationwide advertising was the final link in the national market. From roadside signs to newspaper ads, it pervaded American life. R. H. Macy in New York, John Wanamaker in Philadelphia, and Marshall Field in Chicago turned the department store into a national institution. There people could browse (a relatively new concept) and buy. Innovations in pricing, display, and advertising helped customers develop wants they did not know they had. In 1870, Wanamaker took out the first full-page newspaper ad, and Macy, an aggressive advertiser, touted “goods suitable for the millionaire at prices in reach of the millions.” The “chain store”—an American term—spread across the country. The A & P grocery stores, begun in 1859, numbered sixty-seven by 1876, all marked by a familiar red-and-gold facade. By 1915, there were a thousand of them. In 1880, F. W. Woolworth, bored with the family farm, opened the first “Five and Ten Cent Store” in Utica, New York. He had fifty-nine stores in 1900, the year he adopted the bright red storefront and heaping counters to lure customers in and persuade them to buy. In similar fashion, Sears, Roebuck and Montgomery Ward sold to rural customers through mail-order catalogs—a means of selling that depended on effective transportation and a high level of customer literacy. As a traveler for a dry goods firm, Aaron Montgomery Ward had seen an unfulfilled need of people in the rural West. He started the mail-order trend in 1872, with a one-sheet price list offered from a Chicago loft. By 1884, he offered almost ten thousand items in a catalog of 240 pages. Richard W. Sears also saw the possibilities in the mail-order business. Starting with watches and jewelry, he gradually expanded his list. In the early 1880s, he moved to Chicago and with Alvah C. Roebuck founded Sears, Roebuck and Company. Sears sold anything and everything, prospering in a business that relied on mutual faith between unseen customers and distant distributors. Sears catalogs, soon more than five hundred pages long, exploited four-color illustration and other new techniques. By the early 1900s, Sears distributed six million catalogs annually.

 Advertising, brand names, chain stores, and mail-order houses brought Americans of all varieties into a national market. Even as the country grew, a certain homogeneity of goods bound it together, touching cities and farms, East and West, rich and poor. There was a common language of consumption. The market, some contemporaries thought, also bridged ethnic and other differences. A prominent English economist wrote in 1919, “Widely as the Scandinavians are separated from the Italians, and the native Americans from the Poles, in sentiment, in modes of living, and even in occupations, they are yet purchasers of nearly the same goods. . . . They buy similar clothes, furniture, and implements.” The theory had severe limits; ethnic and racial differences remained entrenched in the society. But Americans had become a community of consumers, surrounded by goods unavailable just a few decades before, and able to purchase them. They had learned to make, want, and buy. (See Feature Essay, “Shopping in a New Society” on pp 426-427).

The Wage Earners
 Who were the wage earners in the new economy? Although entrepreneurs were important, it was the labor of millions of men and women that built the new industrial society. In their individual stories, nearly all unrecorded, lay much of the achievement, drama, and pain of these years. In a number of respects, their lot improved during the last quarter of the nineteenth century. Real wages rose, working conditions improved, and the workers’ influence in national affairs increased. Between 1880 and 1914, wages of the average worker rose about $7 a year. Like others, workers also benefited from expanding health and educational services.

Working Men, Working Women,
Working Children
 Still, life for workers was not easy. Before 1900, most wage earners worked at least ten hours a day, six days a week. If skilled, they earned about 20 cents an hour; if unskilled, just half that. On average, workers earned between $400 and $500 a year. It took about $600 for a family of four to live decently. Construction workers, machinists, government employees, printers, clerical workers, and western miners made more than the average. Eastern coal miners, agricultural workers, garment workers, and unskilled factory hands made considerably less. There were few holidays or vacations, and there was little respite from the grueling routine. Skilled workers could turn the system to their own ends—New York City cigar makers, for example, paid someone to read to them while they worked— but the unskilled seldom had such luxury. They were too easily replaced. “A bit of advice to you,” said a guidebook for immigrant Jews in the 1890s: “do not take a moment’s rest. Run, do, work, and keep your own good in mind.” Work was not only grueling; it was very dangerous. Safety standards were low, and accidents were common, more

The Wage Earners


 common in fact than in any other industrial nation in the world at that time. On the railroads, 1 in every 26 workers was injured and 1 in every 399 was killed each year. Thousands suffered from chronic illness, unknowing victims of dust, chemicals, and other pollutants. In the early 1900s, physician Alice Hamilton established a link between jobs and disease, but meanwhile, illness weakened or struck down many a breadwinner. The breadwinner might be a woman or a child; both worked in increasing numbers. In 1870, about 15 percent of women over the age of 16 were employed for wages; in 1900, 20 percent (5.3 million women) were. Of 303 occupations listed in the 1900 census, women were represented in 296. The textile industry was their largest single employer. Between 1870 and 1900, the number of working children rose nearly 130 percent to 1.8 million. In 1900, 1 out of every 10 girls and 1 out of every 5 boys between the ages of 10 and 15 held jobs. In Paterson, New Jersey, an important industrial city, about half of all boys and girls aged 11 to 14 had jobs. There were so many children in the labor force that when people spoke of child labor, they often meant boys and girls under the age of fourteen. Boys were paid little enough, but girls made even less. Girls, it was argued, were headed for marriage; those who worked were just doing so in order to help out their families. “We try to employ girls who are members of



 families,” a box manufacturer said, “for we don’t pay the girls a living wage in this trade.” Most working women were young and single. Many began working at sixteen or seventeen, worked a half dozen years or so, married, and quit. In 1900, only 5 percent of all married women were employed outside the home, although African American women were an important exception. Among them, 25 percent of married women worked in 1900, usually on southern farms or as low-paid laundresses or domestic servants. As clerical work expanded, women learned new skills such as typing and stenography. Moving into formerly male occupations, they became secretaries, bookkeepers, typists, telephone operators, and clerks in the new department stores. A few women—very few—became ministers, lawyers, and doctors. Arabella Mansfield, admitted to the Iowa bar in 1869, was the first woman lawyer in the country. But change was slow, and in the 1880s, some law schools still were refusing to admit women because they “had not the mentality to study law.” Among women entering the professions, the overwhelming majority became nurses, schoolteachers, and librarians. In such professions, a process of “feminization” occurred: Women became a majority of the workers, a small number of men took the management roles, and most men left for other jobs, lowering the profession’s status. In most jobs, status and pay were divided unequally between men and women. Many of both sexes thought a woman’s place was in the home, “queen of a little house—no matter how humble—where there are children rolling on the floor.” When employed in Read the Document Mother Jones, “The March of the Mill Children” factories, women tended to occupy jobs that were viewed as natural extensions of household activity. They made clothes and textiles, processed food, and made cigars, tobacco, and shoes. In the women’s garment industry, which employed large numbers of women, they were the sewers and finishers, doing jobs that paid less; men were the higher-paid cutters and pressers. In The Long Day: The Story of a New York Working Girl as Told by Herself (1906), the “working girl,” a young schoolteacher, earned $2.50 a week, paid $1.00 for her room, and had $1.50 for food, clothes, transportation, and any social life. For breakfast, she had bread, butter, and coffee; for lunch, bread and butter; for dinner, potato soup, bread, and butter. In Pittsburgh, a worker in a pickle factory said of her day: “I have stood ten hours; I have fitted 1,300 corks; I have hauled and loaded 4,000 jars of pickles. My pay is seventy cents.” Exhausted, such workers fell into bed at night and crawled out again at dawn to begin another “long day.” In general, adults earned more than chilMany children in the late nineteenth century grew up in the nation’s factories, working long hours for dren, the skilled more than the unskilled, low wages in often dangerous conditions. These girls bundling brooms at an Indiana manufacturing native born more than foreign born, plant were photographed by Lewis Hine.



 CHAPTER 18

THE INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY

Read the Document


Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor (1884)


 This report documents the poor working and living conditions of women workers in Massachusetts. Of special concern in the report, and to reformers of the time, were the unsanitary conditions in which many of the women lived. The forthcoming economic depression of the 1890s would force even more women into such working conditions.

 Protestants more than Catholics or Jews, and whites more than blacks and Asians. On average, women made a little more than half as much as men, according to contemporary estimates. In some cases, employers defended the differences—the foreign born, for example, might not speak English—but most simply reflected bias against race, creed, or gender. In the industrial society, white, native-born Protestant men—the bulk of the male population— reaped the greatest rewards. Blacks labored on the fringes, usually in menial occupations. The last hired and first fired, they earned less than other workers at almost every level of skill. On the Pacific coast, the Chinese—and later the Japanese—lived in enclaves and suffered periodic attacks of discrimination. In 1879, the Workingmen’s party of California got a provision in the state constitution forbidding corporations to employ Chinese, and in 1882, Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act, prohibiting the immigration of Chinese workers for ten years.

Culture of Work
 How did wage earners organize in this period, and what demands did they make? Among almost all groups, industrialization shattered age-old patterns, including work habits and the culture of work, as Herbert G. Gutman, a social historian, noted. It made people adapt “older work routines to new necessities and strained those wedded to premodern patterns of labor.” Adaptation was difficult and often demeaning. Virtually everyone went through it, and newcomers repeated the experiences of those who came before. Men and women fresh from farms were not accustomed to the factory’s disciplines. Now they worked indoors rather than out, paced themselves to the clock rather than the movements of the sun, and followed the needs of the market rather than the natural rhythms of the seasons. They had supervisors and hierarchies and strict rules.

Culture of Work


 As industries grew larger, work became more impersonal. Machines displaced skilled artisans, and the unskilled tended the machines for employers they never saw. Workers picked up and left their jobs with startling frequency, and factories drew on a churning, highly mobile labor supply. Historian Stephan Thernstrom, who carefully studied the census records, found that only about half the people recorded in any census still lived in the same community ten years later. “The country had an enormous reservoir of restless and footloose men, who could be lured to new destinations when opportunity beckoned.” Thernstrom and others have also found substantial economic and social mobility. The rags-to-riches stories of Horatio Alger had always said so, and careers of men such as Andrew Carnegie— the impoverished immigrant boy who made good—seemed to confirm it. The actual record was considerably more limited. Most business leaders in the period came from well-to-do or middle-class families of old American stock. Of 360 iron and steel barons in Pittsburgh, Carnegie’s own city, only five fit the Carnegie characteristics, and one of those was Carnegie himself. Still, if few workers became steel magnates, many workers made major progress during their lifetimes. Thernstrom discovered that a quarter of the manual laborers rose to middle-class positions, and working-class children were even more likely to move up the ladder. In Boston, about half the Jewish immigrants rose from manual to middle-class jobs, and English, Irish, and Italian immigrants were not far behind. The chance for advancement played a vital role in American industrial development. It gave workers hope, wedded them to the system, and tempered their response to the appeal of labor unions and working-class agitation. Very few workers rose from rags to riches, but a great many rose to better jobs and higher status.

Labor Unions
 Weak throughout the nineteenth century, labor unions never included more than 2 percent of the total labor force or more than 10 percent of industrial workers. To many workers, unions seemed “foreign,” radical, and out of step with the American tradition of individual advancement. Craft, ethnic, and other differences fragmented the labor force, and its extraordinary mobility made organization difficult. Employers opposed unions. “I have always had one rule,” said an executive of U.S. Steel. “If a worker sticks up his head, hit it.” As the national economy emerged, however, national labor unions gradually took shape. The early unions often represented skilled workers in local areas, but in 1866, William H. Sylvis, a Pennsylvania iron molder, united several unions into a single national organization, the National Labor Union. Like many of the era’s labor leaders, Sylvis sought long-range humanitarian reforms, such as the establishment of workers’ cooperatives, rather than specific bread-and-butter goals. A talented propagandist, he attracted many members—some 640,000 by 1868—but he died in 1869, and the organization did not long survive him. The year Sylvis died, Uriah S. Stephens and a group of Philadelphia garment workers founded a far more successful organization, the Noble and Holy Order of the Knights of Labor, known simply as the Knights of Labor. A secret fraternal order, it grew



 slowly through the 1870s, until Terence V. Powderly, the new Grand Master Workman elected in 1879, ended the secrecy and embarked on an aggressive recruitment program. Wanting to unite all labor, the Knights welcomed everyone who “toiled,” regardless of skill, creed, sex, or color. Unlike most unions, it organized women workers, and at its peak, it had sixty thousand black members. Harking back to the Jacksonians, the Knights set the “producers” against monopoly and special privilege. As members they excluded only “nonproducers”—bankers, lawyers, liquor dealers, and gamblers. Since employers were “producers,” they could join; and since workers and employers had common interests, the Knights maintained that workers should not strike. The order’s platform included the eight-hour day and the abolition of child labor, but more often it focused on uplifting, utopian reform. Powderly, the eloquent and idealistic leader, spun dreams of a new era of harmony and cooperation. He wanted to sweep away trusts and end drunkenness. Workers should pool their resources, establish worker-run factories, railroads, and mines, and escape from the wage system. “The aim of the Knights of Labor—properly understood—is to make each man his own employer,” Powderly said. Membership grew steadily—from 42,000 in 1882 to 110,000 in 1885. In March 1885, ignoring Powderly’s dislike of strikes, local Knights in St. Louis, Kansas City, and other cities won a victory against Jay Gould’s Missouri Pacifi c Railroad, and membership soared. It soon reached almost 730,000, but neither Powderly nor the union’s loose structure could handle the growth. In 1886, the wily Gould struck back, crushing the Knights on the Texas and Pacific Railroad. The defeat punctured the union’s growth and revealed the ineffectiveness of its national leaders. Tens of thousands of unskilled laborers, who had recently rushed to join, deserted the ranks. The Haymarket Riot turned public sympathy against unions like the Knights. By 1890, the order had shrunk to 100,000 members, and a few years later, it was virtually defunct. Even as the Knights waxed and waned, another organization emerged that was to endure. Founded in 1886, the American Federation of Labor (AFL) was a loose alliance of national craft unions. It organized only skilled workers along craft lines, avoided politics, and worked for specific practical objectives. “I have my own philosophy and my own dreams,” said Samuel Gompers, the founder and longtime president, “but first and foremost I want to increase the workingman’s welfare year by year.” Born in a London tenement in 1850, Gompers was a child of the union movement. Settling in New York, he worked as a cigar maker, took an active hand in union activities, and experimented for a time with socialism and working-class politics. As leader of the AFL, he adopted a pragmatic approach to labor’s needs. Gompers accepted capitalism and did not argue for fundamental changes in it. For labor he wanted simply a recognized place within the system and a greater share of the rewards. Unlike Powderly, Gompers and the AFL assumed that most workers would remain workers throughout their lives. The task, then, lay in improving lives in “practical” ways: higher wages, shorter hours, and better working conditions. The AFL offered some attractive assurances to employers. As a trade union, the AFL would use the strike and boycott, but only to achieve limited gains;



 CHAPTER 18

THE INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY

Read the Document


Leonora M. Barry, Report to the Knights of Labor (1887)


 Women delegates at a national meeting of the Knights of Labor in 1886. Women belonged to separate associations affiliated with local all-male unions.

 if treated fairly, the organization would provide a stable labor force. The AFL would not oppose monopolies and trusts, as Gompers said, “so long as we obtain fair wages.” By the 1890s, the AFL was the most important labor group in the country, and Gompers, the guiding spirit, was its president, except for one year, until his death in 1924. Membership expanded from 140,000 in 1886, past 250,000 in 1892, to more than one million by 1901. The AFL then included almost one-third of the country’s skilled workers. By 1914, it had more than two million members. The great majority of workers—skilled and unskilled— remained unorganized, but Gompers and the AFL had become a significant force in national life. Few unions allowed women to join. The Knights of Labor had a Department of Woman’s Work headed by Leonora M. Barry, a shrewd, enthusiastic organizer who established a dozen women’s locals and investigated the condition of women’s labor. The Knights welcomed housewives because they were “producers.” The AFL either ignored or opposed women workers. Only two of its national affiliates—the Cigar Makers’ Union and the Typographical Union— accepted women as members; others prohibited them outright, and Gompers himself often complained that women workers undercut the pay scales for men. Working conditions improved after 1900, but even then, unions were largely a man’s world. In 1910, when

 there were 6.3 million women at work, only 125,000 of them were in unions. The AFL did not expressly forbid black workers from joining, but member unions used high initiation fees, technical examinations, and other means to discourage black membership. The AFL’s informal exclusion practices were, all in all, a sorry record, but Gompers defended his policy toward blacks, women, and the unskilled by pointing to the dangers that unions faced. Only by restricting membership, he argued, could the union succeed.

Labor Unrest
 Workers used various means to adjust to the factory age. To the dismay of managers and “efficiency” experts, the employees often dictated the pace and quality of their work and set the tone of the workplace. Friends and relatives of newly arrived immigrants found jobs for them, taught them how to deal with factory conditions, and humanized the workplace. Workers also formed their own institutions to deal with their jobs. Overcoming differences of race or ethnic origin, they often banded together to help each other. They joined social or fraternal organizations, and their unions did more than argue

Culture of Work


View the Map




Organizing American Labor in the Late Nineteenth Century


Great Railroad Strike of 1877
(Chicago, Pittsburgh, Martinsburg, Baltimore)
 MAINE

WASHINGTON MONTANA

NORTH DAKOTA

VT. N.H.

MINN. OREGON

 WISCONSIN

SOUTH DAKOTA

 IDAHO

NEW YORK MICH.

 WYOMING

 PENN.

IOWA NEBRASKA

NEVADA UTAH

Haymarket Riot 1886
(Chicago)
Pullman Strike 1894
 (Chicago and nationwide)

OHIO IND. ILL.

VIRGINIA KENTUCKY MISSOURI

 CALIFORNIA

N.C.
S.C.


INDIAN TERR.

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

Homestead Strike
(Homestead)


 TENNESSEE

OK. TERR. ARIZONA TERRITORY

RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT NEW JERSEY DELAWARE MARYLAND

W.V.


COLORADO KANSAS

 MASS.

ARK. MISS.

 ALA.

 GEORGIA

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

PA C I F I C OCEAN TEXAS LOUISIANA FLORIDA
Counties reporting strikes between 1870–1900 
Gulf of Mexico


 Major strikes

LABOR STRIKES, 1870–1900

 More than fourteen thousand strikes occurred in the 1880s and early 1890s,

 involving millions of workers.

 for higher wages. Unions offered companionship, news of job openings, and much needed insurance plans for sickness, accident, or death. Workers went to the union hall to play cards or pool, sing union songs, and hear older workers tell of past labor struggles. Unions provided food for sick members, and there were dances, picnics, and parades. “The night I joined the Cattle Butchers’ Union,” a young Lithuanian said, “I was led into the room by a negro member. With me were Bohemians, Germans and Poles . . . . We swore to be loyal to our union above everything else except the country, the city and the State—to be faithful to each other—to protect the women workers—to do our best to understand the history of the labor movement, and to do all we could to help it on.” Many employers believed in an “iron law of wages” in which supply and demand, not the welfare of their workers, dictated wages. “If I wanted boiler iron,” a steelmaker said, “I would go out on the market and buy where I could get it the cheapest, and if I wanted to employ men I would do the same thing.” Wanting a docile labor force, employers fired union members, hired scabs to replace strikers, and used a new weapon, the court injunction, to quell strikes. The injunction, which forbade workers to interfere with their employers’ business, was used to break the great Pullman Strike

 of 1894, and the Supreme Court upheld use of the injunction in In re Debs (1895). Court decisions also affected the legal protection offered to workers. In Holden v. Hardy (1898), the Court upheld a law limiting working hours for miners because their work was dangerous and long hours might increase injuries. In Lochner v. New York (1905), however, it struck down a law limiting bakery workers to a sixty-hour week and ten-hour day. Because baking was safer than mining, the Court saw no need to interfere with the right of bakers to sell their labor freely. As employers’ attitudes hardened, strikes and violence broke out. The United States had the greatest number of violent confrontations between capital and labor in the industrial world. Between 1880 and 1900, there were more than 23,000 strikes involving 6.6 million workers. The worst incident took place at Haymarket Square in Chicago, where workers had been campaigning for an eight-hour workday. In early May 1886, police, intervening in a strike at the McCormick Harvester works, shot and killed two workers. The next evening, May 4, labor leaders called a protest meeting at Haymarket Square near downtown Chicago. The meeting was peaceful, even a bit dull. About three thousand people were there; police ordered them to disperse, and someone threw a dynamite



 CHAPTER 18

THE INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY

Read the Document


George Engel, Address by a Haymarket Anarchist


 In the rioting that followed the bomb explosion in Haymarket Square in Chicago, seven police officers and four workers died and more than seventy officers were wounded, many of them by fellow police. August Spies, one of the anarchists convicted of murder and sent to the gallows, said at his trial, “Let the world know that in A.D. 1886, in the state of Illinois, eight men were sentenced to death because they believed in a better future; because they had not lost their faith in the ultimate victory of liberty and justice!” (Actually, seven of the agitators were sentenced to death, the eighth to imprisonment.)

 bomb that instantly killed one policeman and fatally wounded six others. Police fired into the crowd and killed four people. The authorities never discovered who threw the bomb, but many Americans—not just business leaders—immediately labeled the incident the Haymarket Riot and demanded action against labor “radicalism.” Cities strengthened their police forces and armories. In Chicago, donors helped to establish nearby Fort Sheridan and the Great Lakes Naval Training Station to curb social turmoil. Uncertain who threw the bomb, Chicago police rounded up eight anarchists, who were convicted of murder. Although there was no evidence of their guilt, four were hanged, one committed suicide, and three remained in jail until pardoned by the governor in 1893. Linking labor and anarchism in the public mind, the Haymarket Riot weakened the national labor movement. Violence again broke out in the unsettled conditions of the 1890s. In 1892, federal troops crushed a strike of silver miners in the Coeur d’Alene district of Idaho. That same year, Carnegie and

 Henry Clay Frick, Carnegie’s partner and manager, cut wages nearly 20 percent at the Homestead steel plant. The Amalgamated Iron and Steel Workers, an AFL affiliate, struck, and Frick responded by locking the workers out of the plant. The workers surrounded it, and Frick, furious, hired a small private army of Pinkerton detectives to drive them off. But alert workers spotted the detectives, pinned them down with gunfire, and forced them to surrender. Three detectives and ten workers died in the battle. A few days later, the Pennsylvania governor ordered the state militia to impose peace at Homestead. On July 23, an anarchist named Alexander Berkman, who was not one of the strikers, walked into Frick’s office and shot him twice, then stabbed him several times. Incredibly, Frick survived, watched the police take Berkman away, called in a doctor to bandage his wounds, and stayed in the office until closing time. “I do not think I shall die,” he told reporters. “But if I do or not, the company will pursue the same policy and it will win.” In late July, the Homestead works reopened under military guard, and in November the strikers gave up.

 Conclusion: Industrialization’s Benefits and Costs

 Events like the Homestead Strike troubled many Americans who wondered whether industrialization, for all its benefits, might carry a heavy price in social upheaval, class tensions, and even outright warfare. Most workers did not share in the immense profits of the industrial age, and as the nineteenth century came to a close, there were some who rebelled against the inequity.



Watch the Video The Gilded Age: The Rise of
 Capitalism, Industrialism, andPoverty

 Conclusion: Industrialization’s Benefits and Costs In the half century after the Civil War, the United States became an industrial nation—the leading one, in fact, in the world. On one hand, industrialization meant “progress,” growth, world power, and in some sense, fulfillment of the American promise of abundance. National wealth grew from $16 billion in 1860 to $88 billion in 1900; wealth per capita more than doubled. For the bulk of the population, the standard of living—a particularly American concept—rose. But industrialization also meant rapid change, social instability, exploitation of labor, and growing disparity in income between rich and poor. Industry flourished, but control rested in fewer and fewer hands. Maturing quickly, the young system became a new corporate capitalism: giant businesses, interlocking in ownership, managed by a new professional class, and selling an expanding variety of goods in an increasingly controlled market. As goods spread through the society, so did a sharpened, aggressive materialism. Workers felt the strains of the shift to a new social order. In 1902, a well-to-do New Yorker named Bessie Van Vorst decided to see what it was like to work for a living in a factory. Disguising herself in coarse woolen clothes, a shabby felt hat, a cheap piece of fur, and an old shawl and gloves, she went to Pittsburgh and got a job in a canning factory. She worked ten hours a day, six days a week, including four hours on Saturday afternoons when she and the other women, on their hands and knees, scrubbed the tables, stands, and entire factory floor. For that she earned $4.20 a week, $3 of which went for food alone. “My hands are stiff,” she said, “my thumbs almost blistered . . . . Cases are emptied and refilled; bottles are labeled, stamped and rolled

 The Gilded Age is associated with an enormous expansion of American industry, American manufacturing, and the growth of the factory system. It’s also the moment when it’s increasingly clear that large numbers of Americans are going to be doing wage labor for all their life.

 away . . . and still there are more cases, more jars, more bottles. Oh! the monotony of it!” The noise around her was deafening; her head grew dazed and weary. Van Vorst was lucky—when she tired of the life, she could go back to her home in New York. The working men and women around her were not so fortunate. They stayed on the factory floor and, by dint of their labor, created the new industrial society.



 CHAPTER 18

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 18 The Industrial Society on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1859
First oil well drilled near Titusville, Pennsylvania 1866 William Sylvis establishes National Labor Union 1869 Transcontinental railroad completed at Promontory, 
 Utah; Knights of Labor organize Alexander Graham Bell invents the telephone; Centennial Exposition held in Philadelphia Railroads cut workers’ wages, leading to bloody and violent strike Thomas A. Edison invents the incandescent lamp Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Company becomes nation’s first trust; Edison opens first electric generating station in New York

 1883 Railroads introduce standard time zones 1886 Samuel Gompers founds American Federation of



 Labor (AFL); Labor protest erupts in violence in Haymarket Riot in Chicago; Railroads adopt standard gauge Workers strike at Homestead steel plant in Pennsylvania Economic depression begins J. P. Morgan announces formation of U.S. Steel Corporation, nation’s first billion-dollar company

CHAPTER REVIEW
Industrial Development 
The Sellers


 What enabled the United States to build an industrial economy?

 Why were the new methods of advertising so important?

 The United States had an abundance of natural resources, plentiful labor from Europe and American farms, numerous inventions, a national market, plentiful capital, favorable government policies, and entrepreneurs who saw the possibilities in developing a national economy. (p. 416)

 Advertising, a relatively new industry, helped to sell the goods of the new industrial economy. Americans learned to buy goods they did not even know they wanted. When bored or troubled, they went to a store—today’s mall—to shop. (p. 428)

The Wage Earners
An Empire on Rails
 Who were the wage earners in the new economy? How and why did the railroad system grow? Through the infusion of foreign and domestic capital, and the help of local, state, and federal government, a railroad system grew that dwarfed those in other countries. It changed the economic, political, and social landscape, creating a different nation from the country that had come before. (p. 416)

An Industrial Empire
 What were the main characteristics of the new steel and oil industries? In the late nineteenth century, an industrial empire took shape, centered around steel and oil, leading to the importance of the automobile in the twentieth century. The result was larger and more complex business organizations and greater concentrations of wealth, capital, and control by a relatively few individuals and companies. (p. 421)

 The hard work of millions of men and women built the new factory society. Their work was grueling and often dangerous. Men, women, and children often worked for low wages in unsafe conditions. (p. 428)

Culture of Work
 How did wage earners organize in this period, and what demands did they make? Laborers faced many challenges in the new economy, including work that followed the clock, bigger industries, machines, and wages. Unions formed, including the American Federation of Labor (AFL), which still exists. Labor unrest for better wages and safer working conditions took peaceful forms, but also resulted in violence that disturbed other Americans. (p. 430)

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
trunk lines Four major railroad networks that emerged after the Civil War to connect the eastern seaports to the Great Lakes and western rivers. They reflected the growing integration of transportation across the country that helped spur large-scale industrialization. p. 419 Trust A device to centralize and make more efficient the management of diverse and far-flung business operations. It allowed stockholders to exchange their stock certificates for trust certificates, on which dividends were paid. John D. Rockefeller organized the first major trust, the Standard Oil Trust, in 1882. p. 423 Knights of Labor Founded in 1869, this labor organization pursued broad-gauged reform and practical issues such as improved wages and hours. The Knights welcomed all laborers regardless of race, gender, or skill. p. 431 
 American Federation of Labor (AFL) Founded by Samuel Gompers in 1886, the AFL organized skilled workers by craft and worked for specific practical objectives, such as higher wages, shorter hours, and better working conditions. The AFL avoided politics, and while it did not expressly forbid blacks and women from joining, it used exclusionary practices to keep them out. p. 431 Homestead Strike In July 1892, wage-cutting at Andrew Carnegie’s Homestead Steel Plant in Pittsburgh provoked a violent strike in which three company-hired detectives and ten workers died. Using ruthless force and strikebreakers, company officials broke the strike and destroyed the union. p. 435

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
What were eight advantages the United States possessed that helped spur industrial development, and in what ways did these advantages lead to the growth of specific industries? 
 4. What role did the culture of work and advances in areas like advertising play in shaping economic growth?

 5. In what ways did the hard work of men, women, and children contrib-

 2. In what ways did the revolution in transportation and communications also spur industrial development?

 ute to the growth of industry?

 6. How did American workers respond to the demands of industrial

 3. Drawing on the conditions leading to the growth of industry, how did

 growth, and what did their various responses indicate about the dangerous effects of industrialization?

 the huge steel and oil industries grow?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 18 on MyHistoryLab An Empire On Rails Watch the Video

Culture of Work


An Industrial Empire
Read the Document
 p. 422

◾


Read the Document Leonora M. Barry, Report to the
Knights of Labor (1887) p. 432


Andrew Carnegie, “Wealth” (1889)


Read the Document Thomas Edison, The Success of
 the Electric Light p. 425

The Sellers
◾


Read the Document Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics
 of Labor (1884) p. 430

Railroads and Expansion p. 417


Complete the Assignment
Society p. 426


Shopping in a New


The Wage Earners


◾


View the Map
Organizing American Labor in the Late
Nineteenth Century p. 433


◾


Read the Document George Engel, Address by a
Haymarket Anarchist p. 434


◾


Watch the Video The Gilded Age: The Rise of
Capitalism, Industrialism, and Poverty p. 435


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment
Read the Document
Mill Children” p. 429


Mother Jones, “The March of the




Toward an Urban Society,
1877–1900


Contents and Learning Objectives
THE LURE OF THE CITY PG. 439

THE STIRRINGS OF REFORM PG. 455

 Why did cities in the United States grow between 1880 and 1900?

 How did life in the growing cities lead to ideas of reform?

SOCIAL AND CULTURAL CHANGE, 1877–1900 PG. 447
How did the growth of American cities affect social, cultural, and political life? 
FEATURE ESSAY
Ellis Island: Isle of Hope, Isle of Tears ◾ LAW AND SOCIETY Plessy v. Ferguson: The Shaping of Jim Crow 
THE SPREAD OF JIM CROW PG. 454
Why did Jim Crow laws spread across the South after the end of Reconstruction? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

