Chapter 31 The Rise of a New Conservatism, 1969–1988


 Reagan and America’s Shift to the Right In October 1964, the Republican National Committee sponsored a televised address by Hollywood actor Ronald Reagan on behalf of Barry Goldwater’s presidential candidacy. Reagan’s speech had originally been aired on a Los Angeles station; the resulting outpouring of praise and campaign contributions led to its national rebroadcast. In contrast to Goldwater’s strident rhetoric, Reagan used relaxed, confident, and persuasive terms to put forth the case for a return to individual freedom. Instead of the usual choice between increased government activity and less government involvement, often couched in terms of the left and the right, Reagan presented the options of either going up or down—“up to the maximum of human freedom consistent with law and order, or down to the ant heap of totalitarianism.” Then, borrowing a phrase from FDR, he told his audience: “You and I have a rendezvous with destiny. We can preserve for our children this the last best hope of man on Earth, or we can sentence them to take the first step into a thousand years of darkness.” Although the speech did not rescue Goldwater’s unpopular candidacy, it marked the beginning of Ronald Reagan’s remarkable political career. A popular actor whose movie career had begun to fade in the 1950s,

 Reagan had become an effective television performer as host of The General Electric Theater. His political views, once liberal, moved steadily to the right as he became a spokesperson for a major American corporation. In 1965, a group of wealthy friends persuaded him, largely on the basis of the success of “the speech,” to run for the California governorship. Reagan proved to be an attractive candidate. His approachable manner and his mastery of television enabled him to present his strongly conservative message without appearing to be a rigid ideologue of the right. He won handily by appealing effectively to rising middleclass suburban resentment over high taxes, expanding welfare programs, and bureaucratic regulation. In his two terms as governor, Reagan displayed natural ability as a political leader. Instead of insisting on implementing all of his conservative beliefs, he proved surprisingly flexible. Faced with a Democratic legislature, he yielded on raising taxes and increasing state spending while managing to trim the welfare rolls. Symbolic victories were his specialty; in one example he managed to confront campus radicals and fire Clark Kerr, chancellor of the University of California, while at the same time generously funding higher education.

 Ronald Reagan and his wife Nancy wave to the crowd during the 1980 Republican convention in Detroit.



 CHAPTER 31

THE RISE OF A NEW CONSERVATISM, 1969–1988

 By the time Reagan left the governor’s office in 1974, many signs pointed to a growing conservative mood across the nation. In a popular rebellion against escalating property taxes in 1978, California’s voters passed Proposition 13, which slashed property taxes in half and resulted in a gradual reduction in social services. Religious leaders were especially outraged over the 1962 Supreme Court ruling in Engel v. Vitale outlawing school prayer on the grounds that it was “no part of the business of government to compose official prayers.” In the South, where daily prayers were the customary way of beginning the school day, the reaction was intense. One Alabama congressman denounced the Supreme Court justices, proclaiming, “They put the Negroes in the schools and now they’re driving God out.” Concern over school prayer, along with rising abortion and divorce rates, impelled religious groups to engage in political activity to defend what they viewed as traditional family values. Jerry Falwell, a successful Virginia radio and television evangelist, founded the Moral Majority, a fundamentalist group dedicated to preserving the “American way of life.” (See the Feature Essay, “The Christian Right,” pp. 756–757.) The population shift of the 1970s, especially the rapid growth of the Sunbelt region in the South and West (see p. 774), added momentum to the conservative upsurge. Those moving to the Sunbelt tended to be white, middleand upper-class suburbanites—mainly skilled workers, young professionals, and business executives who were attracted both by economic opportunity and by a political climate emphasizing low taxes, less government regulation, and more reliance on the marketplace. The political impact of population shifts from east to west and north to south during the 1970s was reflected in the congressional gains (seventeen seats) by Sunbelt and far western states after the 1980 census. Conservatives also succeeded, for the first time since World War II, in making their cause intellectually respectable. Scholars and academics on the right flourished in new “think tanks”; writer William Buckley and economist Milton Friedman proved to be effective advocates of conservative causes in print and on television. Neoconservatism, led by Norman Podhoretz’s magazine Commentary, became fashionable among many intellectuals who were former liberal stalwarts. They denounced liberals for being too soft on the Communist threat abroad and too willing to compromise high standards at home in the face of demands for equality from African Americans, women, and the

 disadvantaged. Neoconservatives called for a reaffirmation of capitalism and a new emphasis on what was right about America rather than an obsessive concern with social ills. y the end of the 1970s, a decade marked by military defeat in Vietnam, political scandal that destroyed the administration of Richard Nixon, economic ills that vexed the country under Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter, and unprecedented social strains on families and traditional institutions, millions of Americans had come to believe that Cold War liberalism had run its course. Ronald Reagan, as the acknowledged leader of the conservative resurgence, was ideally placed to capitalize on this discontent. His personal charm softened the hard edges of his right-wing call to arms, and his conviction that America could regain its traditional self-confidence by reaffirming basic ideals had a broad appeal to a nation facing new challenges at home and abroad. In 1976, Reagan had barely lost to President Ford at the Republican convention; four years later, he overcame an early upset by George Bush in Iowa to win the GOP presidential nomination handily. In his acceptance speech at the Republican convention in Detroit, Reagan set forth the themes that endeared him to conservatives: less government, a balanced budget, family values, and peace through greater military spending. Unlike Barry Goldwater, who frightened people with his rigid ideology, Reagan offered reassurance and hope for the future. He spoke of restoring to the federal government “the capacity to do the people’s work without dominating their lives.” As historian Robert Dallek pointed out, Reagan “assured his listeners that he was no radical idealist courting defeat, but a sensible, thoroughly likable American with a surefire formula for success that would please everyone.” In Ronald Reagan, the Republicans had found the perfect figure to lead Americans into a new conservative era.

B


The Tempting of Richard Nixon
 What were the major accomplishments and failures of the Nixon presidency? Following the divisive campaign of 1968, Richard Nixon’s presidency proved to be one of the most controversial in American history. Nixon’s domestic policies had limited success, and though his diplomacy broke new ground in relations with China and the Soviet Union and ended American fighting in Vietnam, he was forced to resign the presidency under the dark cloud of the Watergate scandal.

Pragmatic Liberalism
 Nixon began his first term on a hopeful note, promising the nation peace and respite from the chaos of the 1960s. Rejecting the divisions that had driven Americans apart, he pledged in his inaugural address to bring the country together. “We cannot learn from one another,” he said, “until we stop shouting at one another—until we speak quietly enough so that our words can be heard as well as our voices.”

The Tempting of Richard Nixon


 Nixon’s moderate language appeared to herald a return to the politics of accommodation that had characterized the Eisenhower era. Faced with a Democratic Congress, Nixon, like Ike, reconciled himself to the broad outlines of the welfare state. Instead of trying to overthrow the Great Society, he focused on making the federal bureaucracy function more efficiently. In some areas he actually expanded federal programs and responsibilities. On civil rights, for example, Nixon was the first president to adopt affirmative action as an explicit policy. His labor secretary, George Shultz, applied the “Philadelphia plan,” which had evolved to ensure the hiring of minority contractors in Pennsylvania’s largest city, to other cities and eventually to all federal contracts worth more than $50,000. Nixon also expanded affirmative action to include women, vastly increasing the scope of the policy. The goal, a Nixon executive order explained, was for the federal government to achieve “the prompt and full utilization of minorities and women at all levels in all segments of its work force.” Nixon broke new ground in other areas associated with liberalism. He approved the creation of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, which assumed responsibility for reducing workplace injuries. He oversaw the establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the federal watchdog on environmental affairs. He signed the Clean Air Act, which provided the basis for tackling smog and other air pollutants. He supported automatic cost-of-living increases to Social Security, ensuring that the elderly not lose ground to the inflation that increasingly vexed the American economy. Many liberals suspected Nixon’s motives, and not without reason. Nixon’s liberalism was pragmatic, even opportunistic, rather than principled. In private conversations, he could be demeaning of African Americans, Jews, and other minorities. But, planning big changes in American foreign policy, he chose not to pick fights with congressional Democrats or buck the liberal tide that was still flowing from the 1960s. He did try to shape that tide. Under the label of the “new federalism,” he shifted responsibility for many social programs from Washington to state and local authorities. He developed the concept of revenue sharing, by which federal funds were dispersed to state, county, and city agencies to meet local needs. In 1972, he signed a law that shared $30 billion with local governments over a five-year period. An accompanying ceiling of $2.5 billion a year on federal welfare payments meant that much of the revenue-sharing payments had to be allocated by cities and states to programs previously paid for by the federal government. Nixon’s civil rights policy was similarly calculating. Action by Congress and the Johnson administration had ensured that massive desegregation of southern schools, delayed for more than a decade by legal action, would begin just as Nixon took office. Nixon and his attorney general, John Mitchell, decided to shift the responsibility for this process to the courts. In the summer of 1969, the Justice Department asked a federal judge to delay the integration of thirty-three school districts in Mississippi. The Supreme Court quickly ruled against the Justice Department, declaring that “the obligation of every school district is to terminate dual school systems at once.” Thus, in the minds of southern white voters, it was the hated Supreme Court, not Richard Nixon, who had forced them to integrate their schools.



 The upshot of Nixon’s domestic policies was to extend the welfare state in some areas, reshape it in others, and leave liberals and conservatives alike wondering just where Nixon stood.

 Détente Nixon didn’t really care, because foreign policy—not domestic policy—was his pride and joy. Nixon had thought long about the state of the world, and he was determined to improve it. To assist him in this endeavor, he appointed Henry Kissinger to be national security adviser. A refugee from Nazi Germany, Kissinger had become a professor of government at Harvard, the author of several influential books, and an acknowledged authority on international affairs. Nixon and Kissinger approached foreign policy from a practical, realistic perspective. Instead of viewing the Cold War as an ideological struggle for survival with Communism, they saw it as a traditional great-power rivalry, one to be managed and controlled rather than to be won. Nixon and Kissinger had a grand design. Realizing that recent events, especially the Vietnam War and the rapid Soviet arms buildup of the 1960s, had eroded America’s position of primacy in the world, they planned a strategic retreat. Russia had great military strength, but its economy was weak, and it had a dangerous rival in China. Nixon planned to use American trade—notably grain and high technology—to induce Soviet cooperation, while at the same time improving U.S. relations with China. Nixon and Kissinger shrewdly played the China card as their first step toward achieving détente—a relaxation of tension—with the Soviet Union. In February 1972, accompanied by a planeload of reporters and television camera crews, Nixon visited China, meeting with the Communist leaders and ending more than two decades of Sino–American hostility. Nixon agreed to establish an American liaison mission in Beijing as a first step toward diplomatic recognition. The Soviets, who viewed China as a dangerous adversary, responded by agreeing to an arms control pact with the United States. The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) had been under way since 1969. During a visit to Moscow in May 1972, Nixon signed two vital documents with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev. The first limited the two superpowers to two hundred antiballistic missiles (ABMs) apiece; the second froze the number of offensive ballistic missiles for a five-year period. The SALT I agreements recognized the existing Soviet lead in missiles, but the American deployment of multiple independently targeted reentry vehicles (MIRVs) ensured a continuing strategic advantage for the United States. The SALT I agreements were most important as a symbolic first step toward control of the nuclear arms race. They signified that the United States and the Soviet Union were trying to achieve a settlement of their differences by peaceful means.

Ending the Vietnam War
 Vietnam remained the one foreign policy challenge that Nixon could not overcome. He had a three-part plan to end the conflict—gradual withdrawal of American troops, accompanied by training of South Vietnamese forces to take over the



 CHAPTER 31

THE RISE OF A NEW CONSERVATISM, 1969–1988

 combat role; renewed bombing; and a hard line in negotiations with Hanoi. The number of American soldiers in Vietnam fell from 540,000 in early 1969 to less than 30,000 by 1972; domestic opposition to the war declined sharply with the accompanying drop in casualties and reductions in the draft call. Renewed bombing proved the most controversial part of the plan. As early as the spring of 1969, Nixon secretly ordered raids on Communist supply lines in neutral Cambodia. Then in April 1970, he ordered both air and ground strikes into Cambodia, causing a massive outburst of antiwar protests at home. Students demonstrated against the invasion of Cambodia on campuses across the nation. Tragedy struck at Kent State University in Ohio in early May. After rioters had firebombed an ROTC building, the governor sent in national guard troops who were taunted and harassed by irate students. The guardsmen then opened fire, killing four students and wounding eleven more. The victims were innocent bystanders; two were young women caught in the fusillade on their way between classes. A week later, two African American student demonstrators were killed at Jackson State

 College in Mississippi; soon riots and protests raged on more than four hundred campuses across the country. Nixon had little sympathy for the demonstrators, calling the students “bums” who were intent on “blowing up the campuses.” The “silent majority” to whom he appealed seemed to agree; one poll showed that most Americans blamed the students, not the national guard, for the deaths at Kent State. An “Honor America Day” program, held in Washington, D.C., on July 4, attracted 250,000 people who heard Billy Graham and Bob Hope endorse the president’s policies. Nixon’s Cambodian invasion did little to shorten the Vietnam War, but the public reaction reinforced the president’s resolve not to surrender. The third tactic, negotiation with Hanoi, finally proved successful. Beginning in the summer of 1969, Kissinger held a series of secret meetings with North Vietnam’s foreign minister, Le Duc Tho. In the summer and fall of 1972, the two sides neared agreement, but South Vietnamese objections blocked a settlement before the 1972 election. When the North Vietnamese tried to make last-minute changes, Nixon ordered a series of heavy

 The photograph depicts the horror of the Kent State University shooting of thirteen unarmed college students by Ohio National Guardsmen on May 4, 1970. Some of the students who were shot were protesting President Nixon’s invasion of Cambodia. In response to the Kent State tragedy, hundreds of high schools, colleges, and universities across America closed due to a student strike.



The Tempting of Richard Nixon


 B-52 raids on Hanoi that finally led to the signing of a truce on January 27, 1973. In return for the release of all American prisoners of war, the United States agreed to remove its troops from South Vietnam within sixty days. The political clauses allowed the North Vietnamese to keep their troops in the South, thus virtually guaranteeing future control of all Vietnam by the Communists. For two years after the accords the Communists waited, weighing, among other things, the willingness of Americans to continue to support South Vietnam. As Nixon became enmeshed in the Watergate scandal, his grip on foreign policy weakened, and by the time he was forced from office in August 1974, most Americans simply wanted to forget Vietnam. The following spring the Communists mounted a major offensive and in just weeks completed their takeover of Vietnam. Ten years after the American escalation of the war, and after the loss of sixty thousand American lives, the American effort to preserve South Vietnam from Communism had proved a tragic failure.

Election of 1972
Electoral Vote by State
REPUBLICAN
Richard M. Nixon 


46,740,323


DEMOCRATIC
George S. McGovern 


28,901,598


MINOR PARTIES
John Hospers 


1,983,231




77,625,152
















































 HAWAII



WASH., D.C.



1 11








 ALASKA







The Watergate Scandal












 Nixon’s Vietnam problems and especially his formulation of détente made him sensitive to the unauthorized release of information about American foreign policy. He had good reason for fearing leaks, since they might tip the administration’s hand in sensitive negotiations with the Communists. When leaks did occur, Nixon grew outraged and demanded that they be stopped. The White House established an informal office of covert surveillance— the “plumbers,” its operatives were called—which began by investigating the national security breaches but, during the presidential campaign of 1972, branched out into spying on Nixon’s Democratic opponents and engaging in political dirty tricks. Five of the “plumbers” were arrested in June 1972 during a break-in at the headquarters of the Democratic National Committee at the Watergate office complex in Washington. The Nixon White House took pains to conceal its connection to what its spokesman dismissed as a “third-rate burglary attempt.” Nixon personally ordered the cover-up. “I want you to stonewall it, let them plead the Fifth Amendment, cover-up, or anything else,” Nixon told John Mitchell, his former attorney general, and then campaign director. The cover-up succeeded long enough to ensure Nixon’s landslide reelection victory over Democrat George S. McGovern of South Dakota, but in the months after the election the cover-up began to unravel. James McCord, one of the Watergate burglars, was the first to break the silence. Sentenced to a long jail term by Judge John Sirica, McCord asked for leniency, informing Sirica he had received money from the White House and had been promised a presidential pardon in return for his silence. By April 1973, Nixon was compelled to fire aide John Dean, who had directed the cover-up but who now refused to become a scapegoat. Two other aides, H. R. Haldeman and John Ehrlichman, were forced to resign. The Senate then appointed a special committee to investigate the unfolding Watergate scandal. In a week of dramatic testimony, Dean revealed the president’s personal involvement in the cover-up. Still, it was basically a matter of whose word was to be believed—the president’s or a discredited aide’s—and Nixon hoped to weather the storm.

Popular Vote








 The committee’s discovery of the existence of tape recordings of conversations in the Oval Office, made regularly since 1970, proved the beginning of the end for Nixon. At first, the president tried to invoke executive privilege to withhold the tapes. When Archibald Cox, appointed as Watergate special prosecutor, demanded the release of the tapes, Nixon fired him. Yet the new Watergate prosecutor, Leon Jaworski, continued to press for the tapes. Nixon tried to release only a few of the less damaging ones, but the Supreme Court ruled unanimously in June 1974 that the tapes had to be turned over to Judge Sirica. By this time, the House Judiciary Committee, acting on evidence compiled by the staff of the Senate committee, had voted three articles of impeachment, charging Nixon with obstruction of justice, abuse of power, and contempt of Congress. Faced with the release of tapes that directly implicated him in the cover-up, the president chose to resign on August 9, 1974. Nixon’s resignation proved to be the culmination of the Watergate scandal. The entire episode revealed both the weaknesses and strengths of the American political system. Most regrettable was the abuse of presidential authority—a reflection both of the growing power of the modern presidency and of fatal flaws in Richard Nixon’s character. Unlike previous executive branch scandals such as the Whiskey Ring and Teapot Dome, Watergate involved a lust for power rather than for money. Realizing he had reached the White House almost by accident, Nixon did everything possible to retain his hold on his office. He used the plumbers to maintain executive secrecy, and he directed the Internal Revenue Service and the Justice Department to punish his enemies and reward his friends.



 CHAPTER 31

THE RISE OF A NEW CONSERVATISM, 1969–1988

 But Watergate also demonstrated the vitality of a democratic society. The press showed how investigative reporting could unlock even the most closely guarded executive secrets. Judge Sirica proved that an independent judiciary was still the best bulwark for individual freedom. And Congress rose to the occasion, both by carrying out a successful investigation of executive misconduct and by following a scrupulous and nonpartisan impeachment process that left Nixon with no chance to escape his fate. The nation survived the shock of Watergate with its institutions intact. John Mitchell and twenty-five presidential aides were sentenced to jail terms. Congress, in decline since Lyndon Johnson’s exercise of executive dominance, was rejuvenated, with its members now intent on extending congressional authority into other areas of American life.

The Economy of Stagflation
 How were oil and inflation linked during the 1970s? In the midst of Watergate, the outbreak of war in the Middle East threatened a vital national interest: the unimpeded and inexpensive flow of oil to the United States. The resulting energy crisis helped spark a raging price inflation that had a profound impact on the national economy and on American society at large.

War and Oil


 On October 6, 1973, Egypt and Syria launched a surprise attack on Israel. The fighting followed decades of tension between Israel and its Arab neighbors, which had grown only worse upon the stunning Israeli victory in the Six Days’ War of 1967. In that conflict, the Israelis routed the Arabs, View the Closer Look Watergate Shipwreck seizing the Golan Heights from Syria, the Sinai Peninsula from Egypt, and Jerusalem and the West Bank from Jordan. The Arabs ached for revenge, and in 1973 the Egyptians and Syrians attacked. Catching Israel off guard, they won early battles but eventually lost the initiative and were forced to give up the ground they had recovered. The Israelis would have delivered another devastating defeat to the Arabs if not for the diplomatic intervention of Nixon and Kissinger, who, despite America’s previous strong support for Israel, believed a decisive Israeli victory would destabilize the Middle East even more. The American diplomatic triumph, however, was offset by an unforeseen consequence of the October War (also called the Yom Kippur War, as it started on the Jewish holy day). On October 17, the Arab members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) announced a 5 percent cut in oil production, and vowed additional cuts of 5 percent each month until Israel surrendered the lands it had taken in 1967. Three days later, following Nixon’s announcement of an emergency aid package for Israel, Saudi Arabia cut off oil shipments to the United States. The Arab oil embargo had a disastrous impact on the American economy. With Arab producers cutting production by 25 percent from the September 1973 level, world supplies fell by 10 percent. For the United States, which imported one-third of its daily consumption, this meant a loss of nearly 2 million barrels a day. Long lines formed at gas stations as motorists who feared running out of fuel kept filling their tanks. The Watergate cartoon by Boston Globe cartoonist, Paul Michael Szep, “I’ve decided not to tell A dramatic increase in oil prices proved to you about the alleged shipwreck,” was published on July 11, 1973. The title illustrates the irony of be a far more significant result of the embargo. a shipwrecked Attorney General John Mitchell and President Nixon floundering in political waters After the Arab embargo began, OPEC, led as a result of Mitchell’s and Nixon’s participation in the planning and cover-up of the break-in of Democratic National Committee headquarters. by the shah of Iran, raised crude oil prices

The Economy of Stagflation




THE OIL SHOCKS: PRICE INCREASES OF CRUDE OIL AND GASOLINE, 1973–1985
Price per gallon of regular 
 Average price per barrel $35

$1.40




1.20
Crude Oil


Gasoline




1.00




.80




.60




.40




.20
















 fourfold. In the United States, gasoline prices at the pumps nearly doubled in a few weeks’ time, while the cost of home heating fuel rose even more. Nixon responded with a series of temporary measures, including pleas to Americans to turn down their thermostats in homes and offices and avoid driving simply for pleasure. When the Arab oil embargo ended in March, after Kissinger negotiated an Israeli pullback in the Sinai, the American public relaxed. Gasoline once again became plentiful, thermostats were raised, and people resumed their love affair with the automobile. The energy crisis, however, did not end with the lifting of the embargo. The Arab action marked the beginning of a new era in American history. The United States, with only 6 percent of the world’s population, had been responsible for nearly 40 percent of the world’s energy consumption. In 1970, domestic oil production began to decline; the embargo served only to highlight the fact that the nation was now dependent on other countries, notably those in the Persian Gulf, for its economic well-being. A nation that based its way of life on abundance and expansion suddenly was faced with the reality of limited resources and economic stagnation.

The Great Inflation
 The price spike from the October War was merely the first of the “oil shocks” of the 1970s. Cheap energy had been a primary contributor to the relentless growth of the American economy after World War II. The GNP had more than doubled between 1950 and 1973; the American people had come to base their standard of living on oil prices that yielded gas at about 35 cents a gallon. Large cars, sprawling suburbs, detached houses heated by fuel oil and natural gas and cooled by central air-conditioning produced a dependence on inexpensive energy that Americans took for granted. The quadrupling of oil prices in 1973–1974 suddenly put all this at risk. Because oil or its equivalent in energy is required for the production and transportation of manufactured goods, the rising oil prices caused the prices of nearly everything else to increase as well. Most services require energy; they went up as well.



 OPEC oil embargo













 Other factors added to the trend of rising prices. The Vietnam War created federal budget deficits that grew from $63 billion for the entire decade of the 1960s to a total of $420 billion in the 1970s. A worldwide shortage of food, resulting from both rapid population increases and poor harvests around the globe in the mid-1970s, triggered a 20 percent rise in American food prices in 1973 alone. But above all else, the primary source of the great inflation of the 1970s was the six-fold increase in petroleum prices. The impact on consumers was staggering. The price of an automobile jumped 72 percent between 1973 and 1978. During the decade, the price of a hamburger doubled, milk went from 28 to 59 cents a quart, and a loaf of bread—the proverbial staff of life— rose from 24 to 89 cents. Corresponding wage increases failed to keep pace with inflation; in 1980, the real income of the average American family fell by 5.5 percent. Often inflation signals economic exuberance, and rising prices indicate a rapid rate of growth. Not so with the inflation of the 1970s, which reflected economic weakness. The great inflation contributed to the worst recession in the United States since World War II. American GNP dropped by 6 percent in 1974, and unemployment rose to more than 9 percent, the highest level since the Great Depression of the 1930s. President Gerald R. Ford, who followed Richard Nixon into the White House (see p. 749), responded belatedly to the economic crisis by proposing a tax cut to stimulate consumer spending. Congress passed a $23 billion reduction in taxes in early 1975, which led to a gradual recovery by 1976. The resulting budget deficits, however, helped keep inflation above 5 percent and prevented a return to full economic health. Jimmy Carter of Georgia, who succeeded Ford (see pp. 749–751), had little more success in reviving the economy. Continued federal deficits and relatively high interest rates kept the economy sluggish throughout 1977 and 1978. Then in 1979, the outbreak of the Iranian Revolution and the overthrow of the shah touched off another oil shock. The members of the OPEC cartel took advantage of the situation to double prices over the next eighteen months. A barrel of crude oil now cost more than $30. Gasoline prices climbed to more



 CHAPTER 31

THE RISE OF A NEW CONSERVATISM, 1969–1988

 than $1 a gallon at American service stations, leading to an even greater wave of inflation than in 1973. Finally, in late 1979, the Federal Reserve Board, led by Carter appointee Paul Volcker, began a sustained effort to halt inflation by mandating increased bank reserves to curtail the supply of money in circulation. The new tight-money policy served only to heighten inflation in the short run by driving interest rates up to record levels. By the spring of 1980, the prime interest rate reached 20 percent.

The Shifting American Economy
 Inflation and the oil shocks helped bring about significant changes in American business and industry in the 1970s. The most obvious result was the slowing of the rate of economic growth, with the GNP advancing only 3.2 percent for the decade, compared to 3.7 percent in the 1960s. More important, American industry began to lose its position of primacy in world markets. In 1959, U.S. firms had been the leaders in eleven of thirteen major industrial sectors, ranging from manufacturing to banking. By 1976, American companies led in only seven areas, and in all but one category—aerospace—U.S. corporations had declined in relation to Japanese and western European competitors. The most serious losses came in the heavy industries in which the United States had once led the world. New steel producers in western Europe, Japan, and the developing world, using more advanced technology and aided by government subsidies, were producing steel far more efficiently than their American counterparts. As a result, by the end of the 1970s, American firms were closing down their obsolete mills in the East and Midwest, idling thousands of workers. The foreign competition did even more damage in the automobile industry. The oil shocks led to a consumer demand for small, efficient cars. German and Japanese automakers seized the opportunity to expand their once low volume of sales in the United States. By 1977, imported cars had captured nearly a fifth of the American market, with Japan leading the way. In response, Detroit spent $70 billion retooling to produce a new fleet of smaller, lighter front-wheel-drive cars, but American manufacturers barely survived the foreign invasion. Only government-backed loans helped the Chrysler Corporation stave off bankruptcy. The decline in manufacturing led to significant shifts in the labor movement. The industrial unions such as the United Automobile Workers (UAW) lost members steadily in the 1960s and 1970s. At the same time, public employee unions enjoyed rapid growth and acceptance. The Great Society legislation, the baby boom with the resulting need for many more teachers, and the growth of social agencies on the state and local level opened up new jobs for social workers, teachers, and government employees. By the end of the 1980s, members of public employee unions made up over 20 percent of the AFL-CIO ranks, while the separate National Education Association (NEA) became the nation’s largest single union with two million members—600,000 more than the Teamsters. The rise of public employee unions also opened the way for greater participation by African Americans and women than in the older trade and industrial unions. Just as public employee unions prospered from the shifts in the American economy in the 1970s, so did many American corporations.

 The multinationals that had emerged in the boom years of the 1960s continued to thrive. IBM sold computers all over the globe. The growth of conglomerates—huge corporations that combined many dissimilar industrial concerns—accelerated as companies such as Gulf & Western and the Transamerica Corporation diversified by buying up Hollywood studios, insurance companies, and recreational equipment manufacturers. The growth of high-technology industries proved to be the most profitable new trend of the 1970s. Computer companies and electronics firms grew at a rapid rate, especially after the development of the silicon chip, a small, waferthin microprocessor capable of performing complex calculations almost instantly. The result was a geographic shift of American industry from the East and Midwest to the Sunbelt. Electronics manufacturers flourished in California, Texas, and North Carolina, where they grew up around major universities. The absence of entrenched labor unions, the availability of skilled labor, and the warm and attractive climate of the southern and western states lured many new concerns to the Sunbelt. At the same time, the decline of the steel and auto industries was leading to massive unemployment and economic stagnation in the northern industrial heartland. The overall pattern was one of an economy in transition. The oil shocks had caused serious problems of inflation, slower economic growth, and rising unemployment rates. But American business still displayed the enterprise and the ability to develop new technologies that gave promise of renewed economic vitality.

A
New Environmentalism  The oil shocks had another effect: They injected new life into the environmental movement. The high price of gasoline made pocketbook conservationists of millions of Americans who hadn’t thought twice about their country’s heavy dependence on foreign oil; it also spurred Congress to press automakers to improve the fuel efficiency of the cars they built. The 1975 Energy Policy and Conservation Act set corporate standards for gas mileage; manufacturers who failed to achieve the mandated averages faced stiff fines and other sanctions. Between the high prices and the federal requirements, American drivers began squeezing more miles out of each tank of gas. Environmentalists and consumers meanwhile began searching for alternative sources of energy. Solar power appealed to some as being clean and endlessly renewable. But it was also expensive (solar panels and related technologies remained underdeveloped) and intermittent (clouds cut off the power). Hydropower—electricity generated by falling water—was better proven and more reliable, but most of the suitable dam sites had already been built upon. Wind power worked in some areas (where the wind blew frequently and without obstruction), but those were precisely the areas where few people lived. Coal power was reliable, proven, and cheap, but it was also dirty (the gases emitted by coal plants fouled the air) and dangerous (to the men and women who mined the coal). Nuclear power had its advocates. It had been in use in America since the 1950s, and its characteristics were well known. Its fuel— uranium—was essentially inexhaustible, and nuclear reactors, in normal operations, produced no noxious gases. Nor did they

Private Lives, Public Issues


 produce any “greenhouse gases”—carbon dioxide and other heattrapping gases—that contribute to global warming, a rise in average temperatures that was just beginning to worry some Earth scientists (and would worry them much more in coming decades). But nuclear power made many environmentalists nervous. The waste products of the reactors were radioactive, and would remain so for thousands of years. Guaranteeing that the wastes would not contaminate water supplies—for fifty generations into the future—was a daunting challenge. And occasionally nuclear reactors malfunctioned in terrifying ways. In March 1979, a reactor at Three Mile Island, near Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, nearly melted down when cooling systems failed. Tens of thousands of people living in the vicinity fled, and though the reactor didn’t explode, as authorities had feared it might, the close call inspired grave second thoughts about nuclear power. A more severe accident at Chernobyl, in the Soviet Ukraine in 1986, released large amounts of radiation into the atmosphere and caused many deaths, reinforcing the fears. The debate over alternative energy sources was part of a larger debate on the environment. Earth Day, first celebrated in April 1970, became an annual event at which participants considered the effect of human actions on their natural surroundings. Groups such as the Sierra Club and Friends of the Earth lobbied to reinforce antipollution laws, to clean up toxic wastes, and to increase gas mileage standards further. Business associations typically resisted the measures as too restrictive and expensive. The results were mixed. Congress strengthened the Clean Air Act, and in 1980 it created the federal “Superfund” for toxic cleanups. But oil imports continued to rise, by some 50 percent between 1973 and 1979, to nine million barrels a day, or half what the country consumed.

Private Lives, Public Issues
 How did private life change during this period? Sweeping changes in the private lives of the American people began in the 1970s and continued for the rest of the century. The traditional American family, with the husband as wage earner and the wife as homemaker, gave way to much more diverse living arrangements. The number of working women, including wives and mothers, increased sharply; the wage gap between the sexes narrowed, but women still lagged noticeably behind men in earnings. Then, in the years following 1970, came the emergence of an active gay rights movement as more and more gay, lesbian, and bisexual Americans began to disclose their sexual identities and demand an end to discrimination.

The Changing American Family
 Family life underwent a number of significant shifts after 1970. The most notable was a decline in the number of families with two parents and one or more children under 18. By the end of the 1980s, in only one two-parent family out of five was the mother solely engaged in child rearing. A few fathers stayed at home with the children, but in the great majority of these families, both parents worked outside the home.



 The traditional nuclear family of the 1950s no longer prevailed in America by the end of the twentieth century. The number of married couple households with children dropped from 30 percent in the 1970s to 23 percent by 2000. The number of unmarried couples doubled in the 1990s, while adults living alone surpassed the number of married couples with children for the first time in American history. “Being married is great,” commented demographer William H. Frey, “but being married with kids is tougher in today’s society with spouses in different jobs and expensive day care and schools.” The divorce rate, which doubled between the mid-1960s and the late 1970s, leveled off for the rest of the century. Nevertheless, half of all first marriages still ended in divorce. After a sharp fall in the 1970s, the birthrate climbed again as the baby boom generation began to mature. There was a marked increase in the number of births to women over age 30, as well as a very high proportion of children born to single mothers, who composed 7 percent of all households by 2000, a 25 percent increase since 1990. Conservatives, alarmed by the decline of the nuclear family, called for change. “We need to discourage people from living together outside of marriage,” observed Bridget Maher of the Family Research Council, “and encourage them to have children within marriage.” For better or worse, the American family structure changed significantly in the last three decades of the twentieth century, with a large number of people either never marrying or postponing marriage until late in the childbearing period. The traditional family unit, with the working father and the mother rearing the children at home, rapidly declined. Most mothers worked outside the home, and many were the sole support for their children. The proportion of children living with only one parent doubled in twenty years. Women without partners headed more than one-third of all impoverished families, and children made up 40 percent of the nation’s poor. Although politicians, especially Republicans, refer to family values during campaigns, the fact remains that the American family underwent great stress due to social changes in the last third of the twentieth century, and children suffered disproportionately.

Gains and Setbacks for Women
 American women experienced significant changes in their way of life and their place in society in the last quarter of the twentieth century. The prevailing theme concerned the increasing percentage of working women. There was a rapid movement of women into the labor force in the 1970s; six million more married women held jobs by the end of the decade as two incomes became increasingly necessary to keep up with inflation. The trend continued through the 1980s. Fully 61 percent of the nearly nineteen million new jobs created during the decade were filled by women; many of these new jobs, however, were entry-level or low-paying service positions. Women scored some impressive breakthroughs. They began to enter corporation boardrooms, became presidents of major universities, and were admitted to the nation’s military academies. Women entered blue-collar, professional, and small-business fields traditionally dominated by men. Ronald Reagan’s appointment of Sandra Day O’Connor to the Supreme Court in 1981 marked a historic first; Bill Clinton doubled the number of women on the Court with his selection of Ruth Bader Ginsburg.



 CHAPTER 31

THE RISE OF A NEW CONSERVATISM, 1969–1988

MASS. VT. MAINE

WASH. N. DAK.

 MONT.

MINN. N.H.

 OREG.

 MICH.

WYO. NEBR. NEV.

 UTAH

 COLO.

CALIF. ARIZ.

 OKLA.

 TEXAS

PA. OHIO ILL. IND. W. VA. VA. MO. KY. N.C. TENN. S.C. ARK. ALA. GA. MISS.

 IOWA

 KANS.

N. MEX.

N.Y.


 WIS.

S. DAK.

 IDAHO

 LA.

R.I.
CONN. N.J. DEL. MD.

 FLA.

ALASKA
States ratifying HAWAII 
States not
 ratifying

VOTING ON THE EQUAL RIGHTS AMENDMENT
By the end of 1974, thirty-four states had ratified the ERA; Indiana finally approved the amendment in 1977, but the remaining fifteen states held out, leaving ratification three states short of the required three-fourths majority. Yet at the same time, women encountered a great deal of resistance. Most women continued to work in female-dominated fields— as nurses, secretaries, teachers, and waitresses. Those who entered such “male” areas as management and administration soon encountered the so-called glass ceiling, which kept them from advancing beyond midlevel executive status. In 1990, only 4.3 percent of corporate officers were women. Most in business worked at the middle and lower rungs of management with staff jobs in personnel and public relations, not key operational positions in sales and marketing that would lead to the boardroom; women held fewer than 3 percent of the top jobs in Fortune 500 companies. The economic boom of the 1990s, however, led to a steady increase in the number of women executives; in 1998, there was an increase of 514,000. Even with these gains, however, by 2004 women’s wages still averaged only 76.5 percent of men’s earnings. A college education helped close the gap, but a woman with a degree made only $600 a year more on the average than a man with a high school diploma. Younger women did best; those between 16 and 24 earned almost 90 cents for every dollar paid to a male in the same age group. Older women, who often had no other source of support, fared poorly; those over the age of 50 earned only 64 percent as much as men their age. Feminists had once hoped to close the gender gap by the year 2000, but experts predicted women would not reach pay equity with men until 2018. The most encouraging development for women came in business ownership. Often blocked by the glass ceiling and seeking flexible schedules, more and more women went into business for themselves. The number of female business owners increased 40 percent between 1987 and 1992, twice the national rate of business growth. A women’s trade group estimated that in 1996 women owned almost eight million businesses, employing more than eighteen million workers—one out of four American workers. A speaker at the first National Women’s Economic Summit in 1996 exaggerated only slightly in crediting her group with restoring 
 prosperity, claiming that “the American economy has been revitalized in good measure because of the participation of and contributions of women business owners.” Beyond economic opportunity, the women’s movement had two goals. The first was ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA). Approved by Congress in 1972, the ERA stated simply, “Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or any state on account of sex.” Within a year, twenty-two states had approved the amendment, but the efforts gradually faltered just three states short of ratification. The opposition came in part from working-class women who feared, as one union leader explained, that those employed as “maids, laundry workers, hospital cleaners, or dishwashers” would lose the protection of state laws that regulated wages and hours of work for women. Right-wing activist Phyllis Schlafly led an organized effort to defeat the ERA, claiming the amendment would lead to unisex toilets, homosexual marriages, and the drafting of women. The National Organization of Women (NOW) fought back, persuading Congress to extend the time for ratification by three years and waging intense campaigns for approval in Florida and Illinois. But the deadline for ratification finally passed on June 30, 1982, with the ERA forces still three states short. NOW leader Eleanor Smeal vowed a continuing struggle: “The crusade is not over. We know that we are the wave of the future.” The women’s movement focused even more of its energies in protecting a major victory it had won in Roe v. Wade in 1973. (See the Law and Society essay, “Roe v. Wade: The Struggle over Women’s Reproductive Rights,” pp. 760–763.) Right-to-life groups, consisting mainly of orthodox Catholics, fundamentalist Protestants, and conservatives, fought back. In 1978, with strong support from President Carter, Congress passed the Hyde amendment, which denied the use of federal funds to pay for abortions for poor women. Nevertheless, prochoice groups organized privately funded family planning agencies and abortion clinics to give more women a chance to exercise their constitutional right to abortion. As Presidents Reagan and Bush appointed more conservative judges to the Court, however, prochoice groups began to fear the future overturn of Roe v. Wade. The Court avoided a direct challenge, contenting itself with lesser actions that upheld the rights of states to regulate abortion clinics, impose a 24-hour waiting period, and require the approval of one parent or a judge before a minor could have an abortion. Abortion became an issue in presidential contests, with the Republicans upholding a prolife position and the Democrats taking a prochoice stand. Bill Clinton’s election and appointment of Ruth Bader Ginsburg to the Court appeared to end the danger to Roe v. Wade, but in 2000 the Court margin in rejecting a Nebraska law forbidding certain late-term abortions fell to a bare majority, 5–4. And even the exercise of the right to abortion proved difficult and sometimes dangerous in view of the often violent protests of prolife groups outside abortion clinics. For many women, abortion was a hard-won right they still had to struggle to protect.

The Gay Liberation Movement
 On the night of June 27, 1969, a squad of New York policemen raided the Stonewall Inn, a Greenwich Village bar frequented by “drag queens” and lesbians. As the patrons were being herded into

Private Lives, Public Issues


Read the Document




Roe v. Wade (January 22, 1973)


 Roe v. Wade exerted a tremendous impact throughout the country, as only four states had enacted laws guaranteeing a woman widespread access to an abortion at the time of the ruling. The abortion issue continues to be a major source of controversy within U.S. politics and society.

 vans, a crowd of gay onlookers began to jeer and taunt the police. A riot quickly broke out. “Beer cans and bottles were heaved at the windows and a rain of coins descended on the cops,” reported the Village Voice. “Almost by signal the crowd erupted into cobblestone and bottle heaving.” The next night, more than four hundred police officers battled two thousand gay demonstrators through the streets of Greenwich Village. The two-day Stonewall Riots marked the beginning of the modern gay liberation movement. Refusing to play the role of victims any longer, gays and lesbians decided to affirm their sexual orientation and demand an end to discrimination against homosexuals. Within a few days, two new organizations were formed in New York, the Gay Liberation Front and the Gay Activist Alliance, with branches and offshoots quickly appearing in cities across the country. The basic theme of gay liberation was to urge all homosexuals to “come out of the closet” and affirm with pride their sexual identity; instead of shame, they would find freedom and self-respect in the very act of coming out. “Come out for freedom! Come out now!” proclaimed the Gay Liberation Front’s newspaper. “Come out of the closet before the door is nailed shut!” In the course of the 1970s, hundreds of thousands of gays and lesbians responded to this call. They formed more than a

 thousand local clubs and organizations and won a series of notable victories. In 1974, the American Psychiatric Association stopped classifying homosexuality as a mental disorder, and by the end of the decade, half the states had repealed their sodomy statutes. Gays fought hard in cities and states for laws forbidding discrimination against homosexuals in housing and employment, and in 1980, they finally succeeded in getting a gay rights plank in the Democratic National Platform. In the 1980s, the onset of the AIDS epidemic (see pp. 748–749) forced the gay liberation movement onto the defensive. Stung by the accusation that AIDS was a “gay disease,” male homosexuals faced new public condemnation at a time when they were trying desperately to care for the growing number of victims of the disease within their ranks. The gay organizations formed in the 1970s to win new rights now were channeling their energies into caring for the ill, promoting safe sex practices, and fighting for more public funding to help conquer AIDS. In 1986, ACT UP (AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power) began a series of violent demonstrations in an effort to shock the nation into doing more about AIDS. ACT UP members disrupted public meetings, chained themselves to a New York Stock Exchange balcony, and spray-painted outlines of corpses on the streets of San Francisco to call attention to those who had died of AIDS.



 CHAPTER 31

THE RISE OF A NEW CONSERVATISM, 1969–1988

 The movement also continued to stimulate gay consciousness in the 1980s. In 1987, an estimated six hundred thousand gays and lesbians took part in a march on Washington on behalf of gay rights. Every year afterward, gay groups held a National Coming Out Day in October to encourage homosexuals to proclaim proudly their sexual identity. In a more controversial move, some gay leaders encouraged “outing”—releasing the names of prominent homosexuals, primarily politicians and movie stars— in an effort to make the nation aware of how many Americans were gay or lesbian. Gay leaders claimed there were more than twenty million gays and lesbians in the nation, basing this estimate on a Kinsey report which had stated in the late 1940s that one in ten American males had engaged in homosexual behavior. A sociological survey released in the spring of 1993 contradicted those numbers, finding only 1.1 percent of American males exclusively homosexual. Whatever the actual number, it was clear by the 1990s that gays and lesbians formed a significant minority that had succeeded in forcing the nation, however grudgingly, to respect its rights. There was one battle, however, in which victory eluded the gay liberation movement. In the 1992 election, gays and lesbians strongly backed Democratic candidate Bill Clinton, who promised, if elected, to end the ban on homosexuals in the military. In his first days in office, however, President Clinton stirred up great resistance in the Pentagon and Congress when he tried to issue an executive order forbidding such discrimination. The Joint Chiefs of Staff and many Democrats, led by Georgia Senator Sam Nunn, warned that acceptance of gays and lesbians would destroy morale and seriously weaken the armed forces. Clinton finally settled for the Pentagon’s compromise “Don’t ask, don’t tell” policy that would permit homosexuals to continue serving in the military as they had in the past as long as they did not reveal their sexual preference and refrained from homosexual conduct. However disappointed gays and lesbians were in Clinton’s retreat, their leaders understood that the real problem was the resistance of mainstream America to full acceptance of homosexuality. Public attitudes toward gays and lesbians seemed to be changing in the 1990s, but the growing tolerance had definite limits. In a 1996 poll, 85 percent of those questioned believed that gays should be treated equally in the workplace, up from 76 percent in 1992. Violence against gays, however, continued, most notably in the 1998 fatal beating of Matthew Shepard, a 21-year-old gay college student, in Wyoming. The brutal attack spurred calls for hate-crime legislation, and the judge in the case, banning a so-called gay-panic defense, sentenced Shepard’s assailant to two consecutive terms of life imprisonment. The issue of same-sex marriage came to a head at the end of the century. In 1996, President Clinton signed the Defense of Marriage Act, which decreed that states did not have to recognize same-sex marriages performed elsewhere. But in 2000, following a state supreme court ruling, the Vermont legislature legalized civil unions between individuals of the same sex, enabling gays and lesbians to receive all the legal benefits available to married couples. Whether sanctioned by law or not, the number of gay and lesbian households steadily increased; the 2000 census revealed that there were nearly six hundred thousand homes in America headed by

 same-sex couples. While nearly one-quarter were in California and New York, there was at least one gay or lesbian couple living in 99 percent of the nation’s counties.

 The AIDS Epidemic The outbreak of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) in the early 1980s took most Americans by surprise. Even health experts had difficulty grasping the nature and extent of the new public health threat. Doctors first noticed a few cases of a rare form of pneumonia and an unusual type of skin cancer in male patients in New York City and San Francisco in 1981. The Centers for Disease Control noted the phenomenon in a June 1981 bulletin, but it was several years before researchers finally identified it as a hitherto unknown human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). HIV apparently originated in Central Africa and spread to the United States, where it found its first victims primarily among gay men. Initially, AIDS was perceived as a threat only to gay men. With a growing sense of urgency as the death toll mounted, gay men began to practice safer sex, using condoms and confining themselves to trusted partners. It soon became clear, however, that AIDS could not be so easily contained. It began to appear among intravenous (IV) drug users who shared the same needles and eventually among hemophiliacs and others receiving frequent blood transfusions. The threat of a contaminated national blood supply terrified middle-class America, as did the possibility of the spread of AIDS to heterosexuals. Scientists tried to reassure the public by explaining that the virus could be spread only by the exchange of bodily fluids, primarily blood and semen, and not by casual contact. The death of former movie star Rock Hudson from AIDS in the summer of 1985, however, intensified the sense of national panic. Controversy soon developed over proposals for mandatory blood tests for suspected HIV carriers and for the quarantine of AIDS victims. The integrity of hospital blood supplies caused the most realistic concern; in 1985, a new test finally gave reassurance that transfusions could be performed safely. The Reagan administration proved slow and halting in its approach to the AIDS epidemic. The lack of sympathy for gays and a need to reduce the deficit worked against any large increase in health spending; what little money was devoted to AIDS went almost entirely for research rather than for educational measures to slow its spread. The only real leadership came from Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, who surprised his conservative backers in 1986 by coming out boldly with proposals for sex education, the use of condoms to ensure “safer sex,” and confidential blood testing to help contain the disease. While the administration dallied, the grim toll mounted. Because the average time between the initial HIV infection and the first symptoms of AIDS was five years and the delay could be as long as fourteen years, efforts at prevention had little immediate impact. In November 1983, there were 2,803 known cases and 1,416 deaths; by the time Hollywood film actor Rock Hudson died from complications of HIV/AIDS in mid-1985, more than 12,000 cases and more than 6,000 deaths had been reported. Growing public concern finally led to action. In 1987, Reagan appointed a special presidential commission headed by Admiral James Watkins, a former chief of naval operations, to study the

Politics and Diplomacy After Watergate


 AIDS epidemic. The Watkins report in 1988 criticized the administration’s AIDS efforts as “inconsistent” and recommended a new effort that included antidiscrimination legislation and explicit prevention education. Koop responded by sending out a pamphlet titled “Understanding AIDS” to 107 million households, while in the fall, Congress voted to spend $1.3 billion to fight AIDS, with much of the money going for confidential testing and counseling and home care for victims. Despite the new efforts, the epidemic continued to grow. In 1987, there were 50,000 cases; by mid-1989, the count had reached 100,000. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia, reported more than 200,000 cases at the end of 1991; the total had increased to more than 500,000 by mid-1996. By then, 345,000 AIDS victims had died, making it the leading cause of death for Americans aged 25 to 44. The number of those infected with HIV appeared to be stabilizing by the mid-1990s at between 650,000 and 900,000. Yet, what was once known as the gay disease had spread far beyond that one group in society by the end of the century. Minorities and the young were at greatest risk. African American youths made up two-thirds of the new HIV cases among people under 25. “The disease is disappearing from the mainstream” claimed a Washington, D.C., clinic director, “and becoming a disease of kids who are disenfranchised anyway.” The most encouraging development was a fall-off in the death rate from AIDS that began in the mid-1990s. Health officials attributed the decline to heavier spending on treatment and prevention and, above all, to powerful new drug combinations. By 2001, however, the drop in new cases and deaths from AIDS began to level off. “The latest data,” commented one expert in August 2001, “suggest that the era of dramatic declines is now over.” There was a particularly alarming increase in the number of new cases among young gay men who apparently believed that the new treatment had made the disease manageable. But unfortunately the so-called AIDS cocktail was very expensive, running as high as $15,000 a year, and did not work for everyone. And even more disturbing was the growing realization that AIDS was threatening to decimate the population of developing countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa.

Politics and Diplomacy
After Watergate
 Why did the presidencies of Ford and Carter largely fail? The economic and social disruptions of the era contributed to problems of governance left over from Watergate. Even as many Americans worried about shrinking paychecks and disintegrating families, Congress increasingly challenged the prerogatives of the presidency. This made life in the White House difficult for Richard Nixon’s immediate successors—and it made solving America’s pressing problems nearly impossible.



 who had been forced to resign in order to avoid prosecution for accepting bribes while he was governor of Maryland. Ford, an amiable and unpretentious Michigan congressman who had risen to the post of House minority leader, seemed ready to restore public confidence in the presidency when he replaced Nixon in August 1974. Ford’s honeymoon lasted only a month. On September 8, 1974, he shocked the nation by announcing he had granted Richard Nixon a full and unconditional pardon for all federal crimes he may have committed. Some critics charged darkly that Nixon and Ford had made a secret bargain; others pointed out how unfair it was for Nixon’s aides to serve their prison terms while the chief criminal went free. Ford apparently acted in an effort to end the bitterness over Watergate, but his attempt backfired, eroding public confidence in his leadership and linking him indelibly with the scandal. Ford soon found himself fighting an equally difficult battle on behalf of the beleaguered CIA. The Watergate scandal and the Vietnam fiasco had eroded public confidence in the government and lent credibility to a startling series of disclosures about past covert actions. The president allowed the CIA to confirm some of the charges, and then he made things worse by blurting out to the press the juiciest item of all: The CIA had been involved in plots to assassinate foreign leaders. Senate and House select committees appointed to investigate the CIA now focused on the assassination issue, eventually charging that the agency had been involved in no less than eight separate attempts to kill Fidel Castro. The chairman of the Senate committee, Frank Church of Idaho, worried that the revelations would damage the reputations of Democratic Presidents Kennedy and Johnson; he tried to put all the blame on the CIA, likening it to “a rogue elephant on the rampage.” In late 1975, President Ford finally moved to limit the damage to the CIA. He appointed George H. W. Bush, then a respected former Republican congressman, as the agency’s new director and gave him the authority both to reform the CIA and to strengthen its role in shaping national security policy. Most notably, Ford issued an executive order outlawing assassination as an instrument of American foreign policy. To prevent future abuses, Congress created permanent House and Senate intelligence committees to exercise general oversight for covert CIA operations. Ford proved less successful in his dealings with Congress on other issues. Although he prided himself on his good relations with members of both houses, he opposed Democratic measures such as federal aid to education and control over strip mining. In a little more than a year, he vetoed thirty-nine separate bills. In fact, Ford, who as a congressman had opposed virtually every Great Society measure, proved far more conservative than Nixon in the White House.

Carter and American Malaise
The Ford Administration
 Gerald R. Ford had the distinction of being the first president who had not been elected to national office. Richard Nixon had appointed him to the vice presidency to succeed Spiro Agnew,

 Ford’s lackluster record and the legacy of Watergate made the Democratic nomination a prize worth fighting for in 1976. A large field of candidates entered the contest, but a virtual unknown, former Georgia governor James Earl Carter, quickly became the



 CHAPTER 31

THE RISE OF A NEW CONSERVATISM, 1969–1988

 On television, the basic Carter commercial showed him at his Georgia peanut farm, dressed in blue jeans, looking directly into Speech (1979) the camera and saying, “I’ll never tell a lie.” Voters took Carter at his word, and elected him over Ford in a close contest. Unfortunately, Carter’s outsider status, while attractive in a campaign, made governing as president difficult. He had no discernible political philosophy, no clear sense of direction. He called himself a populist, but that label meant little more than an appeal to the common man, a somewhat ironic appeal, given Carter’s personal wealth. “The idea of a millionaire populist has always amused me,” commented his attorney general, fellow Georgian Griffin Bell. Lacking both a clear set of priorities and a coherent political philosophy, the Carter administration had little chance to succeed. The President strove hard for a balanced budget but was forced to accept mounting deficits. Federal agencies fought to save the environment and help consumers but served only to anger industry. In the crucial area of social services, Joseph Califano, secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW), failed repeatedly in efforts to carry out longoverdue reforms. His attempts to overhaul the nation’s welfare program, which had become a $30 billion annual operation serving some thirty million Americans, won little support from the White House. Carter’s unwillingness to take the political risks involved in revamping the overburdened Social Security system by reducing benefits and raising the retirement age blocked Califano’s efforts. And the HEW secretary finally gave up his attempt to draw up a workable national health insurance plan. Informed by his pollsters in 1979 that he was losing the nation’s confidence, Carter sought desperately to redeem himself. After a series of meetings at Camp David with a wide variety of advisers, he gave a speech in which he seemed to blame his failure on the American people, accusing them of creating “a crisis of confidence . . . that strikes at the very As national polls in the summer of 1979 reflected a profound loss of Americans’ confidence in the heart and soul and spirit of our national will.” leadership of President Jimmy Carter, the president attempted to rally the nation and redeem his Then, a week after what his critics termed presidency with his nationally televised “Crisis of Confidence” speech. the “national malaise” speech, he requested the resignation of Califano and the secretary of the treasury. But front-runner. Aware of the voters’ disgust with politicians of both neither the attempt to pin responsibility on the American people parties, Jimmy Carter ran as an outsider, portraying himself as nor the firing of cabinet members could hide the fact that Carter, a southerner who had no experience in Washington and one despite his good intentions and hard work, had failed to provide the who could thus give the nation fresh and untainted leadership. bold leadership the nation needed. Watch the Video

Jimmy Carter, The “Crisis of Confidence”


Politics and Diplomacy After Watergate


THE ELECTION OF 1976
Candidate Jimmy Carter Gerald Ford 
Party
Democratic
Republican


Troubles Abroad


Popular
Vote
40,828,587
39,147,613


Electoral
Vote




 with the shah, despite growing signs of domestic discontent with his leadership. By 1978, Iran was in chaos as the exiled Ayatollah Ruholla Khomeini led a fundamentalist Muslim revolt against the shah, who was forced to flee the country. In October 1979, Carter permitted the shah to enter the United States for medical treatment. Irate mobs in Iran denounced the United States, and on November 4, militants seized the U.S. embassy in Tehran and took fifty-three Americans prisoner. The prolonged Iranian hostage crisis revealed the extent to which American power had declined in the 1970s. Carter relied first on diplomacy and economic reprisals in a vain attempt to free the hostages. In April 1980, the president authorized a desperate rescue mission that ended in failure when several helicopters broke down in the Iranian desert and an accident cost the lives of eight crewmen. The hostage crisis dragged on through the summer and fall of 1980, a symbol of American weakness that proved to be a powerful political handicap to Carter in the upcoming presidential election.

 In the aftermath of the Vietnam War, most Americans wanted to have little to do with the world. Military intervention had failed in Southeast Asia, and with the American economy in trouble, the country’s economic leverage appeared minimal. Moreover, the point of détente was to diminish the need for American intervention abroad by directing the superpower contest with the Soviet Union into political channels. Yet various groups in the developing world didn’t get the message of détente. Central America, for example, witnessed numerous uprisings against entrenched authoritarian regimes. In mid-1979, The Collapse of Détente dictator Anastasio Somoza capitulated to the Sandinista forces in The policy of détente was already in trouble when Carter took Nicaragua. Despite American attempts to moderate the Sandinista office in 1977. Congressional refusal to relax trade restrictions on revolution, the new regime moved steadily to the left, developing the Soviet Union had doomed Kissinger’s attempts to win politiclose ties with Castro’s Cuba. In neighboring El Salvador, a growcal concessions from the Soviets through economic incentives. ing leftist insurgency against a repressive regime put the United The Kremlin’s repression of the growing dissident movement States in an awkward position. Unable to find a workable alternaand its harsh policy restricting the emigration of Soviet Jews had tive between the extremes of reactionary dictatorship and radical caused many Americans to doubt the wisdom of seeking accomrevolution in Central America, Carter tried to use American ecomodation with the Soviet Union. nomic aid to encourage the military junta in El Salvador to carry President Carter’s emphasis on human rights appeared to the out democratic reforms. But after the guerrillas launched a major Russians to be a direct repudiation of détente. In his inaugural offensive in January 1981, he authorized large-scale military assisaddress, Carter reaffirmed his concern over the mistreatment of tance to the government for its war against the insurgents, setting a precedent for the future. Carter initially had better luck in the Middle East. In 1978, he invited Egyptian president Anwar Sadat and Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin to negotiate a peace treaty under his guidance at Camp David. For thirteen days, Carter met with Sadat and Begin, finally emerging with the Camp David accords. A framework for negotiations rather than an actual peace settlement, the Camp David accords nonetheless paved the way for a 1979 treaty between these principal antagonists in the Arab– Israeli conflict. The treaty provided for the gradual return of the Sinai to Egypt but left the fate of the Palestinians, the Arab inhabitants of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, unsettled. Any sense of progress in the Middle East was quickly offset in 1979 with the outbreak of the Iranian revolution. Under Nixon and Kissinger, the United States Blindfolded American hostages stand among their Iranian captors after Iranian militants captured the had come to depend heavily on the shah American embassy in Tehran on November 4, 1979. The Iranians’ capture of fifty-three Americans as for defense of the vital Persian Gulf. hostages and their violent attacks on the embassy shocked U.S. citizens. The hostage crisis dragged Carter continued the close relationship on for the rest of Carter’s administration; the hostages were not released until January 1981.



 CHAPTER 31

THE RISE OF A NEW CONSERVATISM, 1969–1988

 human beings anywhere in the world, declaring that “our commitment to human rights must be absolute.” It was easier said than done. Carter withheld aid from authoritarian governments in Chile and Argentina, but equally repressive regimes in South Korea and the Philippines continued to receive generous American support. The Soviets, however, found even an inconsistent human rights policy to be threatening, particularly after Carter received Soviet exiles in the White House. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance concentrated on continuing the main pillar of détente, the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT). In 1974, President Ford had met with Brezhnev in Vladivostok and reached tentative agreement on the outline of SALT II. The chief provision was for a ceiling of twenty-four hundred nuclear launchers by each side, a level that would not require either the Soviet Union or the United States to give up any existing delivery vehicles. In March 1977, Vance went to Moscow to propose a drastic reduction in this level; the Soviets, already angry over human rights, rejected the American proposal as an attempt to overcome the Soviet lead in land-based ICBMs. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Carter’s national security adviser, worked from the outset to reverse the policy of détente. Commenting that he was “the first Pole in three hundred years in a position to really stick it to the Russians,” he favored confrontation with the Kremlin. Although Carter signed a SALT II treaty with Russia in 1979, lowering the ceiling on nuclear delivery systems to 2,250, growing opposition in the Senate played directly into Brzezinski’s hands. He prevailed on the president to advocate adoption of a new MX missile to replace the existing Minuteman ICBMs, which some experts thought were now vulnerable to a Soviet first strike. This new weapons system, together with the planned Trident submarine, ensured that regardless of SALT, the nuclear arms race would be speeded up in the 1980s. Brzezinski also was successful in persuading the president to use China to outmaneuver the Soviets. On January 1, 1979, the United States and China exchanged ambassadors, thereby completing the reconciliation that Nixon had begun in 1971. The new relationship between Beijing and Washington presented the Soviet Union with the problem of a link between its two most powerful enemies. The Cold War, in abeyance for nearly a decade, resumed with full fury in December 1979 when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan. Although this move was designed to ensure a regime friendly to the Soviet Union, it appeared to many the beginning of a Soviet thrust toward the Indian Ocean and the Persian Gulf. Carter responded to this aggression by declaring a “Carter doctrine” that threatened armed opposition to any further Soviet advance toward the Gulf. The president banned the sale of high technology to Russia, embargoed the export of grain, resumed draft registration, and even boycotted the 1980 Moscow Olympics. The Soviet action and the American reaction doomed détente. Aware that he could not get a two-thirds vote in the Senate, Carter withdrew the SALT II treaty. The hopeful phrases of détente gave way to belligerent rhetoric as groups such as the Committee on the Present Danger called for an all-out effort against the Soviet Union. Jimmy Carter, who had come into office hoping to advance human rights and control the nuclear arms race, now found himself a victim of a renewed Cold War.

The Reagan Revolution
 What was the “Reagan revolution”? After the turmoil of the 1960s, the economic and political troubles of the 1970s made Americans’ turn to conservatism almost inevitable. The Watergate scandal won the Democrats a brief reprieve, but when the Republicans discovered an attractive candidate in Ronald Reagan, a decisive Republican victory was essentially assured.

The Election of 1980
 In 1980, Jimmy Carter, who had used the Watergate trauma to win the presidency, found himself in serious trouble. Inflation, touched off by the second oil shock of the 1970s, reached doubledigit figures. The Federal Reserve Board’s effort to tighten the money supply had led to a recession, with unemployment climbing to nearly 8 percent by July 1980. What Ronald Reagan dubbed the “misery index,” the combined rate of inflation and unemployment, hit 28 percent early in 1980 and stayed above 20 percent throughout the year. Foreign policy proved almost as damaging to Carter. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan had exploded hopes for continued détente

Read the Document


Ronald Reagan, First
Inaugural Address (1981)


Election of 1980
Electoral Vote by State


Popular Vote


REPUBLICAN
Ronald Reagan 


43,901,812


DEMOCRATIC
Jimmy Carter 


35,483,820


INDEPENDENT
John B. Anderson 
5,719,437


MINOR PARTIES

921,188


86,026,257


















































 ALASKA



 HAWAII



WASH., D.C.





























The Reagan Revolution




 and made Carter appear naive. The continuing hostage crisis in Iran blamed what he termed “the worst economic mess since the underlined the administration’s helplessness. Great Depression” on high federal spending and excessive taxaRonald Reagan and his running mate, George H. W. Bush, tion. “Government is not the solution to our problems,” Reagan hammered away at the state of the economy and the world. Reagan announced in his inaugural address. “Government is the problem.” scored heavily among traditionally Democratic blue-collar groups The president embraced the concept of supply-side economics as the remedy for the nation’s economic ills. Supplyby blaming Carter for inflation, which robbed workers of any gain in real wages. Reagan also accused Carter of allowing the Soviets side economists believed that the private sector, if encouraged by to outstrip the United States militarily and promised a massive tax cuts, would shift its resources from tax shelters to productive buildup of American forces if he was elected. Carter’s position was investment, leading to an economic boom that would provide further hurt by the independent candidacy of liberal Republican enough new income to offset the lost revenue. Although many John Anderson of Illinois, who appealed to voters disenchanted economists worried that the 30 percent cut in income taxes that with Carter but not yet ready to embrace Reagan. Reagan favored would lead to large deficits, the president was conThe president fought back by claiming that Reagan was too fident that his program would both stimulate the economy and reckless to conduct American foreign policy in the nuclear age. reduce the role of government. Charging that the election would decide “whether we have peace The president made federal spending his first target. Quickly or war,” Carter tried to portray his Republican challenger as a wardeciding not to attack such popular middle-class entitlement promonger. Reagan deflected the charge and summarized the case grams as Social Security and Medicare, and sparing critical social against the administration by putting a simple question to voters: services for the “truly deserving needy,” the so-called safety net, the “Are you better off now than you were four years ago?” Republicans concentrated on slashing $41 billion from the budget Voters answered with a resounding “no.” Reagan carried by cutting heavily into other social services such as food stamps forty-four states and gained 51 percent of the popular vote. Carter and by reducing public service jobs, student loans, and support won only six states and 41 percent of the popular vote, while John for urban mass transit. Reagan used his charm and powers of perAnderson received the remaining 8 percent but failed to carry a suasion to woo conservative Democrats from the West and South. single state. Reagan clearly benefited from the growing political Appearing before a joint session of Congress only weeks after an power of the Sunbelt; he carried every state west of the Mississippi attempt on his life, Reagan won a commanding 253 to 176 margin except Minnesota, the home state of Carter’s running mate, Walter of victory for his budget in the House, and an even more lopsided Mondale. In the South, Reagan lost only Georgia, Carter’s home vote of 78 to 20 in the Senate in May. A jubilant Reagan told a state. Even more impressive were Reagan’s inroads into the old Los Angeles audience that he had achieved “the greatest reduction New Deal coalition. He received 50.5 percent of the blue-collar vote in government spending that has ever been attempted.” and 46 percent of the Jewish vote, the best showing by a Republican since 1928. Only one group remained loyal to Carter: African American votWatch the Video Ronald Reagan on the Wisdom of the Tax Cut ers gave him 85 percent of their ballots. Republican gains in Congress were even more surprising. For the first time since 1954, the GOP gained control of the Senate, 53 to 46, and the party picked up 33 seats in the House to narrow the Democratic margin from 114 to 50. Though the full implications of the 1980 election remained to be seen, the outcome suggested that the Democratic coalition that had dominated American politics since the days of Franklin Roosevelt was falling apart. In the eight presidential elections from 1952 to 1980, Republican candidates received 52.3 percent of the popular vote, compared with 47.7 percent for the Democrats. Reagan’s victory in 1980 thus marked the culmination of a Republican presidential realignment that ended a half-century of Democratic dominance.

Cutting Taxes and Spending
 When Ronald Reagan took office in January 1981, the ravages of inflation had devastated the economy. Interest rates hovered near 20 percent, while the value of the dollar, compared to 1960, had dropped to just 36 cents. The new president

 President Ronald Reagan’s televised speech to the nation in the 1981 advocating deep personal income taxes to spur economic growth and limit the ability of Congress to spend funds on domestic social programs. President Reagan persuaded Congress to adopt a 25 percent cut in personal income taxes over three years.



 CHAPTER 31

THE RISE OF A NEW CONSERVATISM, 1969–1988

 The president proved equally successful in trimming taxes. He initially advocated annual cuts of 10 percent in personal income taxes for three consecutive years. When the Democrats countered with a two-year plan that would reduce taxes by only 15 percent, Reagan compromised with a proposal to cut taxes by 5 percent the first year but insisted on the full 10 percent reduction for the second and third years. In July, both houses passed the tax cut by impressive margins. In securing reductions in spending and lowering taxes, Reagan demonstrated beyond doubt his ability to wield presidential power effectively. As Time magazine commented, no president since FDR had “done so much of such magnitude so quickly to change the economic direction of the country.”

Unleashing the Private Sector
 Reagan met with only mixed success in his other efforts to restrict government activity and reduce federal regulation of the economy. Cutting back on the scope of federal agencies and limiting their impact on American business was a central tenet of the president’s political philosophy. To achieve his goal of deregulation he appointed men and women who shared his belief in relying on the marketplace rather than the bureaucracy to direct the nation’s economy. To the outrage of environmentalists, Secretary of the Interior James Watt opened up federal land to coal and timber production, halted the growth of national parkland, and made more than a billion acres available for offshore oil drilling. Though Watt was eventually forced to resign, the Reagan administration continued its policy of reducing government intervention in business long after Watt’s departure. Transportation Secretary Drew Lewis proved to be the most effective cabinet member in the administration’s first two years. He helped relieve the troubled American automobile industry of many of the regulations adopted in the 1970s to reduce air pollution and increase passenger safety. At the same time, he played a key role in the behind-the-scenes negotiations that led Japan to agree in the spring of 1981 to restrict its automobile exports to the United States for the next three years. This unilateral Japanese action enabled the Reagan administration to help Detroit’s carmakers without openly violating its free market position by endorsing protectionist measures. Lewis gained notoriety in opposing a strike by the air traffic controllers’ union (PATCO) in the summer of 1981. The president, denouncing PATCO for threatening to interrupt “the protective services which are government’s reason for being,” fired the striking workers, decertified the union, and ordered Lewis to hire and train thousands of new air traffic controllers at a cost of $1.3 billion. For the Reagan administration, the price was worth paying to prove that no group of government employees had the right to defy the public interest. The Reagan administration was less successful in trying to cut back on the entitlement programs that it viewed as the primary cause of the growing budget deficits. Social Security was the greatest offender. A 500 percent increase in Social Security benefits in the 1970s threatened to bankrupt the system’s trust fund by the end of the century. Reagan, overconfident from his budget victory, met a sharp rebuff when he tried to make substantial cuts in future benefits. The president then appointed a bipartisan commission to recommend ways to protect the system’s endangered trust fund.

 In March 1983, Congress approved a series of changes that guaranteed the solvency of Social Security by gradually raising the retirement age, delaying cost-of-living increases for six months, and taxing pensions paid to the well-to-do elderly. The administration’s record in dealing with women’s concerns and civil rights proved clumsy and divisive. Although feminist groups were disappointed by the administration’s strong rhetorical attacks on legalized abortion, the appointment of Sandra Day O’Connor to the Supreme Court pleased them. By this one shrewd move, Reagan was able both to fulfill a campaign pledge and to make a symbolic gesture to women. His appointments to the lower federal courts were a better indication of his administration’s relatively low regard for women. Of the first seventy-two Reagan nominees to the federal judiciary, only three were women; just one of the sixty-nine men was African American.

Read the Document


Ronald Reagan, the Air
Traffic Controllers Strike


 The Professional Air Traffic Controllers’ Organization (PATCO) was one of the few unions to support Reagan in the 1980 campaign. But when PATCO struck in August 1981, Reagan unhesitatingly fired the striking air traffic controllers and refused to rehire them when the strike collapsed.

Reagan and the World


 The administration’s civil rights record proved especially revealing. Aware of how few African Americans had supported the GOP in 1980, Reagan made no effort to reward this group with government jobs or favors. Instead, the Justice Department actively opposed busing to achieve school integration and affirmative action measures that resulted in minority hiring quotas.

Reagan and the World
 How did Reagan reshape American foreign relations? Reagan was determined to reverse the course of American policy abroad no less than at home. He believed that under Carter, American prestige and standing in the world had dropped to an all-time low. Intent on restoring traditional American pride and influence, Reagan devoted himself to strengthening America’s defenses and recapturing world supremacy from the Soviet Union.

Challenging the “Evil Empire”
 The president scored his first foreign policy victory on the day he took office, thanks to diplomatic efforts begun under Carter. On January 20, 1981, Iran released the fifty-three Americans held hostage and thus enabled Reagan to begin his presidency on a positive note. He built upon this accomplishment by embarking on a major military expansion. Here again he continued efforts begun by Carter, who after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan had persuaded Congress to fund a 5 percent increase in defense spending. The Reagan expansion went far beyond Carter’s. Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger proposed a plan that would more than double defense spending. The emphasis was on new weapons, ranging from the B-1 bomber and the controversial MX nuclear missile to the expansion of the navy from 456 to 600 ships. Despite some opposition in Congress, Reagan and Weinberger got most of what they wanted, and by 1985 the defense budget grew to more than $300 billion. The justification for all the new weapons was Reagan’s belief that the Soviet Union was a deadly enemy that threatened the wellbeing and security of the United States. Reagan saw the Russians as bent on world revolution, ready “to commit any crime, to lie, to cheat” to advance their cause. Citing what he called a “record of tyranny,” Reagan denounced the Russians before the UN in 1982, claiming, “Soviet-sponsored guerrillas and terrorists are at work in Central and South America, in Africa, the Middle East, in the Caribbean and in Europe, violating human rights and unnerving the world with violence.” Given this view of Russia as “the focus of evil in the modern world,” it is not surprising that the new president continued the hard line that Carter had adopted after the invasion of Afghanistan. Abandoning détente, Reagan proceeded to implement a 1979 decision to place 572 Pershing II and cruise missiles in western Europe within range of Moscow and other Russian population centers to match Soviet deployment of mediumrange missiles aimed at NATO countries. Despite strong protests from the Soviet Union, as well as growing uneasiness in Europe and an increasingly vocal nuclear freeze movement at home, the United States began putting the weapons in bases in Great



 Britain and Germany in November 1983. The Soviets, claiming the move gave them only ten minutes of warning time in case of an American attack, responded by breaking off disarmament negotiations in Geneva. The nuclear arms race had now reached a more dangerous level than ever before. The United States stepped up research and development of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), an antimissile system based on the use of lasers and particle beams to destroy incoming missiles in outer space. SDI was quickly dubbed “star wars” by the media. Critics doubted that the SDI could be perfected, but they warned that even if it were, the result would be to escalate the arms race by forcing the Russians to build more offensive missiles in order to overcome the American defense system. The Reagan administration, however, defended SDI as a legitimate attempt to free the United States from the deadly trap of deterrence, with its reliance on the threat of nuclear retaliation to keep the peace. Meanwhile, the Soviet Union kept deploying larger and more accurate land-based ICBMs. Although both sides continued to observe the unratified SALT II agreements, the fact remained that between them the two superpowers had nearly fifty thousand warheads in their nuclear arsenals.

Confrontation in Central America
 Reagan perceived the Soviet challenge as extending across the globe. In Central America, an area marked by great extremes of wealth, with a small landowning elite and masses of peasants mired in poverty, the United States had traditionally looked for moderate middle-class regimes to support. But these were hard to find, and Washington often ended up backing repressive rightwing dictatorships rather than the leftist groups that raised the radical issues of land reform and redistribution of wealth. Yet it was often oppression by U.S.-supported regimes that drove those seeking political change to embrace revolutionary tactics. This was precisely what happened in Nicaragua, where the leftist Sandinista coalition finally succeeded in overthrowing the authoritarian Somoza regime in 1979. In an effort to strengthen the many middle-class elements in the original Sandinista government and to avoid forcing Nicaragua into the Cuban and Soviet orbit, Carter extended American economic aid. The Reagan administration quickly reversed this policy. Secretary of State Alexander Haig cut off aid to Nicaragua in the spring of 1981, accusing the Sandinistas of driving out the moderates, welcoming Cuban advisers and Soviet military assistance, and serving as a supply base for leftist guerrillas in nearby El Salvador. The criticism became a self-fulfilling prophecy as Nicaragua became even more dependent on Cuba and the Soviet Union. The United States and Nicaragua were soon on a collision course. In April 1983, declaring that “the national security of all the Americas is at stake in Central America,” Reagan asked Congress for the money and authority to oust the Sandinistas. When Congress, fearful of repeating the Vietnam fiasco, refused, Reagan opted for covert action. The CIA began supplying the Contras, exiles fighting against the Sandinistas from bases in Honduras and Costa Rica. The U.S.-backed rebels tried to disrupt the Nicaraguan economy, raiding villages, blowing up oil tanks, and even mining harbors. Then, in 1984, Congress passed the Boland Amendment

 Complete the Assignment The Christian Right on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


The Christian Right


I


 n early 1979, Rev. Jerry Falwell was flying to Lynchburg, Virginia, when he suddenly felt God calling him to enlist “the good people of America” in a crusade to battle permissiveness and moral decay. Falwell, who had built a small church in Lynchburg into a huge religious enterprise with eighteen thousand members, sixty associate pastors, and a television and radio audience of a million and a half, plus fifteen hundred students at Liberty Baptist College, launched his new enterprise on Capitol Hill in April 1979. Announcing that it was time to “fight the pornography, obscenity, vulgarity, profanity that, under the guise of sex education and ‘values clarification,”’ pervaded public school education, Falwell founded an overtly political organization to purify American society. He invited Roman Catholics, Jews, Protestants, Mormons, and even nonreligious conservatives to join his “Moral Majority.” Falwell’s Moral Majority highlighted the emergence in the 1970s of what journalists called the Christian Right. Throughout American history, many church members have been swept up in religious “awakenings.” Leaders of the revivals have called Americans back to personal piety and a concern for their society and its changing values. At those times, Christians have been urged to work actively to change their communities. The Supreme Court’s 1962 and 1963 decisions to ban school-sponsored prayer and Bible reading sparked increased political activity among conservative Christians. Many joined organizations working at the local level to gain greater control over public education and the content of textbooks

 Ronald Reagan appears with Rev. Jerry Falwell at a Moral Majority rally in Dallas, Texas, in 1980. Falwell’s Moral Majority and other similar evangelical groups endorsed conservative positions on a variety of issues, including abortion and school prayer. In his two presidential election campaigns, Reagan vigorously sought the support of Falwell’s followers.

 and science lectures. Church leaders often encouraged their congregations to become more active in local politics; they endorsed candidates and causes and passed out literature at church services. Conservative Christians also supported candidates who promised measures that would reverse the perceived decline in traditional family values as evidenced by feminism, abortion, and overt homosexuality. Concern for the changing values of Americana resulted in a new series of revivals. The open-air “camp meetings” of past awakenings developed into gatherings that packed thousands into large arenas for events broadcast by television to extended audiences. A number of Christian preachers used television to broaden their ministries. Several, like Falwell, produced their own weekly or daily television broadcasts. The new television evangelists—dubbed televangelists— combined commentary on social, economic, and foreign policy issues with

 their more traditional sermons and advice on living the Christian life. The televangelists produced publications and solicited contributions for their ministries. Their mailing lists formed the first “membership roles” of the new Christian Right. Jimmy Carter was one of their earliest national beneficiaries and suffered the consequences. Carter was a devoted Baptist who taught Sunday school, readily professed his Christianity, and emphasized family values in his speeches. He received the endorsement of some of the televangelists for his campaign to become president of the United States, and the national press began to pay closer attention to his personal religious beliefs. But support from the budding Christian Right was not necessarily an asset; such Christians hold themselves, their preachers, and other Christians to very high standards of moral behavior and ideological purity. When Carter discussed his Christian commitment in an interview in Playboy

 magazine, it cost him some votes in a close election; Playboy was the cultural antithesis of the family values advocated by the Christian Right. Other voters feared that Carter was crossing the traditional barrier placed between religion and politics in America. As president, Carter’s actions continually reminded conservatives that he was, after all, a Democrat and a liberal one. Carter was unwilling to reform welfare, to work for the return of prayer in public schools, or to ban abortion. The developing Christian Right wanted more than just Christians in office; they wanted to see their program enacted. They found a new darling—Ronald Reagan. Reagan was not a practicing Christian, he was divorced, and his children were not the model products of a “family values” home. But he was a bona fide conservative. He knew the right words to answer questions about his faith; and he peppered his speeches with the program of the Christian Right. With his words, Reagan brought the growing power of the Christian Right solidly into the Republican party. Their numbers and the enthusiasm of their individual political workers were sufficient to swing close elections; candidates at all levels sought their endorsement. The Moral Majority, and conservative Christians in general, were energized by the recognition they received while working hard for Ronald Reagan. However, President Reagan paid them for their support with little more than the words in his speeches.

 So the Christian Right began to carefully consider the choice of a successor. Pat Robertson stepped forward. He was the son of a congressman and a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Washington and Lee University, Yale Law School, and the New York Theological Seminary. He had first joined the Baptist Church but later became a charismatic Christian and one of the most prominent preachers and healers on television with his 700 Club. Like Falwell, Robertson formed a coalition of religious conservatives from many faiths, with the intent of teaching the members how to be effective in politics. That organization provided the grassroots workers for his effort to win the Republican nomination for president in 1988. Robertson, however, became the innocent victim of the televangelist scandals—the “fallen angels”—that filled newspapers and television throughout 1987 and 1988. Oral Roberts demanded that his supporters send him $8 million or God would “call him home.” Jim and Tammy Bakker, of the PTL Club, were accused of sexual, drug, and financial misconduct; Jim Bakker was sentenced to prison. Jimmy Swaggart, famous for his exhortations calling Christians to morally upright lives, was caught with a prostitute. The scandals cut into the income of every religious broadcast, including the ministries of Falwell and Robertson. The Moral Majority folded. Pat Robertson received good seats for his supporters and some attention at the Republican convention; George Bush got the nomination.

 By the end of the twentieth century, the Christian Right had grown into a powerful political force but its national program remained unrealized. Conservative Christians had become experts at mobilizing support for national elections and local causes and candidates, but they did not form a mature political entity willing to negotiate, compromise, or trade one goal in order to achieve another. Many religious activists quickly became disillusioned with politics when their candidates could not fulfill all their promises once elected. Likewise, candidates who campaigned on the programs of the Christian Right often lost the support of the general electorate because they were seen as too extreme. Clearly, the ideological purity demanded by the Christian Right was at odds with the pragmatism needed to achieve their goals through the actions of government.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
What events contributed to the emergence of the Christian Right in the 1970s and 1980s? 2. What challenges did the new movement pose to the liberalism of the 1960s? 3. To what extent do you think overtly religious values should influence political debate and the framing of laws? 




 CHAPTER 31

View the Map




THE RISE OF A NEW CONSERVATISM, 1969–1988

Conflict in Central America (1970–1998)








 600 miles 600 kilometers

UNITED STATES ATLANTIC OCEAN

Ba
 ha

Gulf of Mexico


 m

 Guatemala. Military coup against President Cerezo fails, May 1989; free elections held, 1993.

 Haiti. Duvalier forced out of office, Feb. 1986; military coup against elected government, 1991.

 CUBA

 ter

Antilles


 Grenada. U.S. and regional forces land after military coup, Oct. 1983; elections held, Dec. 1984.

Antilles


Caribbean Sea


 Nicaragua. Sandinista rebels come to power, 1979; Sandinista government defeated by opposition candidate Violetta Barrios de Chamorro, Feb. 1990.

 GRENADA

 NICARAGUA

 El Salvador. Civil war, 1980–1990; opposing sides hold peace talks, 1990; peace treaty signed, 1992.

 er

 HONDURAS

Puerto Rico
(U.S.)


 ss

 BELIZE

PACIFIC OCEAN

 HAITI ea

 JAMAICA

 GUATEMALA

EL SALVADOR

Gr


DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Le


 Jamaica. Former socialist Michael Manley elected prime minister, Feb. 1989.

 MEXICO

 as

Panama
Canal


COSTA RICA

 Panama Canal. Canal Zone comes under Panamanian control, 1979; Canal comes under Panamanian control in 2000. Canal Zone

 VENEZUELA

 PANAMA

 Panama. U.S. forces invade and capture drug trafficker General Manuel Noriega, Dec. 1989; Noriega is flown to federal prison in United States, Jan. 1990.

 COLOMBIA

 GUYANA

TROUBLE SPOTS IN CENTRAL AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN U.S.
involvement in Central American trouble spots intensified in the 1980s and early 1990s. 
 prohibiting any U.S. agency from spending money in Central America. The withdrawal of U.S. financial backing left the Contras in a precarious position.

More Trouble in the Middle East
 Reagan tried to continue Carter’s basic policy in the turbulent Middle East. In April 1982, the Israelis honored a Camp David pledge by making their final withdrawal from the Sinai. Reagan hoped to achieve the other Camp David objective of providing a homeland for the Palestinian Arabs on the West Bank, but Israel instead continued to extend Jewish settlements into the disputed area. The threat of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), based in southern Lebanon and frequently raiding across the border into Israel, seemed to be the major obstacle to further progress. On June 6, 1982, with tacit American encouragement, Israel invaded southern Lebanon in order to secure its northern border and destroy the PLO. The Reagan administration made no effort to halt the offensive but did join with France and Italy in sending a multinational force to permit the PLO to evacuate to Tunisia. Unfortunately, the United States soon became enmeshed in the

 Lebanese civil war, which had been raging since 1975. American marines, sent to Lebanon as part of the multinational force to restore order, were caught up in the renewed hostilities between Muslim and Christian militia. The Muslims perceived the marines as aiding the Christian-dominated government of Lebanon instead of acting as neutral peacekeepers, and they began firing on the vulnerable American troops. In the face of growing congressional demands for the withdrawal of the marines, Reagan declared they were there to protect Lebanon from the designs of Soviet-backed Syria. But finally, after terrorists drove a truck loaded with explosives into the American barracks, killing 239 marines, the president saw no choice but to pull out. The last American unit left Beirut in late February 1984. Despite his good intentions, Reagan had experienced a humiliation similar to Carter’s in Iran—one that left Lebanon in shambles and the Arab–Israeli situation worse than ever.

Trading Arms for Hostages
 Reagan’s Middle Eastern troubles didn’t prevent his easy reelection in 1984. Voters gave him credit for curbing inflation, reviving the economy, and challenging Communism; compared to these major

Reagan and the World


View the Map


 The Middle East in the 1980s and 1990s

Black


 ITALY

 TURKMENISTAN

 ARMENIA

 TURKEY

 GREECE

Caspian
Sea


 Lebanon. Terrorist bomb kills 239 marines, Oct. 23, 1983; Shiite extremists hold American hostages, 1984–1990.

Sicily


Malta
Crete


Tripoli


Benghazi


LEBANON ISRAEL
Gaza Strip Suez Canal 
L I B YA




 AFGHANISTAN

IRAQ
Iran-Iraq War. 1980–1988. 
 JORDAN

 KUWAIT

 Kuwait. Invaded and occupied by Iraq, Aug. 2, 1990.

Daharan


Pe
 rsi an

PA K ISTA N

 Persian Gulf. U.S. escorts reflagged Kuwaiti tankers, 1987–1988. OMAN Gulf

 BAHRAIN

 EGYPT

QATAR
Iraq. Operation Desert Storm (Persian Gulf War), Jan.–Feb. 1991. 
 400 miles

 400 kilometers

 SUDAN

 a Se

 Israeli-occupied territories

 IRAN

 Iran. American hostages held in Tehran since Nov. 4, 1979; released Jan. 20, 1981 (noon EST).

Golan Heights


 d Re



Tehran


West Bank


 Libya. U.S. bombs military targets, Apr. 14, 1986.

 Afghanistan. Soviet invasion, Dec. 1979; Soviet withdrawal,1989;

 AZERBAIJAN

 SYRIA

Cyprus


Mediterranean Sea
Gulf of
Sidra




 GEORGIA

Sea


 MACEDONIA

 ALBANIA

 TUNISIA



S AU D I
A R A B I A


OMAN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

TROUBLE SPOTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST
Armed conflict and territorial attacks in this region intensified in the 1980s and early 1990s. 
 achievements, the miscue in Lebanon appeared minor. Democratic candidate Walter Mondale, formerly Jimmy Carter’s vice president, provided a jolt to the campaign by choosing Representative Geraldine Ferraro of New York as his running mate. But even the presence of the first woman on the national ticket of a major American party couldn’t dent Reagan’s enormous popularity. He swept to victory with 59 percent of the popular vote and carried every state but Mondale’s home, Minnesota. Yet the troubles abroad persisted. Not long after Reagan’s second inauguration, his administration’s policies in the Middle East and Central America converged in the Iran-Contra affair. In mid-1985, Robert McFarlane, who had become national security adviser a year earlier, began a new initiative designed to restore American influence in the troubled Middle East. Concerned over the fate of six Americans held hostage in Lebanon by groups thought to be loyal to Iran’s Ayatollah Khomeini, McFarlane proposed trading American antitank missiles to Iran in return for the hostages’ release. The Iranians, desperate for weapons in the war they had been waging against Iraq since 1980, seemed willing to comply.

THE ELECTION OF 1984
Candidate Reagan Mondale 
Party
Republican
Democratic


Popular Vote
54,455,075
37,577,185


Electoral
Vote


 McFarlane soon found himself in over his head. He relied heavily on a young marine lieutenant colonel assigned to the National Security Council (NSC), Oliver North, and North, in turn, sought the assistance of CIA director William Casey, who interpreted the Iran initiative as an opportunity to use the NSC to mount the kind of covert operation denied the CIA under the post-1975 congressional oversight policy. By early 1986, when John Poindexter, a naval officer with little political experience, replaced a burned-out McFarlane as national security adviser, Casey was able to persuade the president to go ahead with shipments of TOW antitank missiles and HAWK antiaircraft missiles to Iran. The arms deal with Iran was bad policy, but what came next was criminal. Ever since the Boland Amendment in late 1984 had cut off congressional funding, the Reagan administration had been searching for ways to supply the Contras in Nicaragua. Oliver North was put in charge of soliciting donations from wealthy rightwing Americans. In early 1986, North had what he later described as a “neat idea” (apparently shared by Casey as well)—he could use profits from the sale of weapons to Iran (charging as much as $10,000 for a TOW that cost the United States only $3,500) to finance the Contras. North’s ploy was clearly not only illegal but unconstitutional, since it meant usurping the congressional power of the purse. Ultimately the secret got out. Administration officials tried to shield Reagan from blame, and even after a congressional investigation it was unclear whether the president had approved the Contra diversion. Reagan’s reputation survived the scandal,

 Complete the Assignment Roe v. Wade: The Struggle over Women’s Reproductive Rights on myhistorylab

Law and
Society


I


 n colonial America, abortion was generally legal as a method of terminating early pregnancies, although the practice was usually kept secret since the most common cause of unwanted pregnancy—sex between unmarried men and women—was illegal. Throughout the nineteenth century, states began restricting or outlawing abortion, and by 1900 every state except Kentucky had enacted some form of antiabortion law. Despite laws criminalizing abortion, the number of illegal abortions each year—whether performed privately by physicians or by unlicensed practitioners— numbered anywhere from 200,000 to 1.2 million. And each year about two hundred of the women who obtained illegal abortions died as a result of the procedure. Abortion rights advocates mobilized in the 1960s, helped by the growing women’s rights movement, the declining health risk involved in the procedure, and the wave of fetal deformities and birth defects that swept the nation in the early 1960s, largely attributable to an outbreak of German measles. Their argument centered on the belief that a woman had the right to control her own body. Just as vocal as abortion rights advocates were those who opposed abortion, believing that human life began at conception and that a fetus’s right to life outweighed a woman’s right to end a pregnancy. In 1973, in the case of Roe v. Wade, the U.S. Supreme Court handed down a momentous decision on the abortion debate—a decision that continues to generate controversy more than thirty years later.

Roe v. Wade
 The Struggle over Women’s Reproductive Rights On January 22, 1998, Norma McCorvey joined thousands of Americans who braved the freezing weather of Washington, D.C., to protest the Supreme Court decision in the case of Jane Roe et. al. v. Henry Wade. Exactly twenty-five years earlier the court had sided with Jane Roe, the pseudonym for an anonymous Texas woman seeking an abortion, and overturned a state law that made abortion illegal in all cases except when the life of the mother was at risk. The ruling had voided forty-six state laws that denied or restricted a woman’s access to the controversial procedure. Now, Norma McCorvey and other abortion opponents were observing the anniversary of the decision by taking to the streets to demonstrate their opposition. In many ways, McCorvey’s presence was unsurprising; she was a “born-again” Christian, an active abortion opponent, and the founder of an antiabortion ministry. In 1997, she had publicly denounced abortion in America as “a terrible, terrible holocaust.” Yet, one thing made Norma different from the other protestors: Twenty-five years earlier, she had been Jane Roe. The intensity of the debate over abortion reached unprecedented heights in the 1970s, and state legislatures began to pay attention to the cries for reform of laws governing abortion. Between 1967 and 1970, twelve states liberalized their laws, usually to permit abortion in cases of rape, incest, or fetal deformity, or to protect the life and health of the pregnant woman. Most states, however, retained their restrictive laws, and by 1973 only four states guaranteed their residents virtually unhindered access to an abortion.

 Texas, the home of Norma McCorvey, was not one of them. McCorvey was largely unaware of these legal struggles. A poor Texas woman from a broken home, she had dropped out of school in tenth grade and married at sixteen. The marriage quickly collapsed, and Norma spent the next five years working odd jobs. Her first child, born while she was sixteen, was eventually adopted by her mother, and her second, the product of a short affair with a co-worker a few years later, was given up for adoption. In late 1969, Norma again became pregnant. Twenty-two years old, depressed and poor, she sought a way to avoid having another child. Her attempt to induce an abortion by drinking castor oil only made her sick. Texas’s abortion law, which had stood virtually unchanged since 1857, prescribed a punishment of up to five years in prison for anyone convicted of performing an abortion for reasons other than saving the mother’s life. Adoption, it seemed, was her only option. Surprisingly, her path toward adoption led McCorvey into the struggle for abortion rights. An adoption lawyer referred her to Sarah Weddington and Linda Coffee, two young lawyers who were preparing to challenge Texas’s abortion law but needed a pregnant woman willing to serve as the name plaintiff. In December 1969, the three women met for dinner in Dallas. McCorvey agreed to join the lawsuit without much prodding, but had one request: the use of a pseudonym to hide her identity. Three months later, Weddington and Coffee filed a class action lawsuit on behalf of all Texas women against Henry Wade, the district attorney of Dallas County,

 demanding that he stop enforcing the state’s abortion laws; McCorvey, the name plaintiff, was identified only as Jane Roe. Coffee and Weddington asked the three-judge court of the federal Fifth Circuit to overturn the Texas law on two grounds. First, they claimed, it was written too vaguely to be applied fairly. More significantly, they argued that the Texas law violated a woman’s right to privacy. They cited recent Supreme Court decisions articulating a zone of personal privacy; this zone, the justices had admitted, was not explicitly written into the Constitution but could be inferred from a number of amendments. In 1965, the Supreme Court had made their most specific statement on this concept, writing in Griswold v. Connecticut of a “zone of privacy created by several fundamental constitutional guarantees.” In Griswold, the justices struck down a one-hundredyear-old Connecticut law forbidding the sale of birth control devices; now, Weddington and Coffee argued that this personal privacy zone included reproductive rights as well. Texas’s lawyers rejected the claims. Jay Floyd of the attorney general’s office contended that Jane Roe, whoever she was, had no standing to sue since the law punished only doctors who performed abortions, not the women who received them. Besides, Floyd claimed, Roe had to be so far along in her pregnancy by now that either she had already given birth or would do so fairly soon; thus, regardless of the court’s decision, the whole case was moot. Assistant District Attorney John Tolle took a different approach, arguing that the state had the right to protect life in all forms, and hence the fetus was entitled to the full protection of the state. “I personally think and I think the state’s position,” he concluded, “is that the right of the child to life is superior to that woman’s right to privacy.” It took almost a month for the judges to announce their decision. The Texas laws, they ruled, were unconstitutional, “because they deprive single women and married couples of their

 Norma McCorvey, the Jane Roe of Roe v. Wade, with one of her lawyers, Gloria Allred.

 right [to privacy], secured by the Ninth Amendment.” They also found the statute too vague to be allowed to continue under the Fourteenth Amendment. The law would have to be eliminated. However, the judges refused to issue an injunction ordering the district attorney’s office to stop enforcing it immediately; such an action, they announced, would be too intrusive considering that the state had not yet been given the opportunity to revise its laws. Quickly,

 the Texas attorney general announced his intention to appeal the case and to continue prosecuting doctors who violated the statute. Weddington and Coffee also appealed, citing the court’s refusal to issue an injunction. For Weddington and Coffee, the decision would mean an eventual appeal to the Supreme Court; for Norma McCorvey it meant only crushing disappointment. McCorvey had never seen herself as a crusader for women’s

 rights, and despite being the named plaintiff she had played virtually no role in the case. She had joined the lawsuit only in the hope of obtaining an abortion, and for six months had drifted across Texas, clinging to the lawsuit as her last chance. Now, she discovered, she had won her case, but without an immediate injunction she would have to deliver the baby after all. The lawsuit, she realized for the first time, was “not really for me. It was about me, and maybe all the women who’ve come before me, but it was really for all the women who were coming after me.” A few months later she had her third baby, whom she gave up for adoption. In March 1971, the United States Supreme Court agreed to hear the case. Supreme Court involvement prior to a case being argued before an appeals court was an unusual step, but since a constitutional right was at issue, the justices agreed to intervene immediately. Undoubtedly, the growing intensity of the abortion debate also influenced the court; by the time the Roe appeal was filed, eleven state courts had abortion cases pending, twenty cases were before three-judge federal panels, and four others were on the Supreme Court docket for consideration. In the end, the Supreme Court would hear Roe v. Wade not once but twice. At oral arguments on December 13, 1971, both sides reiterated their positions to the nation’s highest court. The justices pondered the arguments and handed down their verdict. Five of the justices favored striking down the Texas law, while only two sided with the state. Due to recent retirements, however, the court was operating with only seven members, two short of its full complement. This fact, combined with general unhappiness with the majority opinion written by Justice Harry Blackmun, led the Court to the unusual decision of putting the case over for reargument the following year. On October 10, 1972, the two sides rehashed their arguments for a final time. Again, McCorvey remained in Texas while Weddington emphasized her constitutional right to privacy. “We are not here to advocate abortion,” she

 told the court. “We do not ask this Court to rule that abortion is good or desirable in any particular situation. We are here to advocate that the decision as to whether or not a particular woman will continue to carry or will terminate a pregnancy is a decision that should be made by that individual.” A majority of the justices agreed. On January 22, 1973, the Supreme Court struck down the Texas law by a 7 to 2 vote. Justice Blackmun’s eighty-page majority opinion echoed Weddington and Coffee’s argument about an implied zone of privacy. “The right of privacy,” he wrote, “whether it be founded in the Fourteenth Amendment’s concept of personal liberty and restrictions upon state action, as we feel it is, or, as the District Court determined, in the Ninth Amendment’s reservation of rights to the people, is broad enough to encompass a woman’s decision whether or not to terminate her pregnancy.” The fetus, the majority also agreed, had never been given legal recognition as a person, and as such could not expect to receive equal protections. Once again the verdict was not an unqualified victory for Coffee and Weddington. Blackmun’s decision forbade states from restricting abortion in the first trimester of pregnancy and allowed them to regulate it only in the interests of preserving maternal health in the second. However, he recognized a legitimate state interest in protecting “potential life,” which he defined as occurring when the fetus had “the capacity for meaningful life outside of the mother’s womb.” Accordingly, he permitted states to regulate abortion under almost all circumstances during the last trimester. Only Justices Byron White and William Rehnquist sided with Texas. In a scathing dissent, White attacked his brethren for making a decision that should have been left to the individual states, calling the verdict “an improvident and extravagant exercise of the power of judicial review.” The Court, he concluded, “apparently values the convenience of the pregnant mother more than the continued existence and development of the life or potential life which she carries.”

 The ruling set off both celebration and protest. In Texas, Norma McCorvey read about the decision in the newspaper and immediately broke into tears. When Weddington finally reached her a few days later, Norma was thrilled. “It makes me feel like I’m on top of Mt. Everest,” she told her lawyer. Many others felt quite differently. John Cardinal Krol, president of the National Catholic Conference, predicted that the Court was ushering in “the greatest slaughter of innocent life in the history of mankind.” The debate over Roe v. Wade was just beginning. Shocked by the decision, antiabortion forces redoubled their efforts. Although a few chose violence, most opponents of the Roe decision turned to lobbying and legislation to undo the verdict. Congressmen introduced hundreds of constitutional amendments limiting abortion, but none were approved. In 1976, Congress did prohibit the use of Medicaid funds for abortions, except when the life of the mother was at risk, and twelve years later, the Department of Health and Human Services banned government-employed doctors from counseling women about abortions. Even the Supreme Court showed a willingness to chip away at its earlier decision. In Bellotti v. Baird (1979), the Court allowed states to require unmarried minors to get parental consent for abortions, as long as the state offered an alternative procedure such as allowing her to obtain a judge’s permission instead. The Court, in Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey (1992), later upheld a Pennsylvania law that placed various restrictions on abortion rights, including a mandatory twenty-four hour waiting period and a requirement that doctors present alternative options before performing the surgery. During the next decade, abortion continued to be the most controversial issue in American politics and law. As of early 2006, the Roe decision still held, and abortion remained legal in most cases. But conservatives remained as determined as ever to overturn it.

 Throughout the intense debate, no figure remained more central to the struggle than Norma McCorvey. For two decades, many who supported abortion rights admired her as a courageous individual who led American women in their fight to recapture control of their own bodies. Yet, more than twenty years later, McCorvey, who revealed her identity in 1984, stunned her supporters by renouncing her past position and embracing the antiabortion movement. She then became an inspirational symbol to those on the

 other side of the debate who applauded her wisdom and courage in renouncing the errors of her past. By 1997, she had joined the controversial antiabortion group Operation Rescue and the following year opened her own ministry, “Roe No More.” Yet, despite her role as a symbol of this intense struggle, McCorvey remained just a typical American struggling to come to grips with a difficult and complex topic. “Deep inside,” she recalled twenty years after Jane Roe had become famous, “I’m still nobody but Norma McCorvey.”

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
What is the constitutional basis for the assertion of a woman’s right to privacy? 2. Why was Justice Blackmun’s opinion so controversial? Why did he limit the right to abortion to the first two trimesters of a pregnancy? 3. To what extent have subsequent court decisions limited a woman’s right to abortion? How likely do you think it is that the Court will overturn Roe v. Wade in the future? 




 CHAPTER 31

THE RISE OF A NEW CONSERVATISM, 1969–1988

Watch the Video


Oliver North Hearing


 hardliner, Reagan softened during his second term to become an advocate of cooperation with Moscow. A momentous change in leadership in the Soviet Union had much to do with the change in Reagan’s approach. The illness and death of Leonid Brezhnev in 1982, followed in rapid succession by the deaths of his aged successors, Yuri Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko, led finally to the selection of Mikhail Gorbachev, a younger and more dynamic Soviet leader. Gorbachev was intent on improving relations with the United States as part of his new policy of perestroika (restructuring the Soviet economy) and glasnost (political openness). Soviet economic performance had been deteriorating steadily, and the war in Afghanistan had become a major liability. Gorbachev needed a breathing spell in the arms race and a reduction in Cold War tensions in order to carry out his sweeping changes at home. A series of summit meetings between Reagan and Gorbachev broke the chill in superpower relations and led in December 1987 to an Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty, by which Reagan and Gorbachev agreed to remove and destroy all intermediaterange missiles in Europe. The most important arms-control agreement since SALT I of 1972, the INF treaty raised hopes that an end to the Cold War was finally in sight. During the president’s last year in office, the Soviets cooperated with the United States in pressuring Iran and Iraq to end their long war. Most significant of all, Gorbachev moved to end the war in Afghanistan. The first Soviet units pulled out in April 1988, with the final evacuation due to be completed early the next year. By the time Reagan left office in January 1989, he had scored a series of foreign policy triumphs that offset the Iran-Contra fiasco and thus helped redeem his presidency.

Conclusion: Challenging the
New Deal
 Despite Oliver North’s questionable conduct, the public elevated him to near hero status during the televised Iran-Contra hearings. The bemedaled marine testified that he believed his deeds were justified as a defense of democracy.

 albeit tarnished. Several of his subordinates, including North and Poindexter, were prosecuted. William Casey might have joined them in the dock but died suddenly of a brain tumor.

Reagan the Peacemaker
 Americans’ tolerance of Reagan’s mistakes in the Iran-Contra affair resulted in part from the progress he was making on the larger issue of U.S.–Soviet relations. Elected as an antiCommunist

 Though trouble dogged the final years of his presidency, the overall effect of Reagan’s two terms was to reshape the landscape of American politics. The Democratic coalition forged by Franklin Roosevelt during the New Deal finally broke down as the Republicans captured the South and made deep inroads into organized labor. More significantly, Reagan challenged the liberal premises of the New Deal by asserting that the private sector, rather than the federal government, ought to be the source of remedies to most of America’s ills. Reagan prudently left intact the centerpieces of the welfare state—Social Security and Medicare—but he trimmed other programs and made any comparable expansion of federal authority nearly impossible. By the time he left office, smallgovernment conservatism seemed the undeniable wave of the American future.

STUDY RESOURCES



Study Resources
 Take the Study Plan for Chapter 31 The Rise of a New Conservatism, 1969–1988 on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1969
Stonewall Riots in New York’s Greenwich Village 




 spark gay rights movement (June); American astronauts land on the moon (July) U.S. forces invade Cambodia (April); Ohio National Guardsmen kill four students at Kent State University (May) States ratify Twenty-sixth Amendment to the Constitution, giving 18-year-olds the right to vote (July); President Nixon freezes wages and prices for ninety days (August) Richard Nixon visits China (February); U.S. and USSR sign SALT I accords in Moscow (May); White House “plumbers” unit breaks into Democratic headquarters in Watergate complex (June); Nixon wins reelection in landslide victory over George McGovern (November) United States and North Vietnam sign truce (January); Arab oil embargo creates energy crisis in the United States (October) Supreme Court orders Nixon to surrender White House tapes (June); Nixon resigns presidency (August) Last evacuation helicopter leaves roof of U.S. embassy in Saigon, South Vietnam (April) Nation celebrates bicentennial with fireworks, patriotic music, and parade of sailing ships (July); Jimmy Carter defeats Gerald Ford in presidential election (November)

 1977 Carter signs Panama Canal treaties restoring sovereignty to Panama (September); Carter orchestrates Camp David accords between Israel and Egypt (September)

 1979 Iranian militants seize American hostages Tehran (November); Soviet invasion of Afghanistan leads to U.S. withdrawal from 1980 Moscow Olympics (December)

 1980 Ronald Reagan wins presidency over Carter 1981 American hostages in Iran released after 444 days in captivity (January); Sandra Day O’Connor becomes first woman U.S. Supreme Court justice (September)

 1982 Equal Rights Amendment fails state ratification (June); Unemployment reaches postwar record high of 10.4 percent (October)

 1984 Russia boycotts summer Olympics in Los Angeles (July); Reagan reelected president (November)

 1985 Mikhail Gorbachev becomes leader of the Soviet Union (March)

 1986 Iran-Contra affair made public (November) 1987 Reagan and Gorbachev sign INF treaty at Washington summit

 1988 George H. W. Bush defeats Michael Dukakis decisively in presidential election

CHAPTER REVIEW
The Tempting of Richard Nixon What were the major accomplishments and failures of the Nixon presidency? Nixon opened diplomatic relations with China and initiated détente with the Soviet Union. He withdrew American troops from Vietnam, terminating a quarter-century of American involvement. But his role in the Watergate scandal led to a constitutional crisis that forced him from office in disgrace. (p. 738) 
Private Lives, Public Issues
 How did private life change during this period? The divorce rate rose significantly, and the number of married couples with children declined. More women entered the professions, and Roe v. Wade guaranteed their right to an abortion. Gay men and lesbians achieved greater freedom than before, though they still lacked rights accorded to heterosexuals. (p. 745)

Politics and Diplomacy After Watergate
The Economy of Stagflation
Crude Oil


 How were oil and inflation linked during the 1970s?



 Oil prices jumped dramatically in the 1970s, as a result of growing demand for oil and turmoil in the Middle East. Rising oil prices contributed to the worst inflation in modern American history. (p. 742)

 Why did the presidencies of Ford and Carter largely fail? Ford and Carter had to deal with the aftermath of Vietnam and Watergate and the economic disruptions that followed the oil price rises of the 1970s. Ford alienated many Americans by pardoning Nixon, and Carter fumbled the hostage crisis in Iran. (p. 749)



 CHAPTER 31

CHAPTER REVIEW

The Reagan Revolution


Reagan and the World


 What was the “Reagan revolution”? The Reagan revolution was the return to conservatism in American politics and diplomacy upon Reagan’s 1980 election as president. Reagan pledged to reduce the role of government in American life, and restore American honor and confidence abroad. (p. 752)

 How did Reagan reshape American foreign relations? Reagan rejected détente and challenged the Soviet Union more directly than any American president in decades. He called for the creation of the SDI missile system, and he waged covert war against leftists in Central America. The Iran-Contra affair, in which Reagan traded arms for hostages, tarnished his reputation, but he also negotiated the INF treaty with the Soviet Union. (p. 755)

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Moral Majority In 1979, the Reverend Jerry Falwell founded the Moral Majority to combat “amoral liberals,” drug abuse, “coddling” of criminals, homosexuality, communism, and abortion. The Moral Majority represented the rise of political activism among organized religion’s radical right wing. p. 738 Neoconservatism Former liberals who advocated a strong stand against Communism abroad and free market capitalism at home. These intellectuals stressed the positive values of American society in contrast to those liberals who emphasized social problems. p. 738 Détente President Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger pursued a policy of détente, a French word meaning a relaxation of tension, with the Soviet Union to lessen the possibility of nuclear war in the 1970s. p. 739 Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) In 1972, the United States and the Soviet Union culminated four years of SALT by signing a treaty limiting the deployment of antiballistic missiles (ABM) and an agreement to freeze the number of offensive missiles for five years. p. 739 Watergate scandal A break-in at the Democratic National Committee offices in the Watergate complex in Washington was carried out under the direction of White House employees. Disclosure of the White House involvement in the break-in and subsequent cover-up forced President Richard Nixon to resign in 1974. p. 741 Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) A cartel of oil-exporting nations. p. 742 Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) A proposed constitutional amendment passed by Congress in 1972 to guarantee women equal treatment under the law. The amendment failed to be ratified in 1982. p. 746 
 Roe v. Wade The 1973 Supreme Court decision that women have a constitutional right to abortion during the early stages of pregnancy. p. 746 Camp David accords In 1978, President Jimmy Carter mediated a peace agreement between the leaders of Egypt and Israel at Camp David. In 1979, Israel and Egypt signed a peace treaty based on the accords. p. 751 Iranian hostage crisis In 1979, Iranian fundamentalists seized the American embassy in Tehran and held fifty-three Americans hostage for over a year. The hostages were released on January 20, 1981, the day Ronald Reagan became president. p. 751 Supply-side economics The theory that tax cuts would stimulate the economy by giving individuals more incentive to earn more money, which would lead to greater investment and eventually larger tax revenues at a lower rate. p. 753 Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) Popularly known as “Star Wars,” President Ronald Reagan’s SDI proposed to construct an elaborate computer-controlled antimissile defense system capable of destroying enemy missiles in outer space. p. 755 Iran-Contra affair The Iran-Contra affair involved officials in the Reagan administration secretly and illegally selling arms to Iran and using the proceeds to finance the Contra rebels in Nicaragua. p. 759 Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) Signed by President Ronald Reagan and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev in late 1987, this agreement provided for the destruction of all intermediate-range nuclear missiles and permitted on-site inspection for the first time during the Cold War. p. 764

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
If Nixon hadn’t resigned, would he have been impeached? Would that have been a good thing or a bad thing? 
 2. What did feminism and gay liberation have to do with each other?

 3. Should Ford have pardoned Nixon? Why or why not? 4. Which was more scandalous: Iran-Contra or Watergate? Why?

STUDY RESOURCES



 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 31 on MyHistoryLab The Tempting of Richard Nixon ◾

Read the Document Ronald Reagan, the Air Traffic
Controllers Strike p. 754


View the Closer Look Watergate Shipwreck p. 742


Reagan and the World
Private Lives, Public Issues
◾


Read the Document
 p. 747

View the Map Conflict in Central America (1970–1998) p. 758


Roe v. Wade (January 22, 1973)


Politics and Diplomacy After Watergate
Watch the Video
Jimmy Carter, The “Crisis of
Confidence” Speech (1979) p. 750


The Reagan Revolution
Read the Document Ronald Reagan, First Inaugural
Address (1981) p. 752


◾


Ronald Reagan on the
Watch the Video
Wisdom of the Tax Cut p. 753


◾


Complete the Assignment The Christian Right p. 756


◾


 View the Map The Middle East in the 1980s and 1990s p. 759

Roe v. Wade: The
Complete the Assignment
 Struggle over Women’s Reproductive Rights p. 760 Watch the Video Oliver North Hearing p. 764

◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




 Into the Twenty-first Century, 1989–2012

Contents and Learning Objectives
THE FIRST PRESIDENT BUSH PG. 770

REPUBLICANS TRIUMPHANT PG. 783

 What were the important issues in George H. W. Bush’s presidency, and how were they handled?

 How did George W. Bush become president, and what did he do in the White House?

THE CHANGING FACES OF AMERICA PG. 774

BARACK OBAMA’S TRIUMPH AND TRIALS PG. 791

 How did the American population shift and grow between 1990 and 2010?

THE NEW DEMOCRATS PG. 778
What were the accomplishments and failures of the Clinton administration? 
 What challenges faced Barack Obama and the American people during the first decade of the twenty-first century? ◾ FEATURE ESSAY An Inconvenient Truth? The Controversy Surrounding Global Warming

CLINTON AND THE WORLD PG. 781
How did Clinton respond to the Balkan Wars? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

