chapter 1 the collision of cultures juan ponce de len then governor of puerto rico made the e arliest known exploration of what the spanish called la florida the land of flowers in 1513 meanwhile other spanish explorers skirted the coast of the gulf of mexico scouted the atlantic coast all the way north to canada and established a short lived colony on the carolina coast.
sixteenth century knowledge of the north american interior came mostly from would be conquistadores who plundered the region.
the first pnfilo de narvez landed in 1528 at tampa bay marched northward to alabama and then returned to the gulf coast where he and his crew built crude boats out of animal hides and headed for mexico.
high winds and heavy seas however wrecked the vessels on the texas coast.
some of the survivors worked their way overland.
after eight years including periods of captivity among the indians they wandered into a spanish outpost in mexico.
in 1539 hernando de soto a conquistador who had helped conquer the incas in peru set out to explore florida.
with 600 soldiers a pair of women and a few priests as well as horses mules pigs and fighting dogs he landed on floridas west coast.
de soto and his party traveled north as far as western north carolina and then moved westward becoming the first europeans to see the mississippi river.
along the way they looted and destroyed native american villages and took enslaved indians with them in chains and iron collars.
de soto tried to impress the indians by claiming to be a son of the sun in the spring of 1542 having wandered america for three years de soto died near natchez mississippi.
the next year the survivors among his party floated down the mississippi river and 311 of the original adventurers found their way to spanish mexico.
they left behind them a trail of infectious diseases which continued to ravage the indians for years thereafter.
in 1540 francisco vzquez de coronado led an expedition of 1 500 spaniards and indian allies 1 000 horses 500 cattle and 5 000 sheep northward into new mexico and northeast as far as present day kansas.
new spain the spanish established provinces in north america not so much as commercial enterprises but as protective buffers to defend their empire in mexico and south america.
they were concerned about french traders infiltrating from louisiana english settlers crossing into florida and russian seal hunters wandering down the california coast.
as the sixteenth century unfolded the spanish shifted from looting the native peoples to enslaving them.
to reward the crusading conquistadores the spanish empire 35 spain transferred to america a medieval socioeconomic system known as the encomienda whereby favored army officers were given huge parcels of land.
they were to provide the indians with protection in exchange for tribute goods and labor tending farms or mining for gold and silver.
new spain therefore developed a society of extremes wealthy encomenderos and powerful priests at one end of the spectrum and indians held in poverty at the other.
the spaniards used brute force to ensure that indians accepted their new role as serfs.
nuo de guzman a conquistador who became the governor of a mexican province loved to watch his massive fighting dog tear apart rebellious indians.
after a spaniard talked back to him he had the man nailed to a post by his tongue.
a catholic empire the spanish and later the french launched a massive effort to convert the indians deeming them heathens into catholic servants.
during the sixteenth century hundreds of priests fanned out across new spain and later new france.
many of the catholic missionaries decided that the indians of mexico could be converted only by force.
though they seem to be a simple people a spanish priest declared in 1562 they are up to all sorts of mischief and missionaries in the new world a spanish mission in new mexico established to spread the catholic faith among the indigenous peoples.
36 chapter 4 from colonies to states the habit of self government government within the american colonies evolved without plan during the eighteenth century as the colonial assemblies acquired powers particularly with respect to government appointments that parliament had yet to exercise itself.
the english colonies in america unlike new france and new spain benefited from elected legislative assemblies.
whether called the house of burgesses virginia delegates maryland representatives massachusetts or simply the assembly the lower houses were chosen by popular vote.
only male property owners could vote based upon the notion that only men who held a tangible stake in society could vote responsibly.
because property holding was much more widespread in america than in europe a greater proportion of the men could vote and hold office in the colonies.
members of the colonial assemblies tended to be wealthy prominent figures but there were exceptions.
one unsympathetic colonist observed in 1744 that the new jersey assembly was chiefly composed of mechanicks and ignorant wretches obstinate to the last degree the most profound political trend during the early eighteenth century was the growing power exercised by the colonial assemblies.
like parliament the assemblies controlled the budget through their vote on taxes and expenditures and they held the power to initiate legislation.
most of the colonial assemblies also exerted leverage on the royal governors by controlling their salaries.
throughout the eighteenth century the assemblies expanded their power and influence sometimes in conflict with the governors sometimes in harmony with them.
self government in america became first a habit then a right by the mid eighteenth century the american colonies had become largely s elf governing.
warfare in the colonies the glorious revolution of 1688 transformed relations among the great powers of europe.
protestants william and mary for example were passionate foes of catholic frances louis xiv.
king william organized an alliance of european nations against the french in a transatlantic war known in the american colonies as king williams war 1689 1697.
it was the first of four major wars fought in europe and the colonies over the next s eventy four years.
in each case britain and its european allies fought against catholic france or spain and their allies.
by the end of the eighteenth century the struggle between the british and the french would shift the balance of power in europe.
warfare in the colonies 157 in all four of the wars except the last the seven years war battles in the north american colonies were but a sideshow accompanying massive warfare in europe.
although the wars involved many nations including indians who fought on both sides the conflicts centered on the intense struggle for supremacy between the british and the french a struggle that ended up profoundly shifting the international balance of power among the great powers of europe.
the prolonged warfare during the eighteenth century had a devastating effect on new england especially massachusetts for it was closest to the battlefields of french canada.
the wars also reshaped britains relationship with america.
great britain emerged from the wars in 1763 as the most powerful nation in the world.
thereafter international commerce became increasingly essential to the expanding british empire thus making the american colonies even more strategically significant.
the french and indian war the most important conflict between britain and france in north america was the french and indian war 1754 1763 globally known as the seven years war.
unlike the earlier wars the french and indian war started in america and ended with a decisive victory.
it was sparked by french and british competition for the ancestral indian lands in the vast ohio valley and the stakes were high.
whoever controlled the ohio country would control the entire continent because of the ohio and mississippi rivers.
to defend their interests in the ohio country the french pushed south from canada and built forts in the region.
when virginias british governor learned of the forts he sent an ambitious t wenty two year old militia officer major george washington to warn the french to leave.
washington made his way on foot and by horseback canoe and raft more than 450 miles to fort le boeuf just south of lake erie in northwest pennsylvania in late 1753 only to be rudely rebuffed by the french.
a few months later in the spring of 1754 washington now a lieutenant colonel went back to the ohio country with 150 volunteer soldiers and indian allies.
they planned to build a fort where the allegheny monongahela and ohio rivers converged where the city of pittsburgh later developed.
the so called forks of the ohio was the key strategic gateway to the vast western territory west of the appalachian mountains and both sides were determined to control it.
after two months of difficult travel through densely forested hilly terrain washington learned that french soldiers had beaten him to the site and built fort duquesne in western pennsylvania.
washington decided to camp about 158 chapter 4 from colonies to states unexpl ore d north america 1713 hudson bay h u d s o n s b ay c o m pa n y i s w fr co lo an ni c es ne ia newfoundland nova scotia new england n eng lish u ocean sippi sis r ive m is r lo pa c i f i c e virginia na atlantic carolinas ocean e florida w s england france spain gulf of mexico p cuba a 1000 miles i n hispaniola caribbean sea new granada 1000 kilometers what events led to the first clashes between the french and the british in the late seventeenth century.
10e wwn64 why didamerica new england suffer more than other regions of north america 26593 04map 03 during the wars of the eighteenth century.
first proof what were the long term financial military and political consequences of the wars between france and britain.
pontiacs rebellion after the war colonists began squabbling over indian owned land west of the appalachian mountains that the french had ceded to the british in the treaty of paris.
native american leaders none of whom attended the meetings leading to the treaty were shocked to learn that the french had given their ancestral lands to the british.
ohio indians warfare in the colonies 165 north america 1763 unexplored russians hudson bay h u d s o n s b ay c o m pa n y the th irte q en ue co lo be ni c newfoundland nova scotia es m is r i ia na n e w s 1000 miles 1000 kilometers england spain proclamation line of 1763 india n re ser ve u s new england sippi sis r ive lo oregon p a c i f i c disputed by o c e a n russia and spain west florida gulf of mexico p a st pierre et miquelon france i n virginia carolinas east florida atlantic ocean guadeloupe haiti france france cuba hispaniola martinique france british caribbean sea honduras mosquito coast new granada how did the map of north america change between 1713 and 1763.
how did spain win the louisiana territory.
wwn64 america 10e what were the consequences of the british gaining all the land east of the 26593 04map 04 mississippi first proof river.
complained to british army officers that as soon as you conquered the french you did not care how you treated us one chieftain claimed that the british had treated them like slaves the indians fought back in the spring of 1763 capturing most of the british forts around the great lakes and in the ohio valley.
never was panic more general reported the pennsylvania gazette than that of the back woods inhabitants whose terrors at this time exceed that followed on the defeat of general braddock 166 chapter 4 from colonies to states its authority in every area.
in the end however the controversial new sugar tax did not produce more revenue for great britain the cost of enforcing it was four times greater than the revenue it generated.
the currency act americans equally hated another of grenvilles new regulatory measures the currency act of 1764 which prohibited the colonies from coining or printing money while requiring that all payments for british goods imported into the colonies must be in gold or silver coins or in a commodity like tobacco.
the colonies had long faced a chronic shortage of hard money gold and silver coins called specie which kept flowing overseas to pay debts in england.
to address the lack of specie many colonies issued their own paper money which could not be used in other colonies.
british creditors feared payment in a currency of such fluctuating value.
to alleviate their fears grenville implemented the currency act.
by banning paper money it caused the value of existing paper money to plummet.
as a philadelphia newspaper complained ollar less the times are dreadful dismal doleful dolorous and d the stamp act prime minister grenville excelled at doing the wrong thing repeatedly.
in 1765 for example he persuaded parliament to pass the quartering act which required americans to feed and house british troops.
most americans saw no need for so many british soldiers in colonial cities.
if the british were there to defend against indians why werent they positioned closer to the indians.
some colonists decided that the quartering act was actually an effort to use british soldiers to bully the americans.
william knox a british colonial official admitted as much in 1763 when he said that the main purpose of keeping an army in america was to secure the dependence of the colonies on great britain yet grenville aggravated colonial concerns by pushing through an even more controversial measure.
on february 13 1765 parliament passed the stamp act which required colonists to purchase stamped paper for virtually every possible use newspapers pamphlets bonds leases deeds licenses insurance policies college diplomas even playing cards.
the requirement was to go into effect november 1 the stamp act was the first effort by parliament to place a tax directly on american goods and services rather than levying an external tax on imports and exports.
not a single colony supported the new measure.
the whig point of view grenvilles colonial policies outraged many americans especially those living in the large port cities bos regulating the colonies 169 ton new york philadelphia and charleston.
unwittingly the prime minister had stirred up a storm of protest and set in motion a violent debate about the proper relationship between great britain and her colonies.
in the late eighteenth century the americans who opposed british policies began to call themselves patriots or whigs a name earlier applied to british critics of royal power.
in turn whigs labeled the king and his corrupt government ministers and parliamentary supporters as tories a term of abuse meaning friends of the king.
in 1764 and 1765 whigs felt that grenville was violating their rights in several ways.
a professional army was usually a weapon used by tyrants and now with the french defeated and canada solidly under british control thousands of british soldiers remained in america.
were the troops there to protect the colonists or to scare them into obedience.
whigs also argued that british citizens had the right to be taxed only by their elected representatives in parliament but americans had no such representatives.
british leaders countered that the colonists enjoyed virtual representation in parliament.
william pitt a staunch supporter of american rights in parliament dismissed grenvilles concept of virtual representation as the most contemptible idea that ever entered into the head of a man many others in both britain and america agreed.
sir francis bernard the royal governor of massachusetts correctly predicted that the new stamp tax would cause a great alarm meet much opposition in the colonies.
protests in the colonies the stamp act aroused fierce resentment and resistance.
a new yorker wrote that this single stroke has lost great britain the affection of all her colonies in a flood of pamphlets speeches resolutions and street protests critics repeated a slogan familiar to americans no taxation without representation in parliament protesters calling themselves sons of liberty emerged in every colony often meeting beneath liberty trees in boston a great elm in charleston south carolina a live oak.
in new york city the sons of liberty erected liberty poles as symbols of their resistance.
in virginia patrick henry convinced the assembly to pass the stamp act resolutions which asserted yet again that the colonists could not be taxed without being first consulted by the british government or represented in parliament by their own elected members.
the nonimportation movement americans opposed to the stamp act knew that the most powerful form of leverage they had against 170 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 in a predominantly agricultural society like america turning farmers into soldiers hurt the national economy.
william hooper a north carolinian who signed the declaration of independence grumbled that a soldier made is a farmer lost in april 1776 the continental congress had ended britains trade regulations by opening american ports to the ships of all nations.
soon however british warships set up blockades around americas major coastal cities.
many states found a ready source of revenue in the sale of abandoned loyalist homes farms and plantations.
nevertheless congress and the states still fell short of funding the wars cost and were forced to print more and more paper money which eroded its value.
at the start of the fighting there george washington at princeton commissioned for independence were no uniforms for the soldiers and hall in philadelphia this 1779 painting sailors and weapons were as variby charles willson peale portrays ous as their costumes most weapons washington as the hero of the battle of and ammunition were acquired either princeton.
by capturing british supplies or by importing them from france a government all too glad to help the patriots fight its arch enemy.
native americans and the revolution both the british and americans recruited indians to fight with them but the british were far more successful largely because they had longstanding relationships with chieftains and they promised to protect indian lands.
the peoples making up the iroquois league split their allegiances with most mohawks onondagas cayugas and senecas led by mohawk joseph brant and seneca old smoke joining the british and most oneidas and tuscaroras supporting the patriots.
the cherokees also joined the british in hopes of driving out american settlers who had taken their lands.
most indians in new england tried to remain neutral or sided with the patriots.
the stockbridge indians in massachusetts mostly mahicans formed mobilizing for war 205 a company of minutemen who fought alongside patriot units.
they pledged that wherever your armies go there we will go you shall always find us by your side and if providence calls us to sacrifice our lives in the field of battle we will fall where you fall and lay our bones by yours yet however much the british or americans claimed native americans as allies most indians engaged in the war as a means of protecting themselves and their own interests.
disaster in canada in july 1775 the continental congress authorized an ill planned military expedition in canada against quebec in the vain hope of rallying support among the french canadians.
one patriot detachment under general richard montgomery a former british army officer headed toward quebec by way of lake champlain along the new york canadian border another under general benedict arnold struggled westward toward quebec through the dense maine woods.
the americans arrived outside quebec in september tired exhausted and hungry.
a silent killer then ambushed them smallpox.
as the deadly virus raced through the american camp general montgomery faced a brutal dilemma.
most of his soldiers had signed up for short tours of duty and many were scheduled for discharge at the end of the year.
because of the impending departure of his men montgomery could not afford to wait until spring for the smallpox to subside.
seeing little choice but to fight he ordered an attack on the british forces defending quebec during a blizzard on december 31 1775 the american assault was a disaster.
montgomery was killed early in the battle and benedict arnold was seriously wounded.
more than 400 americans were taken prisoner.
the rest of the patriot force retreated to its camp outside the walled city and appealed to the continental congress for reinforcements.
smallpox spread throughout the american army and arnold warned george washington in february 1776 that the runaway disease would soon bring the entire ruin of the army the british sensing weakness attacked the american camp and sent the ragtag patriots on a frantic retreat up the st lawrence river to the american held city of montreal and eventually back to new york and new england.
by the summer of 1776 the american revolutionaries had come to realize that their quest for independence would be neither short nor easy for the king and parliament were determined to smash the revolt and restore their empire.
george washington confessed to his brother that his efforts to form an effective american army out of the great mixture of troops were filled with difficulties and distresses most of the new england soldiers farmers sailors fishermen and a few former s laves were he said an exceeding ly 206 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 or support any religious worship place or ministry whatsoever and that all men shall be free to profess and by argument to maintain their opinions in matters of religion these statutes and the revolutionary ideology that justified them helped shape the course that religious life would take in the new united states diverse and voluntary rather than monolithic and enforced by the government.
slaves and the revolution the sharpest irony of the american revolution is that great britain offered enslaved blacks more opportunities for freedom than did the united states.
in november 1775 the british royal governor of virginia john murray lord dunmore himself a slave owner announced that all slaves and indentured servants would gain their freedom if they joined the loyalist cause.
within a month the british had attracted more than 300 former servants and slaves to what came to be called the ethiopian regiment the number soon grew to almost 1 000 males and twice as many women and children.
one former slave renamed himself british freedom another runaway who joined the a ll black ethiopian regiment was harry washington one of george washingtons slaves.
in his new role as soldier he wore a uniform embroidered with the motto liberty to slaves washingtons farm manager wrote the general that all his slaves would leave us if they believed they could make their escape for liberty is sweet the british recruitment of slaves outraged george washington thomas jefferson and other white plantation owners in virginia where 40 percent of the population was black.
washington predicted that if dunmores efforts were not crushed soon the number of slaves joining the british army would increase as a snow ball by rolling jefferson expressed the same concerns after t wenty three slaves escaped from his plantation outside charlottesville.
jefferson eventually reclaimed six of them only to sell them for their disloyalty another virginia planter captured a fifteen year old girl who tried to join the british army lashed her eighty times with his whip and then poured hot coals on her wounds.
southern backlash in the end the british policy of recruiting slaves backfired.
the terrifying prospect of british troops arming slaves persuaded many f ence straddling southerners to join the patriot cause.
edward rutledge of south carolina said that the british decision to arm slaves and the revolution 237 slaves did more to create an eternal separation between great britain and the colonies than any other expedient for rutledge and many other southern whites the revolution became primarily a war to defend slavery.
in 1775 thomas jeremiah a free black was convicted and executed in charleston south carolina for telling slaves that british troops were coming to help the poor negroes in response to the british recruitment of enslaved african americans at the end of 1775 a desperate general washington authorized the enlistment of free blacks but not slaves into the american army.
in february 1776 however southern representatives convinced the continental congress to instruct general washington to enlist no more african americans free or enslaved.
two states south carolina and georgia refused to allow any blacks to serve in the patriot forces.
as the american war effort struggled however some states ignored southern wishes.
massachusetts organized two all black army units and rhode island organized one which also included native americans.
about 5 000 african americans fought on the patriot side and most of them were free blacks from northern states.
the white belknap family of framingham massachusetts freed their african american slave peter salem so that he might enlist in the massachusetts militia.
salem was with the minutemen at concord in 1775 and also fought alongside other blacks at the battles of bunker hill and saratoga.
another former slave who fought at bunker hill salem poor was commended after the battle for being a brave gallant soldier who behaved like an experienced officer as well as an excellent soldier overall the british army which liberated 20 000 enslaved blacks during the war was a far greater instrument of emancipation than the american forces.
most of the newly freed blacks found their way to canada or to british colonies on caribbean islands.
while thousands of free blacks and runaway slaves fought in the war the vast majority of african americans did not choose sides so much as they chose freedom.
several hundred thousand enslaved blacks mostly in the southern states took advantage of the disruptions caused by the war to seize their freedom.
in the north which had far fewer slaves than the south the ideals of liberty and freedom led most states to end slavery either during the war or shortly afterward.
but those same ideals had little to no impact in the southern states.
these contrasting attitudes toward slavery would continue to shape the political disputes of the young nation.
238 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation the monied interest a direct stake in the success of the new national government.
a well managed federal debt he claimed would become a national blessing by giving investors at home and abroad confidence in the national economy and the integrity of the government.
hamilton also insisted that the federal government pay assume the state debts from the revolutionary war because they were in fact a national responsibility all americans had benefited from the war for independence.
the debt of the united states he stressed was the price of liberty sectional differences hamiltons complicated financial proposals created a storm of controversy in part because many people then and since did not understand their complexities.
james madison who had been hamiltons close ally in the fight for the new constitution broke with him over the federal government assuming the states debts.
madison then the most powerful member of the new congress was troubled that northern states owed far more debt than southern states.
four states virginia north carolina georgia and maryland had already paid off most of their war debts.
the other states had not been as conscientious.
madisons opposition to hamiltons debt assumption plan ignited a vigorous debate in congress.
in april 1790 the house of representatives voted down hamiltons assumption plan 32 29.
hamilton did not give up however.
after failing to get a couple of members of congress to switch their votes he then hatched an ingenious scheme.
in june 1790 hamilton invited jefferson and madison to join him for dinner in new york city.
by the end of the evening the three leaders had reached a famous compromise.
first they agreed that the national capital should move from new york city to philadelphia for the next ten years.
then the capital would move to a new city to be built in a federal district on the potomac river between maryland and virginia.
hamilton agreed to find the votes in congress to approve the move in exchange for madison pledging to find the two votes needed to pass the d ebt assumption plan.
the votes in congress went as planned and the federal government moved in late 1790 to philadelphia.
ten years later the nations capital was moved again this time to the new planned city of washington in the federal district of columbia.
more immediately hamiltons debt funding scheme proved a success.
the new bonds issued by the federal government in 1790 were quickly snatched up by eager investors thereby providing money to begin paying off the war debts while covering its operating expenses.
in addition hamilton obtained new loans from european governments.
hamiltons vision of a c apitalist america 277 to raise additional government revenue hamilton convinced congress to create an array of excise taxes taxes on particular products such as carriages sugar and salt.
a 25 percent excise tax on liquor in 1791 would prove to be the most controversial of all but the excise taxes generated m uch needed revenue.
by 1794 the nation had a higher financial credit rating than all the nations of europe.
by making the new nation financially solvent hamilton set in motion the greatest economic success story in world history.
a national bank part of the opposition to hamiltons debt financing scheme grew out of opposition to hamilton himself.
the brash young treasury secretary viewed himself as president washingtons prime minister.
that his department of treasury had forty staff members while thomas jeffersons state department had five employees demonstrated the priority that president washington gave to the nations financial situation.
hamilton was on a mission to develop an urban centered economy anchored in finance and manufacturing.
after securing congressional approval of his d ebt funding scheme he called for a national bank modeled after the powerful bank of england.
such a bank hamilton believed would enable much greater commerce among individuals and provide a safe place for the federal governments cash.
by their nature hamilton explained banks were essential to a new nation that was short on gold and silver.
banks would increase the nations money supply by issuing currency in amounts greater than their actual reserve gold and silver coins and government bonds in their vaults.
by issuing loans and thereby increasing the amount of money circulating through the economy banks served as the engines of prosperity industry is increased commodities are multiplied agriculture and manufactures flourish and herein consist the true wealth and prosperity of a genuine nation hamiltons idea of a powerful national bank generated intense criticism.
once again madison and jefferson led the opposition arguing that since the constitution said nothing about creating a national bank the government could not start one.
jefferson also believed that hamiltons proposed bank would not help most americans.
instead a small inner circle of self serving financiers and investors would over time exercise corrupt control over congress.
hamilton however had the better of the argument in congress.
representatives from the northern states voted 33 1 in favor of the national bank southern congressmen opposed the bank 19 6.
the lopsided vote illustrated the growing political division between the north and south in the young nation.
278 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation c ommitted to economic growth social stability and national defense.
what most worried the federalists as alexander hamilton said was the poison of democracy the people he stressed are turbulent and changing they seldom judge or determine right wisely by contrast the democratic republicans led by thomas jefferson and james madison were most concerned about threats to individual freedoms and states rights posed by a strong national government.
in july 1789 chaotic violence erupted in france when masses of the working poor enraged over soaring prices for bread their primary food and in part inspired by the american revolution revolted against the absolute monarchy of louis xvi sending shock waves throughout europe.
the french revolution captured the imagination of many sympathetic americans especially thomas jefferson and the republicans as royal tyranny was displaced by a democratic republic that gave voting rights to all adult men regardless of how much property they owned.
americans formed democratic republican societies that hosted rallies on behalf of the french revolution and in support of local republican candidates.
during the 1790s james madison assumed leadership of hamiltons republican opponents in congress.
foreign and domestic crises during the fragile infancy of the new nation george washington was the only man able to rise above party differences and hold things together.
in 1792 he was unanimously reelected to a second term.
and he quickly found himself embroiled in the cascading consequences of the french revolution which had started in 1789 the turmoil in france threatened to draw the united states into a european war.
in 1791 the monarchies of prussia and austria had invaded france to stop the revolutionary movement from infecting their absolutist societies.
the foreign invaders however only inspired the french revolutionaries to greater efforts to use force to spread their ideal of democracy.
by early 1793 the most radical of the french revolutionaries called jacobins had executed the king and queen as well as hundreds of aristocrats and priests.
the jacobins not only promoted democracy religious toleration and human rights but they went well beyond the ideals of the american revolution in supporting social racial and sexual equality.
then on february 1 1793 the french revolutionary government declared war on great britain thus beginning a conflict that would last twenty two years.
as the french republic plunged into warfare the revolution entered its worst phase the s o called reign of terror.
in 1793 1794 t housands of foreign and domestic crises 283 counterrevolutionary political prisoners and priests were executed along with many revolutionary leaders.
barbarism ruled the streets of paris and other major cities.
secretary of state thomas jefferson who loved french culture and democratic ideals wholeheartedly endorsed the revolution as the most sacred cause that ever man engaged in by contrast alexander hamilton and vice president john adams saw the french revolution as vicious and godless.
such conflicting attitudes over events in europe transformed the first decade of american politics into one of the most fractious periods in the nations h istory an age of passion the european war against revolutionary france tested the ability of the united states to remain neutral in world affairs.
both france and britain purchased goods from america and each sought to stop the other from trading with the united states even if it meant attacking u s merchant ships.
federalists and jeffersonian republicans alike agreed that a naval war with either european power would devastate the american economy.
as president washington began his second term in 1793 he faced an awkward decision.
by the 1778 treaty of alliance the united states was a perpetual ally of france.
americans however wanted no part of the european war.
they were determined to maintain their profitable trade with both sides although almost 90 percent of u s imports came from britain.
hamilton and jefferson agreed that entering the european conflict would be foolish.
where they differed was in how best to stay out of the war.
hamilton had a simple answer declare the military alliance formed with the french during the american revolution invalid because it had been made with a monarchy that no longer existed.
jefferson preferred to delay and to use the alliance with france as a bargaining point with the british.
in the end president washington took a wise middle course.
on april 22 1793 he issued a neutrality proclamation that declared the united states friendly and impartial toward the belligerent powers and warned u s citizens that they might be prosecuted for aiding or abetting hostilities or taking part in other un neutral acts.
instead of settling matters in his cabinet however washingtons neutrality proclamation brought to a boil the ugly feud between jefferson and hamilton.
jefferson dashed off an angry letter to james madison urging his friend to take up your pen and cut hamilton to pieces in the newspapers.
citizen gent at the same time that president washington issued the neutrality proclamation he accepted secretary of state jeffersons argument that the united states should officially recognize the new french revolutionary 284 chapter 7 the early republic 1800 1815 in 1801 however the ruler of tripoli upped his blackmail demands and declared war on the united states.
jefferson sent warships to blockade tripoli.
nothing will stop these pirates he wrote but the presence of an armed force a sporadic naval war dragged on until 1805 punctuated in 1804 by the notable exploit of lieutenant stephen decatur who slipped into tripoli harbor by night and set fire to the frigate philadelphia which had been captured after it ran aground.
the tripoli ruler finally settled for a 60 000 ransom and released the philadelphias crew.
it was still blackmail called tribute in the nineteenth century but less than the 300 000 the pirates had demanded and much less than the cost of an outright war.
western expansion thomas jefferson often looked to the west for his inspiration across the appalachian mountains and even across the mississippi river areas that he himself never visited.
only by expanding westward he believed could america avoid becoming overcrowded along the atlantic coast.
westward expansion however meant invading areas long inhabited by native a mericans and the spanish and french.
the louisiana purchase in 1801 american diplomats in europe heard rumors that spain had been forced to transfer its huge louisiana province to its domineering ally france now led by the brilliant napolon bonaparte.
short of stature but a giant on the battlefield napolon was a war loving military genius who had become the most feared ruler in the world the conqueror of egypt and italy.
after taking control of the french government the ambitious napolon set out to restore his countrys north american empire canada and louisiana that had been lost to great britain in 1763 president jefferson referred to napolon as both a scoundrel and a gigantic force threatening the future of the united states.
a weak spain in control of the territory west of the mississippi river could have been tolerated jefferson explained but napoleonic france in control of the mississippi valley would lead to eternal friction and eventually war with the united states.
to prevent france from seizing control of the mississippi river the greatest of evils jefferson sent new yorker robert r livingston to paris in 1801 to serve as the u s ambassador to france.
the president told livingston that his primary objective should be to acquire the port city of new orleans strategically situated at the mouth of the mississippi the magisterial river that begins in northern minnesota and flows 2 552 miles south to the gulf of m exico.
jefferson told livingston that purchasing new orleans and west florida the territory along the gulf coast from pensacola florida to new jeffersonian republicanism 313 orleans was of absolute importance for the day that france takes possession of new orleans.
we must marry ourselves to the british fleet and nation for protection against napoleonic france.
over the years new orleans under spanish and then french rule had become a prosperous port city and a dynamic crossroads where people of all races and classes intermingled.
for years americans living in tennessee and kentucky had begged the american government to ensure that they could send their crops and goods down the river to new orleans.
in early 1803 jefferson grew so concerned about the stalled negotiations in paris over new orleans that he sent james monroe his trusted friend and virginia neighbor to undertake an extraordinary mission to assist the sixty six year old livingston in paris.
all eyes all hopes are now fixed on you jefferson told him as he prepared to depart for france.
no sooner had monroe arrived than the french made a startling proposal napolon offered to sell not just new orleans but all of the immense unmapped louisiana territory from the mississippi river west to the rocky mountains and from the canadian border south to the gulf of mexico.
the unpredictable napolon had reversed himself because the large french army on the caribbean island of saint domingue haiti had been decimated by epidemics of malaria and yellow fever and by a massive slave revolt led by touissant louverture who had proclaimed the republic of haiti.
it was the first successful slave rebellion in history and it panicked slaveholders in the southern states who feared that news of the haitian revolt would spread to america.
napolon had tried to regain control of saint domingue because it was a phenomenally profitable source of coffee and sugar.
he also had hoped to connect new orleans and haiti as a first step in expanding frances north american trading empire.
but after losing more than 50 000 soldiers to disease and warfare napolon decided to cut his losses by selling the louisiana territory to the united states and using the proceeds to finance his inevitable next war with great britain.
by the treaty of cession dated may 2 1803 the united states agreed to pay 15 million for the entire louisiana territory.
when livingston and monroe asked charles maurice de talleyrand napolons negotiator about the precise extent of the territory they were buying the frenchman replied i can give you no direction.
you have made a noble bargain for yourselves.
i suppose you will make the most of it a delighted livingston the u s negotiator said that from this day the united states take their place among the powers of the first rank the arrival of the signed treaty in washington d c presented jefferson who for years had harshly criticized the federalists for stretching the meaning of the constitution with a frustrating political dilemma.
nowhere did the constitution mention the purchase of territory.
was such an action even legal.
314 chapter 7 the early republic 1800 1815 in late 1806 burr floated down the ohio and mississippi rivers toward new orleans with 100 volunteers only to have wilkinson turn on him and alert jefferson to the scheme.
the president ordered that burr be arrested.
militiamen captured burr in february 1807 and took him to richmond virginia where in august he was tried for treason before chief justice john marshall.
jefferson declared that burr was guilty of trying to separate the western states from us of adding mexico to them and of placing himself at their head in the end however burr was acquitted because john marshall instructed the jury that a verdict of treason required an act of war against the united states confirmed by at least two witnesses.
aaron burr burr graduated from what again jefferson was disgusted with is now princeton university where marshalls ruling.
it now appears we he changed his course of study from have no law but the will of the judge theology to law.
he wrote a friend.
the president considered proposing a constitutional amendment to limit the power of the judiciary and even thought about asking congress to impeach the chief justice.
in the end however he did nothing.
with further charges pending the slippery burr deeply in debt skipped bail and took refuge first in england then in france.
he returned to america in 1812 and resumed practicing law in new york.
war in europe in the spring of 1803 soon after completing the sale of louisiana to america napolon bonaparte declared war on great britain.
the massive conflict would last eleven years and eventually involve all of europe.
most americans wanted to remain neutral and trade with both sides in the war but the british and french were determined to keep that from happening.
war in europe 321 naval harassment during 1805 the spreading war in europe reached a stalemate the french army controlled most of europe and the british navy dominated the seas.
in may 1806 britain issued a series of official declarations called orders in council which imposed a naval blockade of the entire european coast to prevent merchant ships from other nations including the united states from making port in france.
soon british warships began seizing american merchant ships bound for france.
an angry congress responded preparation for war to defend by passing the n on importation act commerce shipbuilders like those which banned the importation of brit pictured here constructing the ish goods.
in early 1807 napolon philadelphia played an important role in announced that french warships americas early wars.
would blockade the ports of great britain.
the british responded that they would no longer allow any foreign ships to trade with the french controlled islands in the caribbean.
soon thereafter british warships appeared along the american coast stopping and searching u s merchant vessels as they headed for the caribbean or europe.
the tense situation posed a terrible dilemma for american shippers.
if they agreed to british demands to stop trading with the french the french would retaliate by seizing u s vessels headed to and from great britain and if they agreed to french demands that they stop trading with the british the british would seize american ships headed to and from france.
lured by high profits many american merchants decided to risk becoming victims of the a nglo french war.
many of them paid a high price for their pursuit of overseas profits.
during 1807 hundreds of american ships and their cargoes were captured by british and french warships.
impressment for american sailors the danger on the high seas was heightened by the practice of impressment whereby british warships stopped u s vessels boarded them and kidnapped sailors they claimed were british citizens.
american merchant ships attracted british deserters because they paid seamen more than twice as much as did the royal navy fully half of all sailors on american ships about 9 000 men had been born in britain.
322 chapter 7 the early republic 1800 1815 separate fronts.
one theatre of conflict was the chesapeake bay along the coast of maryland and virginia including washington d c the second theatre was in the south alabama mississippi and west and east florida where american forces led by general andrew jackson invaded lands owned by the creeks and the spanish.
the third front might be more accurately called the canadian american war.
it began in what is now northern indiana and ohio southeastern michigan and the contested border regions around the great lakes.
the fighting raged back and forth across the border as the united states repeatedly invaded british canada only to be embarrassingly repulsed.
the war in the north like the american revolution the war of 1812 often called americas second war for independence was very much a civil war.
the canadians thousands of whom were former american loyalists who had fled north after the revolutionary war remained loyal to the british empire while the americans and a few french canadians and irish canadians sought to push britain out of north america and annex canada.
in some cases americans fought former americans including families that were divided in their allegiances.
siblings even shot each other.
once after killing an american militiaman a canadian soldier began taking the clothes off the corpse only to realize that it was his brother.
he grumbled that it served him right to have died for a bad cause.
indians armed by the british dominated the heavily wooded borderlands around the great lakes.
michigans governor recognized that the british and their indian allies were dependent on each other the british cannot hold upper canada ontario without the assistance of the indians but the indians cannot conduct a war without the assistance of a civilized nation great britain so the american assault on canada involved attacking indians canadians and british soldiers.
invading canada president james madison approved a t hree pronged plan for the invasion of british canada.
it called for one army to move north through upstate new york along lake champlain to take montreal while another was to advance into upper canada by crossing the niagara river between lakes ontario and erie.
the third attack would come from the west with an american force moving east into upper canada from detroit michigan.
the plan was to have all three attacks begin at the same time to force the british troops in canada to split up.
the complicated plan of invasion however was a disaster.
the underfunded and undermanned americans could barely field one army let alone three and communications among the separated commanders was spotty at best.
the war of 1812 331 major northern campaigns of the war of 1812 quebec e 200 kilometers dearborn nov 1812 put in bay new york van rensselaer oct 1812 presque isle er nh ma ct susquehanna river pennsylvania riv harr ison oct 1 g 18 hull au kentucky fort niagara perry sept 1813 ohio ohio american forces british forces battle site ta lake on nj baltimore fort mchenry washington d c potomac river virginia de md chesapeake bay aug wwn64 how did the war of 1812 begin.
the american strategy in regard to british canada.
proof the battle that inspired francis scott key to write the star first describe 31p0 x 28p0 spangled banner figure whatm7 2 was in july 1812 fifty nine year old general william hull a revolutionary war veteran and governor of the michigan territory marched his disorganized and poorly supplied army across the detroit river into canada.
he told the canadians that he was there to free them from tyranny and oppression the canadians however did not want to be liberated and the americans were soon pushed back to detroit by british troops canadian militiamen and their indian allies.
hull was tricked by the british commanders threats to unleash thousands of indian warriors.
fearing a massacre by savages hull did the unthinkable ockade july detroit indiana territory rie l e vt rio york toronto thames macdonough sept 1814 hudson river lake mic higa n lake champlain queenston heights fort dearborn plattsburgh canada ron hu ke la illinois territory fort michilimackinac r iver ash ab w aug sept.
montreal indiana terr.
michigan territory e nc r ve itish bl wr br 200 miles ri la s t lake super ior 332 chapter 8 the emergence of a market economy 1815 1850 first half of the nineteenth century.
this great wave of humanity was not always welcomed however.
ethnic prejudices anti catholicism and language barriers made it difficult for many new immigrants mostly from ireland germany and china to be assimilated into american culture.
in the midwest large scale commercial agriculture emerged as big farms grew corn wheat pigs and cattle to be sold in distant markets and across the atlantic.
in the south cotton became so profitable that it increasingly dominated the regions economy luring farmers and planters wealthy farmers with hundreds or even thousands of acres worked by large numbers of slaves into the new states of alabama mississippi louisiana and arkansas.
in both europe and the united states cotton cloth was the first great consumer product of industrial capitalism cotton from the american south provided most of the clothing for people around the world.
as the cotton economy expanded it required growing numbers of enslaved workers many of whom were sold by professional slave traders and relocated from virginia and the carolinas to the old southwest western georgia and the florida panhandle alabama mississippi and louisiana and arkansas.
meanwhile the northeast experienced a momentous surge of industrial development whose labor saving machines and water and s team powered industries reshaped the regions economic and social life.
mills and factories began to dot the landscape and transform the ways people labored dressed ate and lived.
with the rise of the factory system more and more economic activity in the northeastern states occurred outside the home and off the farm.
the transition from m other daughter power in the home to water and steam power in the mills and factories said a farmer was producing a complete revolution in social life and domestic manners an urban middle class began to emerge as americans left farms and moved to towns and cities drawn primarily by jobs in new mills factories stores and banks.
by 1850 the united states had become the worlds fastest growing commercial manufacturing agricultural and mining nation.
the industrial economy also generated changes in other areas from politics to the legal system from the family to social values.
these developments in turn helped expand prosperity and freedom for whites and free blacks.
they also sparked vigorous political debates over economic policies transportation improvements and the extension of slavery into the new territories.
in the process the nation began to divide into three powerful r egions north south and west whose shifting alliances and disputes would shape political life until the civil war.
the market revolution 353 the market revolution during the first half of the nineteenth century a market revolution that had begun before the war of independence accelerated the transformation of the american economy into a global powerhouse.
in the eighteenth century most americans were isolated farmers focused on a subsistence or household economy.
they produced just enough food livestock and clothing for their own familys needs and perhaps a little more to barter exchange with their neighbors.
their lives revolved around a regular farmstead routine in a d ay long cycle that started with the rooster crowing at dawn to the sleep of the chickens at night punctuated by the changing seasons and unpredictable weather.
as the nineteenth century unfolded however more and more farm families began engaging in commercial rather than subsistence agriculture producing surplus crops and livestock to sell for cash in distant regional and even international markets.
in 1851 the president of the new york agricultural society noted that until the nineteenth century production for consumption was the leading purpose of the farm economy.
now however no farmer could find it profitable to do everything for himself.
he now sells for money with the cash they earned farm families were able to buy more land better farm equipment and the latest manufactured household goods.
such farming for sale rather than for consumption often called a market based economy produced b oom and bust cycles and was often built upon the backs of slave laborers immigrant workers and displaced mexicans.
overall however the standard of living rose and americans experienced unprecedented opportunities for economic gain and geographic mobility.
the transition from a traditional household economy to a modern market economy involved massive changes in the way people lived worked traveled and voted.
what the market economy most needed in order to flourish was what were then called internal improvements deepened harbors lighthouses and a national network of canals bridges roads and r ailroads all designed to improve the flow of goods to markets by liberating people from the constraints of distance.
in 1817 for example south carolina congressman john c calhoun expressed his desire to bind the republic together with a perfect system of roads and canals as the worlds largest republic the united states desperately needed a national transportation system.
let us conquer space he told the house of representatives.
calhouns proposal sparked a fierce debate over how to fund the improvements should it be the responsibility of the federal government the individual 354 chapter 8 the emergence of a market economy 1815 1850 in 1803 when ohio became a state congress had ordered that 5 percent of the money from land sales in the state would go toward building a national road from the atlantic coast across ohio and westward.
construction finally began in 1811 originally called the cumberland road it was the first interstate roadway financed by the federal government.
by 1818 the road was open from cumberland maryland westward to wheeling virginia now west virginia where it crossed the ohio river.
by 1838 the national road extended 600 miles farther westward to vandalia illinois.
the national road quickened the settlement of the west and the emergence of a truly national market economy by reducing transportation costs opening up new markets and stimulating the growth of towns.
farmers increasingly took their produce and livestock to sell in distant markets.
but using federal money to finance internal improvements remained controversial.
to the northeast a movement for paved roads gathered momentum after the philadelphia lancaster turnpike was completed in 1794.
the term turnpike derives from a pole or pike at the tollgate which was turned to admit the traffic in exchange for a small fee or toll.
by 1821 some 4 000 miles of turnpikes had been built and stagecoach and freight companies emerged to move more people and cargo at lower rates.
as the quality of the roads improved stagecoaches increased their speed.
in addition stagecoach lines began using continual relays or stages of fresh horses every 40 miles or so.
this made travel faster less expensive and more accessible.
waterways by the early 1820s the turnpike boom was giving way to dramatic advances in water transportation.
steamboats flatboats barges driven by men using long poles and canal barges carried people and goods far more cheaply than did horse drawn wagons.
hundreds of flatboats floated goods farm produce livestock and people from tennessee kentucky indiana ohio western pennsylvania and other states down the ohio and mississippi rivers.
flatboats however went only in one direction downstream.
once unloaded in natchez mississippi or new orleans louisiana they were sold and dismantled to provide lumber for construction.
the difficulties of getting back upriver were solved when robert fulton and robert r livingston sent the clermont the first commercial steamboat up the hudson river from new york city in 1807 thereafter the use of wood fi red steamboats spread rapidly opening nearly half the continent to water traffic along the major rivers.
by bringing t wo way travel to the mississippi valley which included the areas drained by the ohio and missouri rivers steamboats created a transcontinental market and a commercial agricultural empire that produced the market revolution 357 traveling the western waters steamboats at st paul minnesota in 1859 much of the nations cotton timber wheat corn cattle and hogs.
by 1836 there were 750 steamboats operating on american rivers.
as steamboat use increased the price for shipping goods plunged thus increasing profits and stimulating demand.
the use of steamboats transformed st louis missouri from a sleepy frontier village into a booming river port.
new orleans developed even faster.
by 1840 it was perhaps the wealthiest american city having developed a thriving trade with the caribbean islands and the new latin american republics that had overthrown spanish rule.
a thousand steamboats a year visited new orleans.
the annual amount of trade being shipped through the river city doubled that of new york city by 1843 in large part because of the explosion in cotton production.
the wood burning steamboats were crowded dirty and risky forms of transportation.
accidents explosions and fires were common and sanitation was poor.
passengers crowded on board along with pigs and cattle.
there were no toilets on steamboats until the 1850s and all passengers shared the same two washbasins and towels.
for all of the inconveniences however steamboats were the fastest and most convenient form of transportation in the first half of the nineteenth century.
canals also sped the market revolution.
the erie canal in central new york connected the great lakes and the midwest to the hudson river and new york city.
new york governor dewitt clinton former mayor of new york city and vice president under james madison took the lead in 358 chapter 8 the emergence of a market economy 1815 1850 the growth of railroads 1850 superio lake r canada me is si ss ip lake michigan m wi pi rive tario e on lak ny ma mi e eri ke la r ia vt nh ron hu ke la minnesota territory ri ct pa il in nj oh o ri ve r unorganized territory md de atlantic hi va o mo oce an ky nc tn ar sc al ms ga railroads in 1850 tx la fl what role didwwn64 railroads play in national development.
figure m8 2a first proof 31p0 x 40p6 200 miles 200 kilometers the market revolution 363 the growth of railroads 1860 superio lake r canada si ss ip lake michigan is wi pi mi ron hu ke la minnesota territory m vt ri v e r e ri ct pa nj penn.
rr in md r b o r de va o hi o ri ve r unorganized territory oh mo atl antic ky o cean nc tn ar sc ms tx al railroads in 1860 principal east west lines ga la fl ma e rie r r eri ke il me ny tario e on entral rr lak n y c la ia nh why did the number of railroads expand rapidly from 1850 to 1860.
what were the principal e ast west lines.
wwn64 figure m8 2b first proof 31p0 x 40p6 200 miles 200 kilometers 364 chapter 8 the emergence of a market economy 1815 1850 factories meant that more goods could be produced faster and with less labor and machines helped industries produce standardized parts that could be assembled by unskilled wage workers.
machine made clothes using standardized forms fit better and were less expensive than those sewn by hand machine made newspapers and magazines were more abundant and affordable as were clocks watches guns and plows.
the impact of the cotton gin in 1792 eli whitney a recent yale graduate from new england visited mulberry grove plantation on the georgia coast where he heard much said of the difficulty of ginning cotton that is separating the fibers from the seeds.
cotton had been used for clothing and bedding from ancient times but until the nineteenth century cotton cloth was rare and expensive because it took so long to separate the lint fibers from tenacious cotton seeds.
one person working all day could separate barely one pound by hand.
at mulberry grove eli whitney learned that the person who could invent a machine to gin cotton would become wealthy overnight.
within a few days he had devised a simple mechanism he called it an absurdly simple contrivance using nails attached to a roller to remove the seeds from cotton bolls.
the cotton gin short for engine proved to be fifty times more productive than a hand whitneys cotton gin eli whitneys laborer.
almost overnight it made drawing which accompanied his 1794 the white fiber americas most profitfederal patent application shows the able cash crop.
in the process it transside and top of the machine as well as formed southern agriculture northern the sawteeth that separated the seeds industry race based slavery national from the fiber.
politics and international trade.
king cotton during the first half of the nineteenth century s outhern g rown cotton became the dominant force driving both the national economy and the controversial efforts to expand slavery into the western territories.
cotton was called white gold it brought enormous wealth to southern p lanters industrial development 367 and merchants as well as new england textile mill owners and new york shipowners.
by 1812 because of the widespread use of cotton gins the cost of producing cotton yarn had plunged by 90 percent and the spread of textile mills in britain and europe had created a rapidly growing global market for southern cotton.
by the m id nineteenth century people worldwide were wearing m ore comfortable and easier to clean cotton clothing.
when british textile manufacturers chose the less brittle american cotton over the varieties grown in the caribbean brazil and india the demand for southern cotton skyrocketed as did its price.
cotton became americas largest export and the primary driver of the nations extraordinary economic growth during the first half of the nineteenth century.
by 1860 british textile mills were processing a billion pounds of cotton a year 92 percent of which came from the american south.
cotton growing first engulfed the piedmont region of the carolinas and georgia.
after the war of 1812 it migrated into the contested indian lands to the west tennessee alabama florida mississippi louisiana arkansas and texas.
new orleans became a bustling p ort and active slave market because of the cotton grown throughout the region and shipped down the mississippi river.
from the mid 1830s to 1860 cotton accounted for more than half of american exports.
planter capitalists in the south harvested raw cotton and northern buyers and shipowners carried it to new england great britain and france where textile mills spun the fiber into thread and fabric.
bankers in new york city and london financed the growth of global cotton capitalism.
the expansion of slavery because cotton is a labor intensive crop growers were convinced that only slaves could make their farms and plantations profitable.
as a result the price of slaves soared with the price of cotton.
when farmland in maryland and virginia lost its fertility after years of relentless tobacco planting many whites shifted to growing corn and wheat since the climate in maryland and virginia was too cold for cotton.
many virginia and maryland planters sold their surplus slaves to work in the new c otton growing areas in georgia alabama mississippi and louisiana.
between 1790 and 1860 some 835 000 slaves were sold south in 1790 planters in virginia and maryland had owned 56 percent of all the slaves in the united states by 1860 they owned only 15 percent.
cotton created boom times in the new region called the old southwest southwest georgia alabama mississippi and the panhandle of florida.
a cotton farmer in mississippi urged a friend in kentucky to sell his farm and join him if you could reconcile it to yourself to bring your negroes to the mississippi territory they would certainly make you a handsome fortune in 368 chapter 10 the jacksonian era 1828 1840 the b u s.
helped accelerate business expansion by making loans to individuals businesses and state banks.
it also helped promote a stable money supply and deter excessive lending by requiring the 464 state banks to keep enough gold and silver coins called specie in their vaults to back their own paper currency which they in turn loaned to individuals and businesses.
prior to the b u s.
being reestablished the number of unstable and unregulated state banks had increased dramatically.
most of them issued their own paper money and half of those created between 1810 and 1820 had gone bankrupt by 1825 the primary benefit of the b u s.
was its ability to monitor and regulate many of the state banks.
with federal revenues soaring from land sales during the early 1830s the b u s led by the brilliant but arrogant nicholas biddle had accumu oney and economic power.
even though lated massive amounts of m the b u s.
benefited the national economy state banks especially in the south rechartering the bank jacksons effort to defeat the recharter of the b u s.
is likened to fighting a hydra a many headed serpent from greek mythology.
just as the hydra would sprout two heads when one was severed for each b u s.
supporter that jackson subdued even more supporters would emerge to take his place.
213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 436 24 10 15 1 52 pm jackson as president 437 and west feared its growing monopolistic power.
critics claimed that b iddle and the b u s.
directors most of whom lived in the northeast were so focused on their own profits that they were restricting lending by state banks and impeding businesses from borrowing as much as they wanted.
andrew jackson had always hated banks and bankers whom he called vipers and thieves his prejudice grew out of his own experiences with banks in the 1790s when he had suffered huge financial losses.
now as a popularly elected president he claimed to speak for ordinary americans who felt that banks favored the rich and powerful in the east.
jackson also distrusted banks because they printed too much paper money causing prices to rise inflation.
he wanted only gold and silver coins to be used for economic transactions.
i think it right to be perfectly frank with you jackson told biddle in 1829.
i do not dislike your bank any more than i dislike all banks but jackson also disliked biddle because he was everything that jackson was not an easterner born to wealth highly educated financially sophisticated and a world traveler.
ironically biddle had voted for jackson.
the national bank may have become too powerful as jackson charged but the bank war between jackson and biddle revealed that the president never truly understood the national banks role or policies and he continued to let personal animosity drive many of his policy decisions.
had provided a stable monetary system for the expanding economy as well as a mechanism for controlling the pace and integrity of economic growth by regulating the ability of branch banks and state banks to issue paper currency.
the recharter effort although the charter for the b u s.
ran through 1836 nicholas biddle could not afford to wait until then for its renewal.
leaders of the national republican party especially senators henry clay and daniel webster who was a paid legal counsel to the b u s.
told biddle that the charter needed to be renewed before the 1836 presidential election.
they assured him that congress would renew the charter leading the impolitic biddle to grow overconfident about the banks future.
jackson he said thinks because he has scalped indians.
he is to have his way with the bank biddle and his political allies however failed to appreciate jacksons tenacity and the depth of his hatred for the b u s.
and most voters were on jacksons side.
in the end biddle clay and the national republicans unintentionally handed jackson a popular issue on the eve of the election.
at their nominating convention in december 1831 the national republicans endorsed clay as their presidential candidate and approved the renewal of the b u s.
213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 437 24 10 15 1 52 pm 438 chapter 10 the jacksonian era 1828 1840 webster replying to senator hayne 1848 the eloquent massachusetts senator challenges the argument for nullification in the webster hayne debate.
unapologetic unionist determined to strengthen the ties that hold us together he pointed out that the u s constitution was created not by the states but by the american people.
if states were allowed to nullify a federal law the union would be nothing but a rope of sand south carolinas defiance of federal authority he charged is nothing more than resistance by force it is disunion by force it is secession by force it is civil war websters powerful closing statement liberty and union now and forever one and inseparable was printed in virtually every newspaper in the nation.
abraham lincoln later called it the very best speech ever delivered even hayne was awestruck.
he told webster that a man who can make such speeches as that ought never to die in the end webster rather than hayne had the better argument.
president jackson did not attend the debate but he kept abreast of it from the white house.
when he asked an aide how webster was doing the answer was what he wanted he is delivering a most powerful speech.
demolishing our friend hayne the president was pleased.
as jackson said the constitution and its laws remained supreme calhoun versus jackson that jackson like calhoun was a cotton planting slaveholder led many southerners to assume that the president would support their resistance to the federal tariff.
jackson was s ympathetic 213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 440 24 10 15 1 52 pm nullification 441 ntil calhoun and others in south carolina threatened to nullify federal u laws they did not like.
he then turned on them with the same angry force he had directed toward the advancing british army at new orleans in 1815 on april 13 1830 the democratic party hosted scores of congressmen and political leaders at the first annual jefferson day dinner.
when it was jacksons turn to salute jeffersons memory he rose to his feet raised his glass and while glaring at calhoun growled our union it must be preserved people gasped knowing that the vice president as if challenged to a duel must reply to jacksons threat to the southern weapon of nullification.
calhoun stood and trembling with emotion countered with a defiant toast to the union next to our liberty the most dear in that dramatic exchange jackson and calhoun laid bare the fundamental tension between federal authority and states rights that has remained one of the animating themes of the american republic.
soon thereafter another incident deepened the hatred between the two men.
on may 12 1830 the president saw for the first time a letter from 1818 in which calhoun then secretary of war in the monroe administration had wanted to discipline general jackson for his unauthorized invasion of spanish held florida.
after exchanging heated letters about the incident with calhoun jackson told a friend that he was finally through with the double dealing of j c c the rift between the two proud men prompted jackson to take a dramatic step suggested by secretary of state martin van buren his closest and most cunning adviser.
during one of their daily horseback rides together van buren offered himself up as a sacrifice as a way to remove all calhoun supporters from the cabinet and thereby end the ongoing eaton affair that had fractured the administration.
as the first step in the planned cabinet coup van buren convinced john eaton to resign as secretary of war on april 4 1831 four days later van buren resigned as secretary of state.
the long agony is over crowed samuel ingham the secretary of the treasury in a letter to attorney general john berrien.
v b and major eaton have resigned what ingham and berrien did not realize was that a few days later jackson would force t hem both calhoun supporters to resign as well.
jackson now had a clean slate on which to create another cabinet.
never before had a president dismissed his entire cabinet.
critics saw through the secretary of states scheme mr.
van buren may be called the great magician wrote the new york courier for he raises his wand and the whole cabinet disappears others claimed that the cabinet purge showed ewspaper that jackson did not have the political skill to lead the nation.
one n 213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 441 24 10 15 1 52 pm 442 chapter 12 religion romanticism and reform 1800 1860 with the church of england it lost its status as the official religion in most states after the american revolution.
to help erase their pro british image virginia anglicans renamed themselves episcopalians.
but even the new name did not prevent the episcopal church from losing its leadership position in the south.
newer denominations especially baptists and methodists 20 percent of whom were african american emerged and attracted masses of excited followers.
these christian sects were organized in accord with more d emocratic principles they allowed john wesley wesleys gravestone individual congregations to exercise reads lord let me not live to be useless more power on their own than did the anglican church.
in 1784 methodists met in baltimore and announced that they were abandoning episcopalianism and forming a distinct new denomination committed to the aggressive conversion of all people men women indians and african americans.
the r eform minded methodists inspired by their founder the english anglican priest john wesley abandoned the gloomy predestination of calvinism in favor of a life of cheerful activism around 1800 the united states experienced a huge wave of religious revivals called the second great awakening.
without religion revivalists warned the american republic would give way to unbridled appetites and lust while all denominations grew as a result of the second great awakening the evangelical s ects baptists methodists and presbyterians experienced explosive popularity.
in 1780 the nation had only 50 methodist churches by 1860 there were 20 000 far more than any other denomination.
the percentage of americans who joined protestant churches increased sixfold between 1800 and 1860 the second great awakening involved two different centers of activity.
one developed among the elite new england colleges that were founded as religious centers of learning then spread across western new york into pennsylvania and ohio indiana and illinois.
the other center emerged in the b ackwoods of tennessee and kentucky and spread in every direction across rural america.
both the urban and rural phases of protestant revival a more democratic religion 509 ism shared a simple message salvation is available not just to a select few as the calvinist puritans had claimed but to anyone who repents and embraces christ.
frontier revivals in its frontier phase the second great awakening like the first generated tremendous excitement and emotional excesses.
it gave birth to two religious p henomena the traveling backwoods evangelist and the frontier camp meeting that helped keep the fires of revivalism and spiritual intensity burning.
people in the early nineteenth century found the supernatural inside as well as outside of churches they readily believed in magic dreams visions miraculous healing and speaking in tongues a spontaneous babbling precipitated by the workings of the holy spirit.
evangelists and exhorters spiritual speakers who were not formal ministers with colorful nicknames such as jumpin jesus or crazy dow or mad isaac found ready audiences among lonely frontier folk hungry for spiritual intensity and a sense of community.
mass revivals were family oriented community building events they bridged social economic political and even racial divisions.
women especially flocked to the rural revivals and served as the backbone of religious life on the frontier.
at the end of the eighteenth century ministers visiting the western territories reported that there were few frontier churches and few people attending them.
to remedy the situation traveling evangelists emerged.
the first large camp meeting occurred in august 1801 on a kentucky hillside called cane ridge east of lexington.
a presbyterian minister named james mcgready invited protestants in the region to attend and as many as 20 000 frontier folk came from miles around camping in tents for nine days.
white and black ministers mostly baptists and methodists preached day and night often chanting their sermons in ways that prompted listeners to cry amen hallelujah lord have mercy the frontier revivals generated intense emotions as people experienced on the spot conversions.
one participant at cane ridge observed that some of the people were singing others praying some crying for mercy as news of the cane ridge gathering spread protestant evangelists especially methodists organized similar revivals in other states.
one participant reported that the revivals created such a gust of the power of god that it seemed the very gates of hell would give way not all were swept up in the religious emotionalism.
frances trollope a distinguished english writer who toured the united states in 1827 attended a frontier revival and thought the participants behaved like raving lunatics.
she 510 chapter 12 religion romanticism and reform 1800 1860 black methodists holding a prayer meeting 1811 this caricature of an african american methodist meeting in philadelphia shows a preacher in the church doorway while his congregation engages in exuberant prayer.
to heaven to stand.
he then asked those who did not desire to go to hell to do the same.
the only person in the crowd who did not stand for either choice was a tall t hirty seven year old whig attorney named abraham lincoln cartwrights opponent in the election.
may i inquire of you mr lincoln asked cartwright where are you going lincoln replied that he was going to congress soon thereafter he defeated cartwright.
revivalism and african americans the revivals broke down conventional social barriers.
free african americans were especially attracted to the emotional energies of the methodist and baptist churches in part because many white circuit riders were opposed to slavery.
african american richard allen a freed slave in philadelphia said in 1787 that there was no religious sect or denomination that would suit the capacity of the colored people as well as the methodist he decided that the plain and simple gospel suits best for any people for the unlearned can understand it even more important the methodists actively recruited blacks.
they were the first people allen noted that brought glad tidings to the colored people in 1816 allen helped found the african methodist episcopal ame church the first black denomination in america.
a more democratic religion 513 camp meetings and women the energies of the great revival as the second great awakening was called spread through the western states and into m ore settled regions back east.
the fastest growth was along the frontier where camp meetings were an expression of the frontiers democratic spirit.
revivals were typically held in late summer or fall when farmwork eased.
baptist methodist and presbyterian ministers often worked as a team and crowds would frequently number in the thousands.
mass excitement swept up even the most skeptical onlookers and infusions of the spirit sparked strange behavior.
some went into trances others contracted the jerks babbled in unknown tongues or got down on all fours and barked like dogs to tree the devil the camp meetings also offered a social outlet to isolated rural folk especially women for whom the gatherings provided a welcome alternative to the rigors and loneliness of farm life.
evangelical ministers repeatedly applauded the spiritual energies of women and affirmed their right to give public witness to their faith and to play a leading role in efforts at social reform.
at a time when women were banned from preaching jarena lee a free black who lived in the philadelphia area was the first african american woman to become a minister in the african methodist episcopal church ame.
as she wrote if the man may preach because the saviour died for him why not the woman.
seeing as he died for her also lee became a tireless revivalist during the 1830s according to her own records she traveled 2 325 miles and preached 178 sermons the organizational needs of large revivals offered ample opportunities for women.
phoebe worrall palmer for example hosted prayer meetings in her new york city home and eventually traveled across the country as a camp meeting exhorter assuring listeners that they could gain a life without sin.
women like palmer found public roles within evangelical denominations because of their emphasis on individual religious experiences rather than conventional male dominated church structures.
palmer claimed a womans right to preach by citing the biblical emphasis on obeying god rather than man.
it is always right to obey the holy spirits command she stressed and if that is laid upon a woman to preach the gospel then it is right for her to do so it is a duty she cannot neglect without falling into condemnation such opportunities reinforced womens self confidence and their religious enthusiasm often inspired them to pursue social reforms for women including greater educational opportunities and the right to vote.
religion and reform regions roiled by revival fever were compared to forests devastated by fire.
western new york in fact experienced 514 chapters almost all of which were affiliated with a local christian church.
by 1840 some 160 000 people belonged to aass which stressed that slaveholding is a heinous crime in the sight of god and that the duty safety and best interests of all concerned require its immediate abandonment the aass even argued that blacks should have full social and civil rights.
in 1835 the group began flooding the south with a nti slavery pamphlets and newspapers.
the anti slavery materials so enraged southern slaveholders that a louisiana community offered a 50 000 reward for the capture of the notorious abolitionist arthur tappan of new york post offices throughout the south began destroying what was called anti slavery propaganda david walker the most radical figure among the largely white garrisonians was david walker a free black man who owned a used clothing store in boston.
in 1829 he published his appeal to the colored citizens of the world a pamphlet that denounced the hypocrisy of christians in the south for defending slavery and urged slaves to follow the example of the haitian rebels and revolt against the planters.
the whites want slaves and want us for their slaves walker warned but some of them will curse the day they ever saw us walker challenged african americans slave and free to act like men and use the crushing arm of power to gain their freedom.
woe woe will be to you he threatened whites if we have to obtain our freedom by fighting copies of walkers appeal were secretly carried to the south by black sailors but whites in major cities seized the vile pamphlet.
in 1830 the state of mississippi outlawed efforts to print write circulate or put forth.
any book paper magazine pamphlet handbill or circular intended to arouse the colored population by exciting riots and rebellion a split in the movement as the abolitionist movement spread debates over tactics intensified.
the garrisonians for example felt that slavery had corrupted virtually every aspect of american life.
they therefore the a nti slavery movement 541 embraced every important reform movement of the day abolition temperance pacifism and womens rights.
garrisons unconventional religious ideas and social ideals led him to break with the established protestant churches which to his mind were in league with slavery the federal government all the more so.
the u s constitution he charged was a covenant with death and an agreement with hell garrison was such a moral purist that he even refused to vote and encouraged others to do the same arguing that the american republic could not continue to proclaim the ideal of liberty while tolerating the reality of slavery.
he fiercely believed that the south could be shamed into ending slavery.
other reformers were more practical and single minded.
they saw american society as fundamentally sound and concentrated on purging it of slavery.
garrison struck them as an unrealistic fanatic whose radicalism hurt the cause.
even harriet beecher stowe who would write uncle toms cabin 1852 called garrisonians most of whom were unitarians quakers or transcendentalists moral mono maniacs the powerful tappan brothers broke with garrison over religion.
they argued that the anti slavery movement should be led only by men of evangelical piety and they declared that the unitarians and universalists in new england failed to meet that standard.
the grimk sisters a showdown between the rival anti slavery camps erupted in 1840 over the issue of womens rights.
women had joined the abolition movement from the start but largely in groups without men.
during the early nineteenth century women were rarely allowed to speak to organizations that included men.
then the activities of the grimk sisters brought womens rights to center stage.
sarah and angelina grimk daughters of a wealthy south carolina family grew up being served by slaves.
in 1821 soon after her fathers death sarah moved from charleston to philadelphia joined the society of friends quakers and renounced slavery.
angelina soon joined her.
in 1835 the sisters joined the abolitionist movement speaking to northern womens groups in what were called parlor meetings after they appealed to southern christian women to end slavery the mayor of charleston told their mother that they would be jailed if they ever returned home.
the grimk sisters traveled widely speaking first to audiences of women and eventually to groups of both sexes.
their unconventional promiscuous behavior in speaking to m ixed gender audiences prompted sharp criticism from ministers in the a nti slavery movement.
the chairman of the connecticut anti slavery society declared that no woman shall speak or vote.
it is enough for women to rule at home catharine beecher reminded the grimk sisters that women occupied a subordinate relation in society to the other sex 542 chapter 12 religion romanticism and reform 1800 1860 stressed that african americans were endowed with those intellectual and amiable qualities which adorn and dignify human nature frederick douglass frederick douglass was an even more effective spokesman for abolitionism.
having escaped from slavery in baltimore maryland douglass made his way to massachusetts where he began speaking at anti slavery meetings in black churches.
through his writings and dazzling presentations he became the best known black man in america.
i appear before the immense assembly this evening as a thief and a robber he told a massachusetts group in 1842.
i stole this head these limbs this body from my master and ran off with them fearful of capture after publishing his narrative of the life of frederick douglass an american slave written by himself 1845 he left for an extended lecture tour of the british isles returning two years later with enough money to purchase his official freedom.
he then started an abolitionist newspaper for blacks the north star in rochester new york.
he named the newspaper after the star that runaway slaves used to guide them at night toward freedom.
sojourner truth the female counterpart to frederick douglass was sojourner truth.
born to enslaved parents in upstate new york in 1797 she was given the name isabella bell hardenbergh but renamed herself in frederick douglass left and sojourner truth right both former slaves douglass and truth were leading african american abolitionists and captivating orators.
the a nti slavery movement 545 1843 after experiencing a conversation with god who told her to travel up and down the land preaching against slavery.
having been a slave until she was freed in 1827 sojourner truth was able to speak with conviction and knowledge about the evils of the peculiar institution as well as the inequality of women.
truth traveled and spoke throughout the north during the 1840s and 1850s.
as she told the ohio womens rights convention in 1851 i have plowed and planted and gathered into barns and no man could head m e and arnt i a woman.
i have borne thirteen children and seen em mos all sold off into slavery and when i cried out with a mothers grief none but jesus heard and arnt i a woman through such compelling testimony sojourner truth demonstrated the powerful intersection of abolitionism and feminism.
in the process she tapped the distinctive energies that women brought to reformist causes.
if the first woman god ever made was strong enough to turn the world upside down all alone she concluded in her address to the ohio gathering these women together ought to be able to turn it back and get it right side up again the underground railroad between 1810 and 1850 tens of thousands of southern slaves fled north.
runaway slaves would make their way usually at night from one station or safe house to the next.
the organizations and the systems of safe houses and shelters along the routes to freedom were referred to as the underground railroad.
the conductors helping the runaways included freeborn blacks white abolitionists former slaves and native americans.
many were motivated by religious concerns.
quakers presbyterians methodists and baptists participated.
in many northern cities blacks and whites organized vigilance committees to thwart the slave catchers.
in february 1851 shadrach minkins a stout c opper colored man who worked as a waiter at a boston coffee house was seized by u s marshals who claimed that he was a runaway slave from virginia.
during a court hearing black and white members of the anti slavery boston vigilance and safety committee active in the underground railroad rushed in overcame armed guards and snatched the trembling prey of the slave hunters an outraged president millard fillmore issued a proclamation demanding that citizens obey the law and that those responsible for kidnapping minkins be prosecuted.
none of the bostonians charged in the case were convicted.
a few courageous runaway slaves returned to the south to organize more escapes.
harriet tubman the most celebrated member of the underground railroad was born a slave in maryland in 1820 but escaped to philadelphia in 1849 she would return to the south nineteen times to help some 300 fugitive 546 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 seven alamo defenders perhaps including crockett survived and were captured.
santa anna ordered them hacked to death with swords.
a mexican officer wrote that the captives died without complaining and without humiliating themselves before their torturers by dawn the battle was over.
the only survivors were a handful of women and children and joe traviss slave.
it was a costly victory however as more than 600 mexicans died.
the battle of the alamo also provided a rallying cry for vengeful texians.
while santa anna proclaimed a glorious victory and ordered the bodies of the revolutionaries burned his aide wrote ominously in his diary one more such glorious victory and we are finished goliad two weeks later at the battle of coleto a mexican force again defeated a smaller texian army many of them recently arrived volunteers from southern states.
the mexicans marched the 465 captured texians to a fort in the nearby town of goliad.
despite pleas from his own men to show mercy santa anna ordered the captives killed as pirates and outlaws on palm sunday march 27 1836 more than 300 texians were marched out of goliad and murdered.
the massacres at the alamo and goliad fueled a burning desire for revenge among the texians.
sam houston the fate of the texas revolution was now in the hands of the already legendary sam houston a hulking rowdy larger than life frontier statesman born in virginia to scots irish immigrants.
at age fourteen after his father died houston had moved with his mother and siblings to eastern tennessee.
two years later he ran away from home and lived among the cherokees earning the nickname the raven like david crockett houston had served under general andrew jackson during the war of 1812 where he was grievously wounded at the battle of horseshoe bend.
thereafter he returned to tennessee and soon became a federal indian agent an attorney a u s congressman commanding general of the tennessee militia and at the ripe age of thirty governor.
unlike his friend david crockett however houston adored andrew jackson and became his devoted disciple and surrogate son leading many people to speculate that he might become the next president.
like jackson however houston was at heart an oddball ruffian he had an untamed yet gallant personality and violent temper cloaked in a charming brashness.
a friend called him a magnificent barbarian he drank.
he gambled.
he chased women.
and he brawled.
moving west 575 after learning that william stanbery an a nti jackson ohio congressman had questioned his integrity congressman houston assaulted him with a hickory cane on a washington d c street.
stanbery pulled a pistol pushed it into houstons stomach and pulled the trigger only to have it misfire.
houston then beat him about the head before ending the fight with a swift kick between stanberys thighs.
stanbery filed charges and the speaker of the house ordered houston arrested and put on trial in congress.
found guilty of assault he was reprimanded and fined.
controversy dogged houston thereafter.
in 1829 he suddenly resigned the governorship of tennessee because eliza allen his beautiful aristocratic and much younger wife had left him soon after their wedding and returned to her fathers plantation near nashville.
houston never revealed the cause of the dispute sudden calamities but elizas family did its best to destroy his reputation accusing him of dishonoring her.
he in turn kept silent because he explained to president jackson doing so reinforced his notion of honor if his character could not stand the shock of mean spirited gossip he said then let me lose it for years wild rumors circulated about what had happened on houstons wedding night.
some claimed that eliza had discovered to her horror that houston had sustained a dreadful injury true a wound in the groin from an indian arrowhead in the creek war that had left him scarred and impotent a falsehood.
others reported that his bride had confessed she was in love with someone else and had only married him to please her family.
whatever the cause houston later wrote that his ugly public divorce threw him into an agony of despair over his private afflictions that ruined his political career and exiled him from nashville society.
jackson wrote houston a consoling letter oh what a reverse of fortune his friend had experienced.
oh how unstable are human affairs having shouldered the blame for the mysterious scandal the disconsolate houston was now an outcast.
he decided that suicide was his only option.
as he was preparing to kill himself however an eagle suddenly swooped down and then soared upward into the sunset.
then and there houston later wrote i knew that a great destiny waited for me in the west in 1829 houston boarded a steamboat and headed west to cairo illinois.
he then traveled on a flatboat down the mississippi then up the arkansas river to little rock where he bought a horse and made his way several hundred miles to the arkansas territory along the oklahoma border.
there he rejoined the cherokee adopted their clothing customs and language changed his name married a cherokee woman and was formally adopted 576 chapter 14 the gathering storm 1848 1860 let them look to a more hopeful future for almost four hours he pleaded with his colleagues not to be uncompromising pigmies but compromising statesmen.
websters evenhanded speech angered both sides.
no sooner had he finished than calhoun stood to assert that the union could indeed be broken.
great moral causes will break it at the same time northern abolitionists savaged webster for calling them fanatics.
on march 11 william seward a first year whig senator from new york gave an intentionally provocative speech in which he opposed clays compromise declaring that any compromise with slavery was radically wrong and essentially vicious there was he said a higher law than the constitution and it demanded the abolition of slavery through acts of civil disobedience.
he encouraged his fellow new yorkers to defy the federal fugitive slave law by extending a cordial welcome to escaped slaves and defending them from all efforts to return them south.
the southern supporters of slavery he concluded must give way to the inevitable progress of emancipation sewards inflammatory speech outraged southerners who repudiated his fanatical and wild notion of there being a higher law than the constitution and the implication that the godly abolitionists were somehow above the law.
clay felt compelled to dismiss sewards wild reckless and abominable theories seward however was unapologetic.
he had sought to speak for the enslaved as well as all of humankind.
compromise efforts for his part henry clay was angry at everybody the extremists had taken control of the debate and were postponing a vote on his compromise proposal.
he got little help from president taylor who continued to focus solely on the admission of california as a new state.
in a letter to his son clay reported that the administration the abolitionists the ultra southern men and the timid whigs of the north are all combined against his compromise plan.
on july 4 1850 congress took a break and celebrated independence day by gathering beneath a broiling summer sun at the base of the unfinished washington monument.
president taylor suffered a mild heatstroke while listening to three hours of patriotic speeches.
he tried to recover by gorging himself on iced milk cherries and raw vegetables.
that night he suddenly developed a violent stomach disorder.
he died five days later the second president to die in office.
taylors shocking death actually bolstered the chances of a compromise in congress for his successor vice president millard fillmore supported clays proposals.
it was a striking reversal taylor the louisiana slaveholder had slavery in the territories 609 been ready to make war on his native south to save the union fillmore whom southerners thought opposed slavery was ready to make peace.
the new president asserted his control by asking his entire cabinet to resign.
he then appointed webster as secretary of state signaling that he also joined webster in supporting compromise.
fillmore was aided by illinois senator stephen a douglas a rising young star in the democratic party who was friendly to the south.
douglas dramatically stepped up to rescue clays struggling plan.
brash and brilliant short and stocky he stood just five feet four douglas the little giant who millard fillmore fillmores support of modeled himself after andrew jack the compromise of 1850 helped sustain son cleverly suggested that the best the union through the crisis.
way to salvage clays comprehensive scheme was to break it up into separate proposals and vote on them one at a time.
fillmore endorsed the idea.
the plan worked in part because john c calhoun had died and was no longer in the senate to obstruct efforts at conciliation.
each component of clays compromise plan passed in the senate and the house several of them by the narrowest of margins.
only five senators voted for all of the items making up the compromise.
in its final version the compromise of 1850 included the following elements 1 california entered the union as a free state ending forever the old balance of free and slave states 2 the t exas new mexico act made new mexico a territory and set the texas boundary at its present location.
in return for giving up its claims texas was paid 10 million which secured payment of the states debt 3 the utah act set up the utah territory and gave the territorial legislature authority over all rightful subjects of legislation slavery 4 a fugitive slave act required the federal government and northern states to help capture and return runaway slaves and 5 as a gesture to anti slavery groups the public sale of slaves but not slavery itself was abolished in the district of columbia.
by september 20 president fillmore had signed the last of the measures into law claiming that they represented a final settlement to the sectional 610 chapter 14 the gathering storm 1848 1860 and with the blood of millions in this slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked cruel and unjust enactments for four weeks as brown waited to be hanged he met with newspaper reporters and wrote a host of letters many of which were printed in anti slavery newspapers.
henry wise governor of virginia visited brown in jail and reported that he was a man of courage fortitude and simple ingeniousness.
he is cool collected and indomitable on december 2 1859 some 1 500 virginia militiamen including a young actor named john wilkes booth who would later assassinate abraham lincoln assembled for browns execution.
just before being placed atop his coffin in a wagon to take him to the scaffold brown wrote a final message predicting that the crimes of this guilty land will never be purged away but with blood although john browns raid on harpers ferry failed to ignite a massive slave rebellion it achieved two things he became a martyr for the abolitionist cause and he set off a hysterical panic throughout the slaveholding south.
the pacifist abolitionist william lloyd garrison called brown the man with the burning eyes misguided wild and apparently insane others were not so sure.
john brown may be a lunatic said a boston newspaper but if so one fourth of the people of massachusetts are madmen the transcendentalist leader ralph waldo emerson called brown a saint who had made the gallows glorious like a cross frederick douglass proclaimed brown our noblest american hero whose commitment to ending slavery was far greater than mine caught up in a frenzy of fear southerners circulated wild rumors about slave rebellions.
they have declared war on us warned a mississippi legislator.
southern congressmen brought weapons to the capitol.
one of them reported that the only ones who do not have a revolver and a knife are those who have two revolvers john browns raid convinced southern states to strengthen their militia units and pass new restrictions on the movements of slaves.
we regard every man in our midst an enemy to the institutions of the south said the atlanta confederacy who does not boldly declare that he believes african slavery to be a social moral and political blessing other newspapers claimed that browns raid had dramatically increased support for secession in the south.
the richmond whig reported that thousands of virginians had decided that the unions days are numbered its glory perished as a result of john browns actions.
the democrats divide president buchanan had chosen not to seek a second term leaving stephen a douglas as the frontrunner for the nomination.
his northern supporters tried to straddle the slavery issue by the emergence of the republican party 629 promising to defend the institution in the south while assuring northerners that slavery would not spread to new states.
southern firebrands however demanded federal protection for slavery in the territories as well as the states.
when the p ro slavery advocates lost delegates from eight southern states walked out of the convention in charleston south carolina.
the delegates then decided to leave charleston.
douglass supporters reassembled in baltimore on june 18 and nominated him for president.
southern democrats met first in richmond and then in baltimore where they adopted the pro slavery platform defeated in charleston and named john c breckinridge vice president under buchanan as abraham lincoln a lanky and their candidate because he promised to rawboned small town lawyer lincoln ensure that congress would protect the won the presidential election in 1860 right of emigrants to take their slaves to the western territories.
thus another cord of union had snapped the last remaining national party had split into northern and southern factions.
the fracturing of the democratic party made a republican victory in 1860 almost certain.
lincolns election the republican convention was held in may in the fast growing city of chicago where everything came together for abraham lincoln.
the uncommon common man won the nomination over new york senator william h seward and the resulting cheer wrote one journalist was like the rush of a great wind the convention reaffirmed the partys opposition to the extension of slavery and to gain broader support endorsed a series of traditional whig policies promoting national economic expansion a higher protective tariff free farms on federal lands out west and federally financed internal improvements including a transcontinental railroad.
the presidential nominating conventions revealed that opinions tended to be more radical in the northeast and the lower south.
attitude followed latitude.
in the border states of maryland delaware kentucky and missouri a sense of moderation aroused former whigs to make one more try at reconciliation.
meeting in baltimore a week before the republicans met in 630 chapter 14 the gathering storm 1848 1860 the election of 1860 washington terr.
or ca kansas terr.
tx wi ia utah territory new mexico territory nh 5 vt 5 unorg.
mn nebraska territory il mo ar la oh ky 12 tn 12 ms al ma ri 4 ct 6 4 nj de 3 md 8 ny mi in me ga pa va sc nc fl electoral vote popular vote abraham lincoln republican 1 866 000 stephen a douglas democrat northern 1 383 000 john c breckinridge democrat southern 848 000 john bell constitutional union 593 000 what caused the division within the democratic party in 1860.
what were the major factors that led to lincolns electoral victory.
wwn64 figure m14 4 1st proof chicago they reorganized themselves as the constitutional union party and nominated john bell of tennessee for president.
their platform centered on a vague statement promoting the constitution of the country the union of the states and the enforcement of the laws the bitterly contested campaign became a choice between lincoln and douglas in the north lincoln was not even on the ballot in the south and breckinridge and bell in the south.
douglas the only candidate to mount a nationwide campaign promised that he would make war boldly against northern abolitionists and southern disunionists but his heroic effort did no good.
by midnight on november 6 lincolns victory was announced.
he had won 39 percent of the popular vote the smallest plurality ever but garnered a the response in the south 631 clear majority 180 votes in the electoral college.
he carried all eighteen free states but none of the slave states.
lincoln a man of remarkable humility and empathy agreed with the many journalists and politicians who said his election was a fluke.
his political experience was meager his learning limited and his popular support shallow.
never did a president enter upon office with less means at his command the poet and harvard professor james russell lowell remarked.
yet the unassuming prairie lawyer from springfield illinois would emerge the acknowledged leader of his distinguished cabinet earning the respect of colleagues and opponents who had originally scorned him and becoming in the process as the poet walt whitman wrote the grandest figure yet on all the crowded canvas of the nineteenth century the response in the south between november 8 1860 when lincoln was officially named president elect and march 4 1861 when he was inaugurated the united states of america disintegrated.
the election of lincoln an anti slavery midwesterner panicked southerners who believed that the republican party as a richmond virginia newspaper asserted was founded for one reason hatred of african slavery former president john tyler wrote that with lincolns election the nation had fallen on evil times and that the day of doom for the great model republic is at hand false rumors that lincoln planned to free the slaves raced across the south.
one newspaper editorial called the president elect a bigoted unscrupulous and cold blooded enemy of peace and equality of the slaveholding states lincoln responded that southern fears were misguided.
he stressed in a letter to a georgia congressman that he was not a radical abolitionist and his administration would not interfere with slavery either directly or indirectly lincoln however refused to provide such assurances in public in part because he misread the depth of southern anger and concern over his election.
south carolina secedes p ro slavery fire eaters in south carolina viewed lincolns election as the final signal to abandon the union.
after lincolns victory the states entire congressional delegation resigned and left washington d c the state legislature then appointed a convention to decide whether it should remain in the union.
south carolina had a higher percentage of slaves in its population 60 percent than any other state and its political leadership was dominated by slave owning hotheads.
it had been a o ne party state democratic for decades 632 chapter 14 the gathering storm 1848 1860 and it was the only state that did not allow its citizens to vote in presidential elections the legislature controlled by white planters did the balloting.
meeting in charleston on december 20 1860 the special convention unanimously voted to secede from the union.
david jamison rutledge who presided over the convention announced that the ordinance of secession has been signed and ratified and i proclaim the state of south carolina an independent commonwealth rutledge would have four sons killed in the civil war and see his house burned to the ground.
james l petigru one of the few unionists in charles ton quipped that his newly independent state was too small to be a republic and too large to be an insane asylum as the news of south carolinas secession spread through charleston church bells rang and shops closed.
cadets at the citadel the state military college fired artillery salutes new flags were unfurled and volunteers donned militia uniforms.
the union is dis the union is dissolved an 1860 newspaper headline announcing south solved screamed the charleston carolinas secession from the union.
one unionist in charleston kept a copy of the newspaper scribbling on the bottom of it youll regret the day you ever done this.
i preserve this to see how it ends president buchanan balks the nation needed a decisive president but james buchanan was not up to the task.
the president blamed the crisis on fanatical northern abolitionists then declared that secession was illegal only to claim that he lacked the constitutional authority to force a state to rejoin the union.
in the face of buchanans inaction all the southerners in his cabinet resigned and secessionists seized federal property arsenals and forts in the southern states.
the response in the south 633 among those federal facilities was fort sumter nestled on a tiny island at the mouth of charleston harbor.
when south carolina secessionists demanded that major robert anderson a kentucky unionist surrender the undermanned fort he refused vowing to hold on at all costs.
on january 5 1861 buchanan sent an unarmed ship the star of the west to resupply fort sumter.
as the ship approached charleston harbor on january 9 confederate cannons opened fire and drove it away.
it was an act of war but buchanan chose to ignore the challenge and try to ride out the remaining weeks of his term hoping against hope that a compromise would be reached to avoid war.
many southerners however were not in a compromising mood.
the crisis said a southern senator could only be defused when northern people agreed to review and reverse their whole policy upon the subject of slavery secession of the lower south by february 1 1861 the states of the lower s outh south carolina mississippi florida alabama georgia louisiana and texas had seceded.
although the states secession ordinances mentioned various grievances against the federal government including tariffs on imports they made clear that the primary reason for leaving the union was the preservation of slavery.
texass ordinance stoutly opposed by governor sam houston explained that the purpose of secession and the formation of the confederacy was to secure the rights of the slave holding states in their domestic institutions the texas convention displayed the paternalistic racism at work in secession calling africans an inferior and dependent race for whom slavery was actually beneficial an alabama secessionist explained that the people in his state are calmly and fully determined never to submit to lincolns administration or to any compromise with the northern states on february 4 1861 fifty representatives of the seceding states all but one of whom were slave owners t wenty one of them wealthy planters met in montgomery alabama where they adopted a constitution for the confederate states of america.
the confederate constitution mandated that the institution of negro slavery as it now exists in the confederate states shall be recognized and protected mississippis jefferson davis a kentucky born west point graduate who had served in the house of representatives and the senate was elected president with alexander h stephens of georgia as vice president.
the tiny sickly stephens weighing no more than ninety pounds left no doubt about why the confederacy was formed.
our new government he declared is founded upon.
the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white man that slavery subordination to the superior white race is his natural and normal condition 634 chapter 15 the war of the union 1861 1865 however much jefferson davis and other southerners argued that secession and the war were about states rights the states of the lower south seceded in 1860 1861 to protect slavery.
the evidence is overwhelming.
the south carolina declaration on the immediate causes of secession for example was quite clear on the reasons for secession highlighting the increasing hostility on the part of the n on slaveholding states to the institution of slavery mississippi only mentioned one reason for seceding preserving slavery.
georgian alexander stephens the vice president of the confederate states of america was equally emphatic saying that slavery was the immediate cause of secession and war.
and as lincoln noted in his second inaugural address everyone knew that slavery was somehow the cause of the war certainly that was true for nathan bedford forrest a tennessee slave trader and wealthy planter who would become one of the confederacys most valued and controversial cavalry generals.
years after the war he exploded while listening to confederate veterans giving flowery orations in which they claimed that the south had fought the civil war to defend states rights.
the plain speaking forrest stood and shouted that he fought for one reason to keep his niggers and other folks niggers on april 15 three days after the confederate attack on fort sumter lincoln called upon the loyal states to supply 75 000 soldiers to suppress the rebellion.
senator stephen douglas insisted that there are only two sides to the question of civil war.
every man must be for the united states or against it.
there can be no neutrals in this war only patriots or traitors the civil war would force e veryone men and women white and black immigrants and native americans free and e nslaved to choose sides.
thousands of southerners fought for the union thousands of northerners fought for the confederacy.
thousands of european volunteers fought on each side.
choosing sides the first seven states to secede were all from the lower s outh south carolina mississippi florida alabama georgia louisiana and t exas where the cotton economy was strongest and slaves the most numerous.
all the states in the upper south especially tennessee and virginia had areas mainly in the mountains where whites were poor slaves were scarce and union support was strong.
nevertheless the outbreak of actual fighting led four more southern slave states to join the confederacy virginia arkansas tennessee and north carolina.
in east tennessee however the mountain counties would provide more union soldiers than confederate fighters.
thirty nine counties in mountainous choosing sides 641 western virginia were so loyal to the union that they split off and formed the new state of west virginia in october 1861 of the slaveholding states along the border between north and south delaware remained firmly in the union but maryland kentucky and missouri went through bitter struggles to decide which side to support.
i think to lose kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game lincoln said to a friend explaining the situation in the state where he was born.
if kentucky were to join the confederacy we cannot hold missouri nor as i think mary land lincoln hoped to have god on my side but i must have kentucky the president was so determined to keep slaveholding kentucky on the union side that he muffled all talk of abolition.
if maryland had seceded confederates would have surrounded washington d c to keep maryland in the union lincoln had pro confederate secession 1860 1861 illinois kansas territory in wv missouri kentucky unorganized territory texas feb 1 1861 pa ohio tennessee may 7 1861 ar may 6 ms jan 9 al jan 11 md nj de va april 17 nc may 20 sc dec 20 georgia jan 19 louisiana jan 26 1861 florida jan 10 states seceding before fort sumters surrender mexico 200 miles 100 200 kilometers states seceding after fort sumters surrender slave states adhering to the union free states and territories adhering to the union why did south carolina and six other states secede from the union before the siege at fort sumter.
wwn64 why did secession not win unanimous approval in tennessee and virginia.
figure m15 1 1st proof how did lincoln keep maryland in the union.
642 chapter 15 the war of the union 1861 1865 who will follow me two minutes later he was d ead as was the confederate attack when union soldiers held in reserve rushed to close the gap in their lines.
with stunning suddenness the carnage was over.
the surviving confederates retreated in a jostling mob to where they had started.
the once roaring battlefield was now a deathly quiet field of horror punctuated by the moanings and groanings of thousands of wounded soldiers and horses.
what general lee had called the grand charge was in the end a grand failure.
as he watched the survivors straggling back across the bloody field he muttered all this has been my fault.
it is i who have lost this fight he then ordered general pickett to prepare his battered division for another attack campaigns in the east 1863 confederate advance confederate retreat union advance battle site p e n n s y l v a n i a chambersburg gettysburg hagerstown area of map le e m a r y l a n d meade frederick ve r e ri le oa h middletown nd washington ker na c h e sapea hoo s he v i r g i n i a n an po to m n ac ri er v ah r d jac rapp iv e 20 kilometers o ks kr 20 miles an oc le e er bay fredericksburg chancellorsville riv ke r ke rapid an ho o why was gettysburg a major turning point of the war.
what were general lees goals for marching north.
why did his assault at cemetery ridge fail.
wwn64 figure m15 7 1st proof the faltering confederacy 681 only to have pickett tartly reply general lee i have no division now every one of his regimental commanders had fallen and fully half of his men lay dead or wounded.
some 42 000 on both sides were killed wounded or missing during three days at gettysburg and thousands of horses were also killed and left rotting in the summer heat.
a union soldier who witnessed the slaughter on the final day wrote home great god.
when will this horrid war stop others asked the same question.
john futch a confederate private from north carolina saw his brother charley shot in the head suffer and die at gettysburg on july 3 he wrote his wife that the slaughter had left him half crazy a few weeks after the battle he deserted was captured tried and executed.
lees retreat again as after antietam lees mangled army was forced to retreat back to virginia this time in a driving rain and again the federals failed to give chase.
had general meade pursued lees army he might have ended the war.
president lincoln was outraged we had them within our grasp lee had escaped to fight a gain and the war would grind on for another twenty one months.
but lees desperate gamble had failed in every way not the least being its inability to save the besieged confederate army at vicksburg mississippi.
on july 4 as lees defeated army left pennsylvania the confederate commander at vicksburg surrendered his entire 30 000 man army ending the forty seven day siege.
union vessels now controlled the mississippi river and the confederacy was effectively split in two with louisiana texas and arkansas cut off from the other rebel states.
jefferson davis said in late july that it was the confederacys period of disaster after gettysburg a group of northern states funded a military cemetery in commemoration of the thousands of soldiers killed in the battle.
on november 19 1863 president lincoln spoke at the ceremony dedicating the new national cemetery.
in his brief remarks known now as the gettysburg address he expressed the pain and sorrow of the uncivil war.
the prolonged conflict was testing whether a nation dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
can long endure in stirring words lincoln predicted that this nation under god shall have a new birth of f reedom and that government of the people by the people and for the people shall not perish from the earth chattanooga the third union triumph of 1863 occurred in southern tennessee around chattanooga the river port that served as a gateway to northern georgia.
in the late summer a union army led by general william 682 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction few owners however willingly freed their slaves until forced to by the arrival of union soldiers.
a north carolina planter pledged that he and other whites will never get along with the free negroes because they were an inferior race similarly a mississippi planter predicted that these niggers will all be slaves again in twelve months at wars end in the spring of 1865 henry adams left the louisiana plantation where he had been enslaved to see whether i am free by going without a pass a group of whites confronted him on the road asked his owners name and beat him when he declared that i now belong to no one some newly freed slaves rushed to give themselves new names to symbolize their changed status.
others left plantations and farms for towns and cities where as one of them said freedom was free er the ratification of the thirteenth amendment to the u s constitution in december 1865 was intended to end all doubt about the status of former slaves by abolishing slavery everywhere.
now the nation faced the huge task of reconstructing and reuniting a war ravaged south while transforming ex slaves into free workers and equal citizens.
it would not be easy.
freedom did not bring independence or s elf reliance for millions of former slaves.
at the same time many white southerners resented and resisted efforts to reconstruct their region.
as a south carolina planter told a federal official in the fall of 1865 the war is not over during the reconstruction era from 1865 to 1877 political leaders wrestled with how best to bring the confederate states back into the union and how best to help former slaves make the transition from bondage to citizenship.
those turbulent years witnessed a complex debate about the role of the federal government in ensuring civil rights.
some northerners wanted the former confederate states returned to the union with little or no changes in their social political and economic life.
others called for former confederate political and military leaders to be imprisoned or executed and the south rebuilt in the image of the rest of the nation.
the editors of the nations most popular magazine harpers weekly expressed this vengeful attitude when they declared that the forgive and forget policy.
is mere political insanity and suicide although the reconstruction era lasted only twelve years it was one of the most significant periods in u s history.
at the center of the debate over how best to restore the union were questions of continuing significance who is deserving of citizenship and what does it entail.
what rights should all americans enjoy.
what role should the federal government play in ensuring freedom and equality.
those questions are still shaping american life nearly 150 years later.
the wars aftermath in the south 703 the wars aftermath in the south the postwar south presented a sharp contrast to the victorious north where the economy had been strengthened by the war efforts.
between 1860 and 1870 northern wealth grew by 50 percent while southern wealth dropped 60 percent.
along the path that general william tecumseh shermans union army had blazed across georgia and the carolinas one observer reported in 1866 the countryside looked for many miles like a broad black streak of ruin and desolation burned out columbia south carolina said another witness was a wilderness of ruins charleston the birthplace of secession had become a place of vacant houses of widowed women of rotting wharves of deserted warehouses of weed wild gardens of miles of grass grown streets of acres of pitiful and voiceless barrenness throughout the south property values had collapsed.
in the year after the war ended eighty one plantations in mississippi were sold for less than a tenth of what they had been worth in 1860 confederate government bonds and richmond after the civil war before evacuating the capital of the confederacy richmond virginia rebels set fire to warehouses and factories to prevent their falling into union hands.
pictured here is one of richmonds burnt districts in april 1865 women in mourning attire walk among the shambles.
704 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction ring and all of which were flimsy.
in reality the essential grievance against fi the president was that he had opposed the policies of the radical republicans.
according to secretary of the navy gideon welles radicals were so angry at johnson that they would have tried to remove him had he been accused of stepping on a dogs tail the first senate trial of a sitting president began on march 5 1868 with chief justice salmon p chase presiding.
it was a dramatic spectacle before a packed gallery of journalists foreign dignitaries corporate executives and political officials.
as the trial began thaddeus stevens the radical leader warned the president unfortunate unhappy man behold your doom the five week trial ended in stunning fashion but not as the radicals had hoped.
the senate voted 35 to 19 for conviction only one vote short of the two thirds needed for removal from office.
senator edmund g ross a young radical from kansas cast the deciding vote in favor of acquittal knowing that his vote would ruin his political career.
i almost literally looked down into my open grave ross explained afterward.
friendships position fortune everything that makes life desirable.
were about to be swept away by the breath of my mouth ross was thereafter shunned by the republicans.
he lost his reelection campaign and died in near poverty.
the effort to remove johnson was in the end a grave political mistake for it weakened public support for congressional reconstruction.
nevertheless the radical cause did gain something to avoid being convicted johnson had privately agreed to stop obstructing congressional reconstruction.
republican rule in the south in june 1868 congressional republicans announced that eight southern states were allowed again to send delegates to congress.
the remaining former confederate states virginia mississippi and t exas were readmitted in 1870 with the added requirement that they ratify the fifteenth amendment which gave voting rights to african american men.
as black leader frederick douglass himself a former slave had declared in 1865 slavery is not abolished until the black man has the ballot the fifteenth amendment prohibited states from denying any man the vote on grounds of race color or previous condition of servitude but susan b anthony and elizabeth cady stanton seasoned leaders of the movement to secure an honorable independence and voting rights for women demanded that the amendment be revised to include women.
as anthony stressed in a famous speech the u s constitution said we the people not we the white male citizens nor yet we the male citizens but we the whole blacks under reconstruction 719 people who formed the union women as well as men most men however remained unreconstructed when it came to voting rights for women.
radical republicans tried to deflect the issue by declaring that it was the negros hour women would have to wait another fifty years as it turned out.
blacks under reconstruction when a federal official asked garrison frazier a former slave in georgia if he and others wanted to live among whites he said that they preferred to live by ourselves for there is a prejudice against us in the south that will take years to get over in forging new lives frazier and many other former slaves set about creating their own social institutions.
freed but not equal african americans in the postwar south were active agents in affecting the course of reconstruction.
it was not an easy process however because whites both northern and southern still practiced racism.
a northern journalist traveling in the south after the war reported that the whites seem wholly unable to comprehend that freedom for the negro means the same thing as freedom for them once the excitement of freedom wore off most southern blacks realized that their best chance to make a living was by doing farmwork for their former owners.
in fact the freedmens bureau and the federal soldiers urged and even ordered them to sign labor contracts with local whites.
many planters however conspired to control the wages paid to freedmen.
it seems humiliating to be compelled to bargain and haggle with our own servants about wages complained a white planters daughter.
white southerners also used terror intimidation and violence to suppress black efforts to gain social and economic equality.
in many respects the war had not ended as armed men organized to thwart federal efforts to reconstruct the south.
in july 1866 a black woman in clinch county georgia was arrested and given sixty five lashes for using abusive language during an encounter with a white woman.
the civil war had brought freedom to enslaved african americans but it did not bring them protection against exploitation or abuse.
after emancipation union soldiers and northern observers in the south often commented that freed slaves did not go far away from where they had been enslaved.
but why would they leave what they knew so well.
as a group of african americans explained they did not want to abandon land 720 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction they had laid their fathers bones upon a union officer noted that southern blacks seemed more attached to familiar places than any other group in the nation.
participation in the union army or navy had provided many freedmen with training in leadership.
black military veterans would form the core of the first generation of african american political leaders in the postwar south.
military service gave many former slaves their first opportunities to learn to read and write and army life also alerted them to new opportunities for economic advancement social respectability and civic leadership.
fighting for the union cause also instilled a fervent sense of nationalism.
a virginia freedman explained that the united states was now our c ountry made emphatically so by the blood of our brethren black churches and schools african american religious life in the south was transformed during and after the war.
many former slaves identified with the biblical hebrews who were led out of slavery into the promised land emancipation demonstrated that god was on their side.
before the war slaves who were allowed to attend white churches were forced to sit in the back.
after the war with the help of many northern christian the first african church on the eve of its move to a new building the first african church of richmond virginia was featured in a short article including illustrations such as this one in harpers weekly in june 1874 blacks under reconstruction 721 missionaries both black and white e x slaves eagerly established their own african american churches.
the black churches were the first social institution the former slaves could control and quickly became the crossroads for black community life.
black ministers emerged as social and political leaders as well as preachers.
one could not be a real minister one of them claimed without looking out for the political interests of his people many african americans became baptists or methodists in part because these were already the largest denominations in the south and in part because they reached out to the working poor.
in 1866 alone the african methodist episcopal ame church gained 50 000 members.
by 1890 more than 1 3 million african americans in the south had become baptists nearly three times as many as had joined any other denomination.
african american communities also rushed to establish schools.
education said a freed slave in mississippi was the next best thing to liberty starting schools said another former slave was the first proof of freedom.
most plantation owners had denied education to blacks in part because they feared that literate slaves would read abolitionist literature and organize uprisings.
after the war the white elite worried that formal education would distract poor whites and blacks from their work in the fields or encourage them to leave the south in search of better social and economic opportunities.
they didnt want us to learn nothin claimed one former slave.
white opposition made education all the more important to african americans.
south carolinas mary mcleod bethune rejoiced in the opportunity the whole world opened to me when i learned to read she walked five miles to school as a child then earned a scholarship to college and went on to become the first black woman to found a school that became a four year college what is today known as b ethune cookman university in daytona beach florida.
politics and african americans participation in the union army or navy had given many former slaves their first opportunity to express their loyalty to the american nation.
a virginia freedman explained that the united states was now our country paid for by the blood of our brethren who died while serving in the union military during the civil war.
serving in the military enabled many former slaves to learn to read and write and develop leadership qualities suitable for political roles after the war.
groups encouraging freed slaves to embrace the republican party were organized throughout the south.
they were chiefly sponsored by the union league founded in philadelphia in 1862 league recruiters in the south 722 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction rother in law to corner the gold market.
they intended to create a public b craze for gold by purchasing massive quantities of the precious metal to drive up its value.
the only danger to the complicated scheme lay in the possibility that the federal treasury would burst the bubble by selling large amounts of its gold supply which would deflate the value of gold by putting more in circulation.
when grant was seen in public with gould and fisk people assumed that he supported their scheme.
as the false rumor spread in new york citys financial district that the president endorsed the run up in gold its value soared.
on september 24 1869 soon to be remembered as black friday the scheme to drive up the price of gold worked at least at first.
starting at 150 an ounce the bidding for gold started to rise first to 160 then 165 leading more and more investors across the nation and around the world to join the stampede.
then around noon president grant and his treasury secretary realized what was happening and began selling huge amounts of government gold.
within fifteen minutes the bubble created by fisk and gould burst and the price of gold plummeted to 138.
people who had bought gold in large amounts lost fortunes.
their agony said a new yorker made one feel as if the battle of gettysburg had been lost and the rebels were marching down broadway soon the turmoil spread to the entire stock market claiming thousands of victims.
as fisk noted it was each man drag out his own corpse for weeks after the gold bubble collapsed financial markets were paralyzed and business confidence was shaken.
congressman james garfield wrote privately to a friend that president grant had compromised his office by his indiscreet acceptance of gifts from fisk and gould and that any investigation of black friday would lead into the parlor of the president the plot to corner the gold market was only the first of several scandals that rocked the grant administration.
the secretary of war it was revealed had accepted bribes from merchants who traded with indians at army posts in the west.
in st louis whiskey distillers dubbed the whiskey ring in the p ress bribed federal agents in an effort to avoid taxes bilking the government out of millions of dollars in revenue.
grants personal secretary was embroiled in the scheme caught taking secret payments for confidential information he shared.
various congressional committees investigated most of the scandals but uncovered no evidence that grant was involved his poor choice of associates however earned him widespread criticism.
democrats scolded republicans for their monstrous corruption and extravagance and reinforced the public suspicion that elected officials were less servants of the people than they were s elf serving bandits.
the grant administration 733 the money supply complex financial issues especially monetary p olicy dominated grants presidency.
prior to the civil war the economy operated on a gold standard state banks issued paper money that could be exchanged for an equal value of gold coins.
so both gold coins and state bank notes circulated as currency.
greenbacks so called because of the dye color used on the printed dollars were issued during the civil war to help pay for the war.
when a nations supply of money grows faster than the economy itself prices for goods and services increase inflation.
this happened when the greenbacks were issued.
after the war the u s treasury assumed that the greenbacks would be recalled from circulation so that consumer prices would decline and the nation could return to a hard money c urrency gold silver and copper coins which had always been viewed as more reliable in value than paper currency.
the most vocal supporters of a return to hard money were eastern creditors mostly bankers and merchants who did not want their debtors to pay them in paper currency.
critics of the gold standard tended to be farmers and other debtors.
these s o called s oft money advocates opposed taking greenbacks out of circulation because shrinking the supply of money would bring lower prices deflation for their crops and livestock thereby reducing their income and making it harder for them to pay their l ong term debts.
in 1868 congressional supporters of such a soft money policy mostly democrats forced the treasury to stop withdrawing greenbacks.
president grant sided with the hard money camp.
on march 18 1869 he signed the public credit act which said that the investors who purchased government bonds to help finance the war effort must be paid back in gold.
the public credit act led to a decline in consumer prices that hurt debtors and helped creditors.
it also ignited a ferocious political debate over the merits of hard and soft money that would last throughout the nineteenth century a nd beyond.
financial panic president grants effort to withdraw the greenbacks from circulation unintentionally helped cause a major economic collapse.
during 1873 two dozen overextended railroads stopped paying their bills forcing jay cooke and company the nations leading business lender to go bankrupt and close its headquarters doors in philadelphia on september 18 1873 the shocking news created a snowballing effect as h ard pressed banks began shutting down.
a republican senator sent president grant an urgent telegram from new york city results of today indicate imminent danger of general national bank panic 734 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction unpunished any southern citizen may kill or abuse a negro or union man republican with as much safety as one of our frontiersmen may kill an indian at the urging of president grant republicans in congress responded with three enforcement acts 1870 1871.
the first of these measures imposed penalties on anyone who interfered with any citizens right to vote.
the second dispatched federal supervisors and marshals to monitor elections in southern districts where political terrorism flourished.
the third called the ku klux klan act outlawed the main activities of the k kk forming conspiracies wearing disguises resisting officers and intimidating officials.
in general however the enforcement acts were not consistently enforced.
as a result the efforts of southern whites to use violence to thwart reconstruction escalated.
on easter sunday in 1873 in colfax louisiana a mob of white vigilantes most of them ex confederate soldiers disappointed by local election results used a cannon rifles and pistols to attack a group of black republicans in the courthouse slaughtering e ighty one and burning down the building.
it was the bloodiest racial incident during the reconstruction period.
a visit from the ku klux klan african americans in the south lived in constant fear of racial violence as this 1872 engraving from harpers weekly published to elicit northern sympathy illustrates.
the grant administration 737 southern redeemers the ku klux klans impact on southern politics varied from state to state.
in the upper south it played only a modest role in helping democrats win local elections.
in the lower south however klan violence and intimidation had more serious effects.
in overwhelmingly black yazoo county mississippi vengeful whites used terrorism to reverse the political balance of power.
in the 1873 elections for example the republicans cast 2 449 votes and the democrats 638 two years later the democrats polled 4 049 votes the republicans 7 throughout the south the activities of white supremacists disheartened black and white republicans alike.
we are helpless and unable to organize wrote a mississippi scalawag.
we dare not attempt to canvass campaign for candidates or make public speeches at the same time northerners displayed a growing weariness with using federal troops to reconstruct the south.
the plain truth is noted the new york herald the north has got tired of the negro president grant however desperately wanted to use more federal force to preserve peace and asked congress to pass new legislation that would leave my duties perfectly clear congress responded with the civil rights act of 1875 the most comprehensive guarantee of civil rights to that point.
it said that people of all races must be granted equal access to hotels and restaurants railroads and stagecoaches theaters and other places of public entertainment.
unfortunately for grant however the new law provided little authority to enforce its provisions.
those who felt their rights were being violated had to file suit in court and the penalties for violators were modest.
public interest in protecting civil rights in the south continued to wane as other issues emerged to distract northerners.
western expansion indian wars and economic issues surged to the forefront of voter concerns.
republican political control in the south gradually loosened as all white conservative parties mobilized the a nti reconstruction vote.
white d emocrats the so called redeemers who supposedly saved the south from republican control and black rule used the race issue to excite the white electorate and intimidate black voters.
where persuasion failed to work democrats used trickery.
as one enthusiastic democrat boasted the white and black republicans may outvote us but we can outcount them republican political control ended in virginia and tennessee as early as 1869 in georgia and north carolina it collapsed in 1870 although north carolina had a republican governor until 1876 reconstruction lasted longest in the lower south where whites abandoned klan robes for barefaced intimidation in paramilitary groups such as the mississippi rifle club and the south 738 chapter 17 business and labor in the industrial era 1860 1900 and tanker ships.
in economic terms this business strategy is called vertical integration.
rockefellers standard oil company was both horizontally and vertically integrated.
during the 1870s standard oil bought so many of its competitors that it developed a virtual monopoly over the industry.
many state legislatures responded by outlawing the practice of one corporation owning stock in competing ones.
in 1882 rockefeller tried to get around such laws by organizing the standard oil trust.
a trust gives a person or corporation the trustee the legal power to manage another persons money or another company.
instead of owning other companies outright the standard oil trust controlled more than thirty companies by having their stockholders transfer their shares in trust to rockefeller and eight other trustees.
in return the stockholders received trust certificates which paid them annual dividends from the trusts earnings.
the standard oil trust was rockefellers attempt to hide his virtual monopoly over the american oil industry.
soon however the formation of huge corporate trusts a practice widely copied by other industries generated intense criticism.
in 1890 congress responded by passing the sherman a nti trust act with only one dissenting vote.
it declared that corporate efforts to monopolize industries and thereby restrain competition were illegal.
but the bills language was so vague that it proved to be virtually toothless.
state laws against monopolies were initially more effective than the sherman act.
in 1892 ohios supreme court ordered the standard oil trust dissolved.
a furious rockefeller then developed another way to maintain control of his numerous companies a holding company which is a huge corporation that controls other companies by holding most or all of their stock certificates.
a holding company produces nothing itself it simply owns a majority of the stock in other companies.
rockefeller was convinced that ending competition among companies was a good thing for the nation.
monopolies he insisted were the natural result of capitalism at work.
it is too late he declared in 1899 to argue about the advantages of huge industrial combinations.
they are a necessity.
the day of individualism is gone.
never to return that year rockefeller brought his empire under the direction of the standard oil company of new jersey a gigantic holding company.
a wall street investor spoke for many business observers when he asked how can you beat the standard oil party after all they have control of all the industries are getting all the railroads and the street railways and will in a few years own the whole country.
i can see no stopping them the rise of big business 767 andrew carnegie like rockefeller andrew carnegie who created the largest steel company in the world rose to wealth from boyhood poverty.
born in scotland the son of weavers he migrated with his family in 1848 to western pennsylvania.
at age thirteen he went to work in a textile mill.
in 1853 he became personal secretary to thomas scott then district superintendent of the pennsylvania railroad and later its president.
when scott moved up the shrewd and charming carnegie became superin tendent in a region teeming with treasure during the civil war when scott became assistant secretary of war in charge of transportation carnegie went with him to washington d c and helped develop a military tele andrew carnegie established the carnegie steel company and became graph system.
the wealthiest man in the world.
the ambitious carnegie worked his way up from telegraphy to railroading to bridge building and then to steelmaking and investments.
in the early 1870s he decided to concentrate on the manufacture of iron and steel and be master in that a tiny man barely five feet tall carnegie wanted to tower over the steel industry just as john d rockefeller was doing with oil.
like rockefeller carnegie accumulated vast wealth and he often treated his workers ruthlessly.
until the m id nineteenth century steel which is stronger and more flexible than iron could be made only from wrought iron itself expensive since it had to be imported from s weden and could only be manufactured in small quantities.
bars of wrought iron were heated with charcoal over several days to add carbon and produce steel.
it took three tons of coke a high burning fuel derived from coal to produce one ton of steel.
as a result steel was too costly to make in large quantities.
that changed in the 1850s when englands sir henry bessemer invented the bessemer converter a process by which high quality steel could be produced more quickly by blasting oxygen through the molten iron in a furnace.
in the early 1870s carnegie decided to concentrate on steel because 768 chapter 17 business and labor in the industrial era 1860 1900 to be sure college women were often steered into home economics classes and finishing courses intended to perfect their housekeeping or social skills.
still the doors of the p rofessions law medicine science and the arts were at least partially opened.
in this context then the woman question that created so much public discussion and controversy in the second half of the nineteenth century involved far more than the issue of voting rights it also concerned the liberation of at least some women from the home and from longstanding limits on their social roles and even character traits.
middle class women also took advantage of other public venues for interaction charitable associations womens clubs literary societies and church work.
if there is one thing that pervades and characterizes what is called the womans movement e l youmans a prominent science writer remarked it is the spirit of revolt against the home and the determination to escape from it into the outer spheres of activity neurasthenia women who tried to escape the cult of domesticity and pursue careers outside the home often paid a high price.
many contracted college women by the end of the century women made up more than a third of college students.
here an astronomy class at new yorks vassar college is underway in 1880 an industrial society 777 a peculiar affliction which male physicians called neurasthenia a draining psychological and physical disorder whose symptoms usually included insomnia hysteria headaches depression and a general state of fatigue.
although neurasthenia plagued both sexes it most often affected college educated m iddle class women.
some prominent doctors sought to use the prevalence of neurasthenia to force women back into the cult of domesticity george m beard a neurologist who popularized the term neurasthenia concluded incorrectly that women were more nervous immeasurably than men and that female neurasthenics tended to be overly active outside the home.
this explanation led one doctor to insist that the malady provided the best argument against higher education of women many women objected to such self serving male arguments.
charlotte perkins gilman for instance wrote her short story the yellow wallpaper to expose the horrors of the rest cure she was subjected to at age t wenty seven.
a doctor had ordered her to live as domestic a life as possible have your child with you all the time lie down an hour after each meal have but two hours intellectual life a day and never touch pencil brush or pen as long as you live this regimen gilman explained took her as near lunacy as one can and come back jane addams social worker jane addams also struggled with neur asthenia and the dominant male notions of womens roles.
after graduating in 1881 from rockford college in illinois she found few opportunities to use her degree and lapsed into a state of depression during which she developed an intense desire to live in a really living world middle class women she charged were so besotted with our sentimental novel reading that we have lost the power of seeing certain aspects of life with any sense of reality because we are continually looking for the possible romance addamss desire to engage real life eventually led her to found hull house jane addams she believed that social service requires a scientific observation of ones community in order to see the needs and provide data for legislative reform.
778 chapter 19 political s talemate and rural revolt 1865 1900 turning working men into alcoholics as had happened with nations first husband her husband is torn from her she is robbed of her sons her home her food and her virtue between 1869 and 1913 from the first term of ulysses s grant through the election of william howard taft republicans monopolized the white house except for two nonconsecutive terms of new york democrat grover cleveland.
otherwise national politics was remarkably balanced.
between 1872 and 1896 no president won a majority of the popular vote.
in each of those presidential elections sixteen states invariably voted republican and fourteen including every southern state voted democratic leaving six swing states to determine the outcome.
two of those states new york and ohio decided the election of eight presidents from 1872 to 1908 presidents during the gilded age both republican and democrat deferred to their party leaders in the senate and house of representatives.
they believed that congress not the white house should formulate major policies that the president would implement.
as senator john sherman of ohio stressed the president should merely obey and enforce the law as laid out by congress.
hayes to harrison both republicans and democrats had their share of officials willing to buy and sell government jobs or legislative votes.
yet as early as the 1870s in response to the corruption uncovered in the grant administration each party developed factions promoting honesty in government.
the struggle for clean government became one of the foremost issues of the gilded age.
hayes and civil service reform president rutherford b hayes brought to the white house in 1877 both a lingering controversy over the disputed election results critics called him his fraudulency or his accidency and an uprightness that was in sharp contrast to the barely concealed graft of the grant era.
hayes appointed a democrat as postmaster general in an effort to clean up an office infamous for trading jobs for political favors.
the son of an ohio farmer hayes was wounded four times in the civil war.
he went on to serve in congress and as governor of ohio.
honest and conservative he was said a republican journalist a third rate nonentity whose only virtue was that he was obnoxious to no one hayes had been the compromise presidential nominee of two factions fighting for control of the republican party the s o called stalwarts and hayes to harrison 869 the bosses of the senate this 1889 cartoon bitingly portrays the periods corrupt alliance between big business and legislators.
alf breeds led respectively by senators roscoe conkling of new york and h james g blaine of maine.
the stalwarts had been stalwart in their support of president grant during the furor over the misdeeds of his cabinet members.
further they had mastered the patronage system spoils system of distributing political jobs to party loyalists.
the half breeds supposedly were only half loyal to grant and half committed to reform of the spoils system.
but in the end the two factions existed primarily to advance the careers of conkling and blaine who detested each other.
to his credit president hayes tried to stay above the petty bickering.
he joined the growing public outrage over corruption admitting that his party must mend its ways by focusing on republican principles rather than fighting over the spoils of office.
he serves his party best who serves his country best hayes declared.
it was time for civil service government jobs reform he appointed a committee to consider a merit system for hiring government employees as used in some european countries.
in a dramatic gesture hayes also fired chester a arthur a stalwart republican who ran the new york customs house because arthur had abused the patronage system in ways according to hayes that promoted ignorance inefficiency and corruption hayess commitment to cleaning up politics enraged republican leaders.
in 1879 ohio congressman james garfield warned hayes that if he wishes to hold any influence with fellow republicans he must abandon some of 870 chapter 19 political s talemate and rural revolt 1865 1900 although cleveland was known for his honesty and integrity he was hurt by two personal issues the discovery that he had paid for a substitute to take his place in the union army during the civil war and a juicy sex scandal that erupted when a buffalo newspaper revealed that cleveland a bachelor had befriended an attractive widow named maria halpin who named him the father of her baby born in 1874 cleveland had discreetly provided financial support for the child.
the escapades of blaine and cleveland inspired some of the most colorful battle cries in political history blaine blaine james g blaine the continental liar from the state of maine democrats chanted.
republicans countered with ma ma wheres my pa democrats also paraded through the streets chanting burn this letter near the end of the nasty campaign blaine and his supporters committed two fateful blunders in the crucial state of new york.
the first occurred at new york citys fashionable delmonicos restaurant where blaine went to a private dinner with 200 of the nations wealthiest business leaders to ask them to help finance his campaign.
accounts of the unseemly event appeared in the newspapers for days afterward.
one headline blared blaine hobnobbing with the mighty money kings the article explained that the banquet was intended to collect contributions for a republican corruption fund blaines second blunder occurred when a protestant minister visiting republican headquarters in new york referred to the democrats as the party of rum romanism and rebellion the confederacy blaine who was present let pass the implied insult to catholics a fatal oversight since he had cultivated irish american support with his a nti english talk and repeated references to his mother being a catholic.
democrats claimed that blaine was at heart a nti irish and anti catholic.
the two incidents may have tipped the 1884 presidential election.
the elect oral vote was 219 to 182 in clevelands favor but the popular vote ran far closer clevelands plurality was fewer than 30 000 votes out of 10 million cast.
grover cleveland as president cleveland won new york by only 1 149 cleveland made the issue of tariff reform votes out of 1 167 169 cast.
at long last a central to the politics of the late 1880s.
democrat was back in the white house.
hayes to harrison 875 clevelands reform efforts during his first few months in office president cleveland struggled to keep democratic leaders from reviving the self serving patronage system.
in a letter to a friend the new president reported that he was living in a nightmare that dreadful damnable office seeking hangs over me and surrounds me and that it made him feel like resigning democratic newspapers heaped scorn on him for refusing to award federal jobs to his supporters.
one accused cleveland of ingratitude toward those who had delivered the vote despite the presidents best efforts about t wo thirds of the 120 000 federal jobs went to democrats as patronage during his administration.
cleveland was an o ld style democrat who believed in minimal government activity.
during his first term he vetoed over 400 acts of congress more than twice as many as all previous presidents combined.
in 1887 he illustrated his do as little as possible philosophy by vetoing a congressional effort to provide desperate texas farmers with seeds in the aftermath of a terrible drought.
though the people support the government the government should not support the people cleveland asserted.
railroad regulation for all of his commitment to limited government intervention president cleveland urged congress to adopt an important new policy federal regulation of the rates charged by interstate railroads those whose tracks crossed state lines to ship goods crops or livestock.
he believed that railroads were charging unfairly high freight rates.
states had adopted laws regulating railroads since the late 1860s but in 1886 the supreme court declared in wabash st louis and pacific railroad company v illinois that no state could regulate the rates charged by railroads engaged in interstate traffic.
because most railroads crossed state lines cleveland urged congress to close the loophole.
congress followed through and in 1887 cleveland signed an act creating the interstate commerce commission icc the first federal regulatory agency.
the law empowered the iccs five members to ensure that railroad freight rates were reasonable and just but one senator called the new agency a delusion and a sham because its members tended to be former railroad executives.
moreover the commissions actual powers proved to be weak when challenged in the courts by railroads.
over time the icc came to be ignored and the railroads continued to charge high rates while making secret pricing deals with large shippers.
tariff reform and the election of 1888 president clevelands most dramatic challenge to big business focused on tariff reform.
876 chapter 20 seizing an american e mpire 1865 1913 excuse for other nations to dismember china took the opportunity to refine the open door policy.
the united states he said sought a solution that would preserve chinese territorial and administrative integrity as well as equal and impartial trade with all parts of the chinese empire six weeks later the foreign military expedition reached peking and ended the boxer rebellion.
roosevelts b ig s tick diplomacy on september 6 1901 president mckinley was shaking hands at the p an a merican exposition in buffalo new york when a twenty eight year old unemployed laborer named leon czolgosz pronounced chol gots an anarchist who did not believe in governments or rulers approached him with a concealed gun and fired twice at p oint blank range.
one bullet was deflected by the presidents coat button and breastbone but the other tore through his stomach and lodged in his back.
for several days the attending doctors issued opti mistic reports about the presidents condition but after a week mckinley knew he was dying.
it is useless gentlemen he told the doctors and nurses.
i think we ought to have a prayer theodore roosevelt his vice president became the new president and soon launched a new era in national development.
more than any other american of his time roosevelt transformed the role of the united states in world affairs.
the nation had emerged from the war of 1898 a world power with major international responsibilities.
to ensure that americans accepted their new global role roosevelt stretched both the constitution and executive power to the limit.
in the process he pushed a reluctant nation onto the center stage of world affairs.
a rocket rise to prominence born in 1858 teedie roosevelt had grown up in new york city in an upper class family.
he visited europe as a child studied with a personal tutor spoke german fluently and graduated from harvard with honors in 1880 a frail and sickly boy nearly blind in one eye he followed his fathers advice to make your own body he compulsively lifted weights wrestled hiked rowed swam boxed and climbed mountains all in an effort to build himself into a physical and intellectual athlete.
the results were startling.
roosevelt transformed himself into a man of almost superhuman energy who fiercely championed the strenuous life he told his children that he would rather see them dead than have them grow up to be weaklings and sissies roosevelts big stick diplomacy 923 roosevelt was a fearless he man who also displayed extraordinary intellectual curiosity.
he became a voracious reader and talented writer a natural scientist a dedicated bird watcher a renowned historian and essayist and a zealous moralist who divided the world into two camps good and evil.
roosevelts zest for life and his combative spirit were contagious and he was ever eager to express an opinion on any subject.
after young roosevelt participated in a buffalo hunt in the dakotas one of the cowboys said there goes the most remarkable man i ever met.
unless i am badly mistaken the world is due to hear from him one of these days within two years after graduating from harvard roosevelt a r eform minded republican won election as the youngest member of the new york legislature.
fearlessly independent he could not be bought.
nor did he tolerate the excesses of the spoils system.
though i am a strong party man he warned if i find a corrupt public official i would take off his head with the world seemingly at roosevelts feet however disaster struck.
in 1884 his mother mittie only forty eight years old died of typhoid fever.
eleven hours later his bewitchingly pretty twenty two year old wife alice died in his arms of kidney failure having given birth to their only child just two days earlier.
the light has gone out of my life roosevelt noted in his diary.
the double funeral service for his wife and mother was so emotional that the officiating minister wept throughout his prayer.
to recover from this strange and terrible fate roosevelt turned his newborn daughter over to his sister quit his political career sold the family house and moved to a cattle ranch in the dakota territory where he threw himself into roping and branding steers shooting buffalo and bears capturing outlaws fighting indians whom he called a lesser race and reading novels by the campfire.
he was by his own admission a poor shot a bad roper and an average horseman but he loved every minute of his western life.
although his time in the west lasted only two years he never got over being a cowboy.
i owe more than i can express to the west he wrote in his memoirs.
back in new york city roosevelt remarried and ran unsuccessfully for mayor in 1886 he later served six years as a u s civil service commissioner and two years as the citys police commissioner.
in 1896 he campaigned energetically for william mckinley and the new president was asked to reward him with the position of assistant secretary of the navy.
mckinley resisted at first saying that roosevelt was too hotheaded but eventually gave in.
roosevelt took full advantage of the celebrity he had gained with the rough riders in cuba to win the governorship of new york in 1898 by then he had become the most visible young republican in the nation.
i have played it in bull luck this summer he wrote a friend about his recent streak of successes.
924 chapter 20 seizing an american e mpire 1865 1913 the japanese government protested president roosevelt persuaded the school board to change its policy but only after making sure that japanese authorities would stop encouraging unemployed japanese laborers to go to america.
this gentlemens agreement of 1907 the precise terms of which have never been revealed halted the influx of japanese immigrants to california and relieved some of the racial tension.
the great white fleet after roosevelts election to a full term as president in 1904 he celebrated americas rise as a world power.
since his youth he had retained a boyish enthusiasm for ships and sea power.
in 1907 he sent the entire u s navy by then second in strength only to britains royal navy on a grand fourteen month tour around the world as a demonstration of americas power.
at every port of c all down the atlantic coast of south america then up the pacific coast out to hawaii and down to new zealand and a ustralia the great white fleet of sixteen gleaming battleships received a rousing welcome.
the triumphal procession continued to japan china the philippines then egypt through the suez canal and across the mediterranean sea before steaming back to virginia in early 1909 just in time to close roosevelts presidency on a note of triumph.
roosevelts success in expanding u s power abroad would have mixed consequences however because underlying his imperialism was a militantly racist view of the world.
roosevelt and others believed that the world was made up of civilized societies such as the united states japan and the nations of europe and those they described as barbarous backward or impotent it was the responsibility of the civilized nations to exercise control of the barbarous peoples by force if necessary.
roosevelt called warfare the best way to promote the clear instinct for race selfishness and insisted that the most ultimately righteous of all wars is a war with savages such belligerent self righteous bigotry defied american ideals of equality and would come back to haunt the united states.
tafts dollar diplomacy republican william howard taft who succeeded roosevelt as president in 1909 continued to promote americas economic interests abroad practicing what roosevelt called dollar diplomacy taft used the state department to help american companies and banks invest in foreign countries especially east asia and the less developed nations of latin america and the caribbean.
to ensure the stability of those investments taft did not hesitate to intervene in nations experiencing political roosevelts big stick diplomacy 931 and economic turmoil.
in 1909 he dispatched u s marines to support a revolution in nicaragua.
once the new government was formed secretary of state philander c knox helped u s banks negotiate loans to prop it up.
two years later taft again sent american troops to restore political stability.
this time they stayed for more than a decade.
wilsons interventionism in 1913 the new democratic president woodrow wilson attacked dollar diplomacy as a form of economic imperialism.
he promised to treat latin american nations on terms of equality and honor yet wilson along with william jennings bryan his secretary of state dispatched american military forces to latin america more often than taft and roosevelt combined.
wilson argued that the united states must intervene to stabilize weak governments in the western hemisphere to keep european nations from doing so.
during his two presidential terms wilson sent u s troops into cuba once panama twice and honduras five times.
in 1915 when the dominican republic refused to sign a treaty that would have given the united states a special role in governing the island nation wilson sent u s marines who established a military government and fought a nasty guerrilla war against anti american rebels.
that same year wilson intervened in haiti next door to the dominican republic.
he admitted that his actions were high handed but argued that they were justified because the necessity for exercising control there is immediate urgent imperative others disagreed.
as the new york times charged wilsons frequent interventions made tafts dollar diplomacy look like ten cent diplomacy the united states in mexico mexico was a much thornier problem.
in 1910 l ong suffering mexicans had revolted against the dictatorship of porfirio daz who had given foreign corporations a free rein in developing the nations economy.
after revolutionary armies occupied mexico city in 1911 the victorious rebels began squabbling among themselves.
the leader of the rebellion francisco madero was overthrown by his chief of staff general victoriano huerta who assumed power in early 1913 and then had madero and thirty other political opponents murdered.
a shocked president wilson refused to recognize a government of butchers huerta ignored wilsons criticism and established a dictatorship.
wilson decided that huerta must be removed and ordered u s warships to halt shipments of foreign weapons to the new government.
meanwhile several rival revolutionary mexican armies the largest of which was led by francisco pancho villa began trying to unseat huerta.
932 chapter 21 the progressive era 1890 1920 religious activism social justice progressives believed that society had an ethical obligation to help its poorest and most vulnerable members.
others were inspired by the social gospel a newer specifically protestant belief that christians should help the poor to bring about the kingdom of god on earth.
in many respects the progressive movement as a whole represented a new energetic form of public outreach that incorporated religious and nonreligious groups and focused not so much on saving souls as on social action.
more and more christians adopted the mission of social reform.
we believe a social gospel organization said that the age of sheer individualism is past and the age of social responsibility has arrived the social gospel during the last quarter of the nineteenth century a growing number of churches and synagogues began emphasizing community service and the care of the unfortunate.
new organizations made key contributions to the movement.
the young mens christian association ymca and a similar group for women the ywca both entered the united states from england in the 1850s and grew rapidly after 1870 the salvation army founded in london in 1878 came to the united states a year later.
the ymca and ywca combined nondenominational religious evangelism with social services and fitness training in community centers segregated by race and gender across the country.
intended to provide low cost housing and healthful exercise in a safe christian environment for young men and women from rural areas or foreign countries the ymca ywca centers often included libraries classrooms and kitchens.
hebrew c ounterparts ymhas and ywhas provided many of the same facilities in cities with large jewish populations.
salvation army centers offered soup kitchens to feed the poor and day nurseries for the children of working mothers.
the major forces behind the social gospel movement were protestants and catholics who feared that christianity had become too closely associated with the upper and middle classes and was losing its appeal to the working poor.
in 1875 washington gladden a prominent pastor in springfield massachusetts invited striking shoe factory workers to his church but they refused because the factory owners and managers were members of the congregation.
gladden heartbroken that christianity was dividing along class lines responded by writing working people and their employers 1876 which argued that true christianity was based on the principle that thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself gladden rejected the view of social darwinists that the poor deserved the varied sources of progressivism 943 their fate and should not be helped.
he became the first prominent religious leader to support the rights of workers to form unions.
he also spoke out against racial segregation and efforts to discriminate against immigrants.
gladdens efforts helped launch a new era in religious life in which churches engaged with the urgent problems created by a rapidly urbanizing and industrializing society.
he and other social gospelers reached out to the working poor who labored long hours for low wages lived in miserable slum housing had no insurance for o n the job accidents and lacked the legal right to form unions.
walter rauschenbusch a german american baptist minister serving immigrant tenement dwellers in the hells kitchen neighborhood of new york city became the greatest champion of the social gospel.
in 1907 he published a pathbreaking book christianity and the social crisis in which he argued emphatically that whoever uncouples the religious and social life has not understood jesus the christian emphasis on personal salvation he added must be linked with an equally passionate commitment to social justice.
churches must embrace the social aims of jesus he stressed for christianity was intended to be a revolutionary faith.
in rauschenbuschs view religious life needed the social gospel to revitalize it and make it socially relevant we shall never have a perfect social life yet we must seek it with faith like the muckrakers rauschenbusch sought to expose the realities of poverty in america and convince statesmen to deal with the crisis.
his message resonated with theodore roosevelt woodrow wilson and many other progressives in both political parties.
years later rev.
martin luther king jr spoke for three generations of radicals and reformers when he said that christianity and the social crisis left an indelible imprint on my thinking rauschenbusch gladden and other social gospelers sought to expand the kingdom of god by following christs example by serving the poor and powerless.
rugged individualism may have been the path to wealth they argued but christian socialism offered hope for unity among all classes.
every religious and political question said george herron a religion professor at grinnell college is fundamentally economic and the solution to economic tensions was social solidarity.
as progressive economist richard ely put it america could only truly thrive when it recognized that our true welfare is not an individual matter purely but likewise a social affair settlement houses among the most visible soldiers in the social gospel movement were those who volunteered in innovative community 944 chapter 21 the progressive era 1890 1920 roosevelts duality theodore roosevelt as an apostle of prosperity top and as a roman tyrant bottom.
roosevelts energy self righteousness and impulsiveness elicited conflicting reactions.
progressivism under roosevelt and taft 961 progressive regulation now elected in his own right roosevelt launched his second term with an even stronger commitment to regulating corporations and their corrupt owners the criminal rich who exploited their workers and tried to eliminate competition.
his comments irked many of his corporate contributors and congressional republican leaders.
said the pittsburgh steel baron henry frick we bought the son of a bitch and then he did not stay bought to promote the moral regeneration of business roosevelt first took aim at the railroads.
in 1906 he persuaded congress to pass the hepburn act which for the first time gave the federal interstate commerce commission the power to set maximum freight rates for the railroad industry.
under roosevelts square deal programs the federal government also assumed oversight of key industries affecting public health meat packers food processors and makers of drugs and patent medicines.
muckraking journalists had revealed all sorts of unsanitary and dangerous activities in the preparation of food and drug products by many companies.
perhaps the most bad meat government inspectors closely examine tainted sides of beef at a meatpacking plant.
962 chapter 21 the progressive era 1890 1920 theodore roosevelt and booker t washington roosevelt addresses the national negro business league in 1900 with washington seated to his left.
the most damnable outrage that has ever been perpetrated by a citizen of the united states south carolina senator benjamin r tillman threatened that a thousand niggers in the south will have to be killed to teach them their place again a stunned roosevelt insisted that he had done nothing wrong.
in the end however he gave in to the criticism.
never again would he host a black leader.
during a tour of the south in 1905 he pandered to whites by highlighting his own southern ancestry his mother was from georgia and expressing his admiration for the confederacy and robert e lee.
his behavior said a black leader was national treachery to the negro the brownsville riot the following year 1906 brought a violent racial incident in brownsville texas where a dozen or so members of an african american army regiment from a nearby fort got into a shootout with whites who had been harassing them outside a saloon.
one white bartender was killed and a police officer was seriously wounded.
both sides claimed the other started the shooting.
an investigation concluded that the soldiers were at fault but no one could identify any of the shooters and none of the soldiers was willing to talk.
progressivism under roosevelt and taft 965 roosevelt responded by dishonorably discharging the entire regiment of 167 soldiers several of whom had been awarded the congressional medal of honor for their service in cuba during the war of 1898 critics flooded the white house with angry telegrams.
secretary of war william h taft urged the president to reconsider his decision but roosevelt refused to show any mercy to murderers assassins cowards and comrades of murderers sixty years later the u s army cleared the records of all the black soldiers.
disheartened black leaders predicted that roosevelts harsh language would ignite race hatred and violence against innocent african americans.
taft and retrenchment after his 1904 election victory roosevelt had decided he would not run for president again in part because he did not want to be the first president to serve the equivalent of three terms.
it was a noble gesture but a blunder that would have momentous political consequences.
for now however he urged republicans to nominate his l ong time friend secretary of war william howard taft whom the republican convention endorsed on its first ballot in 1908 the democrats again chose william jennings bryan who still retained a faithful following especially in the south.
taft promised to continue roosevelts policies and the republican platform endorsed the presidents progressive program.
the democratic platform echoed the republican emphasis on regulation of business but called for a lower tariff.
bryan struggled to attract national support and was defeated for a third time as taft swept the electoral college 321 to 162 a life of public service william howard taft was superbly qualified to be president.
born in cincinnati in 1857 he was the son of a prominent attorney who had served in president grants cabinet.
he had graduated second in his class at yale and gone on to become a leading legal scholar serving on the ohio supreme court.
in 1900 president mckinley had appointed him the first american g overnor general of the philippines and three years later roosevelt named him secretary of war.
until becoming president taft had never held an elected office.
taft was a cautious conservative progressive who embraced a strict construction of the constitution which meant that he believed the founding fathers had intentionally limited the powers of each of the three government branches executive legislative and judicial.
unlike roosevelt who believed that the president to serve the public interest could take any action 966 chapter 21 the progressive era 1890 1920 l egislation that wilson had earlier supported.
herbert croly the influential editor of the new republic magazine wondered how the president could assert that the fundamental wrongs of a modern society can be easily and quickly righted as a consequence of passing a few laws wilsons about face he concluded casts suspicion upon his own sincerity as a progressive or upon his grasp of the realities of modern social and industrial life progressivism for whites only african americans continued to resent the racial conservatism displayed by most progressives.
carter glass the virginia senator who was largely responsible for developing the federal reserve act in 1913 was an enthusiastic supporter of his states efforts to disfranchise black voters.
when questioned by a reporter about being a racist progressive glass embraced the label discrimination.
why that is exactly what we propose.
to remove every negro voter who can be gotten rid of similarly woodrow wilson showed little concern about the discrimination and violence that african americans faced.
in fact he shared many of new freedom old rules woodrow wilson and the first lady ride in a carriage with african american drivers.
woodrow wilson a progressive southerner 979 the racist attitudes common at the time.
as a student at princeton he had expressed his disgust at the fifteenth amendment which had guaranteed voting rights for black men after the civil war arguing that whites must resist domination by an ignorant and inferior race as a politician wilson did court african american voters but he rarely consulted black leaders and largely avoided associating with them.
josephus daniels a north carolina newspaper editor who became wilsons secretary of the navy was a white supremacist who stressed that the subjection of the negro politically and the separation of the negro socially are paramount to all other considerations in the south for daniels and other southern progressives progress was possible only if blacks were kept in their place daniels and other cabinet members racially segregated the employees in their agencies.
wilson endorsed the policy claiming that racial segregation is not humiliating but a benefit to him separate but equal was the best way to resolve racial tensions.
he was the first president since the civil war who openly endorsed discrimination against african americans.
in november 1914 a delegation of african american leaders met with wilson to ask how a progressive president could adopt such regressive racial policies.
wilson responded that both races benefited from the policies because they eliminated the possibility of friction william monroe trotter a harvard educated african american newspaper editor who had helped found the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp scolded the president have you a new freedom for white americans and a new slavery for your afro american fellow citizens a phrase wilson had used in a speech.
god forbid a furious wilson told trotter and the other visitors to leave saying that their unchristian tone offends me the vote for women activists for womens suffrage were also disappointed in president wilson.
despite having two daughters who were suffragists he insisted that the issue of womens voting rights should be left to the states rather than embodied in a constitutional amendment.
wilsons lack of support led some leaders of the suffrage movement to revise their tactics.
in 1910 alice paul a new j ersey born quaker and social worker returned from working with the militant suffragists of england where she had participated in various forms of civil disobedience to generate attention and support.
after paul joined the national american woman suffrage association nawsa she urged activists to use more aggressive tactics picket 980 chapter 21 the progressive era 1890 1920 alice paul sewing a suffrage fl ag orange and purple with s tars that she and other suffragists often waved at strikes and protests.
state legislatures target and punish politicians who failed to endorse suffrage chain themselves to public buildings incite police to arrest them and undertake hunger strikes.
in march 1913 paul organized 5 000 suffragists to protest at wilsons inauguration.
four years later having broken with the nawsa and formed the national womans party paul decided that suffragists must do something even more dramatic picket the white house.
beginning on january 11 1917 paul and her followers took turns carrying signs all day five days a week for months until the president ordered their arrest.
some sixty suffragists were jailed.
paul was sentenced to seven months in prison.
she then went on a hunger strike leading prison officials to force feed her raw eggs through a tube inserted in her nose.
she later recalled that it was shocking that a government of men could look with such extreme contempt on a movement that was woodrow wilson a progressive southerner 981 asking nothing except such a simple little thing as the right to vote under an avalanche of negative press coverage and public criticism wilson finally pardoned paul and the other activists.
progressivism renewed by 1916 wilsons determination to win reelection revived his commitment to progressive activism.
the president nominated bostonian louis d brandeis the peoples attorney to the supreme court.
brandeis was not just a famed defender of unions against big businesses he would also be the first jewish member of the supreme court.
progressives viewed the nomination as a landmark in the history of american democracy others disagreed.
f ormer president taft dismissed brandeis as a muckraker an emotionalist for his own purposes a socialist.
who is utterly unscrupulous the senate however confirmed brandeiss appointment.
justice oliver wendell holmes jr the leading figure on the court sent brandeis a o ne word telegram welcome farm legislation president wilson also urged congress to pass the first federal legislation directed at assisting farmers.
he first supported a proposal to set up rural banks to provide l ong term farm loans.
the federal farm loan act became law in 1916 under the control of the federal farm loan board twelve federal land banks offered loans to farmers for five to forty years at low interest rates.
farmers could borrow up to 50 percent of the value of their land.
at about the same time a dream long advocated by populists federal loans to farmers on the security of their crops stored in warehouses finally came to fruition when congress passed the warehouse act of 1916 these crop security loans were available to sharecroppers tenant farmers and to farmers who owned the land that they worked.
farmers also benefited from the s mith lever act of 1914 which provided federal programs to educate farmers about new machinery and new ideas related to agricultural efficiency and the s mith hughes act 1917 which funded agricultural and mechanical education in high schools.
farmers with the newfangled automobiles had more than a passing interest as well in the federal highways act of 1916 which helped finance new highways especially in rural areas.
labor legislation one of the l ong standing goals of many progressive democrats was a federal child labor law.
when congress passed the keating owen act in 1916 banning products made by child workers under 982 chapter 22 america and the great war 1914 1920 at the munitions factory women on both sides played crucial roles in the war effort from building airplanes to cooking for soldiers overseas.
here american women use welding torches to build bombs.
on the home front northern businesses sent recruiting agents into the southern states which were still largely rural and agricultural to find workers for their factories and mills.
for the first time such efforts were directed at african americans as well as whites.
more than 400 000 southern blacks mostly farmers joined what came to be known as the great migration a mass movement that would continue through the 1920s and change the political and social chemistry of northern cities such as st louis chicago detroit new york and philadelphia.
by 1930 the number of african americans living in the north was triple that of 1910 recruiting agents and newspaper editors both black and white portrayed the north as the land of promise for southern blacks.
northern factory jobs were plentiful and high paying by southern standards and racism was less obvious and violent at least at first.
a black migrant from mississippi wrote home from chicago in 1917 that he wished he had moved north twenty years earlier.
i just begin to feel like a man here he explained.
its a great deal of mobilizing a nation 1003 pleasure in knowing that you have some privilege.
my children are going to the same school with the whites and i dont have to be humble to no one many mexican americans found similar opportunities to improve their status during the war and after.
some joined the military.
david barkley hernandez had to drop his last name when he enlisted in san antonio texas because the local draft board was not accepting mexicans.
in 1918 just two days before the war ended he died in france while returning from a dan gerous mission behind german lines.
hernandez became the first person of mexican descent in the u s army to win the congressional medal of honor.
even more latinos pursued economic opportunities created by the war effort.
between 1917 and 1920 some 100 000 mexicans crossed the border into the united states.
the economic expansion caused by the war enabled migrant farmworkers already living in states such as texas new mexico arizona and california to take better jobs in factories and mills in rapidly growing cities such as phoenix los angeles and houston where they moved into s panish speaking neighborhoods called barrios.
segregation in the military most african american enlistees served in support units because whites believed them unfit for combat despite evidence of black military contributions since the revolution.
here soldiers in the 92nd infantry division one of the few colored units sent overseas march in verdun france.
1004 chapter 23 a clash of cultures 1920 1929 during the twenties the new and unusual clashed openly with the conventional and the commonplace.
modernists and traditionalists waged cultural warfare with one another one group looking to the future for inspiration and the other looking to the past for guidance.
terrorist attacks increased as did labor and racial violence.
in 1920 a h orse drawn wagon loaded with dynamite exploded at the corner of wall and broad streets in new york city killing thirty eight people and wounding hundreds.
that the bombers were never found fueled public concern that the united states was on the brink of chaos and revolution.
the scope and pace of societal changes were bewildering as the emergence of national radio networks talking motion pictures mass ownership of automobiles and national chain stores combined with the soaring popularity of spectator sports and the rise of mass marketing and advertising transformed america into the worlds leading consumer society.
the culture of mass consumption fueled the explosive growth of middle class urban life while assaulting traditional virtues such as frugality prudence and religiosity.
in the political arena reactionaries and rebels battled for control.
the brutal fight between woodrow wilson and the r epublican led senate over the treaty of versailles coupled with the administrations crackdown on dissenters and socialists had weakened an already fragmented and disillusioned progressivism.
as reformer amos pinchot bitterly observed president wilson had put his enemies in office and his friends in jail by 1920 many progressives had grown skeptical of any politician claiming to be a reformer or an idealist.
social reformer jane addams sighed that the 1920s were a period of political and social sag the desire to restore traditional values and social stability led voters to elect republican warren g harding president in 1920 he promised to return america to normalcy both major parties still included progressive wings but they were shrinking.
the demand for honest efficient government and public services remained strong the impulse for social reform however shifted into a drive for moral righteousness and social conformity.
by 1920 many veteran progressives had withdrawn from public life.
mainstream americans were also shocked by new modernist forms of artistic expression and sexual liberation.
mabel dodge luhan a leading promoter of modern art and literature said that the generation of young literary and artistic rebels that emerged during and after the war was determined to overthrow the old order of things in sum postwar life in america and europe was fraught with turbulent changes contradictory impulses superficial frivolity and seething tensions.
as the french painter paul gauguin acknowledged the upheavals of cultural a new era of consumption 1031 modernism and the chaotic aftermath of the war produced an epoch of confusion a riotous clash of irreverent new ideas with traditional manners and morals.
the nation in 1920 the 1920 census reported that 106 million people lived in the united states a third of the number today.
americas population was remarkably young.
over half the people were under the age of twenty five.
the average life expectancy was just fifty six years for men and fifty eight for women.
american society remained overwhelmingly white 90 percent persons of hispanic origin were considered to be white.
african americans were 9 percent and native americans and asian americans made up most of the rest.
almost half of the white population were either immigrants or the c hildren of immigrants the highest percentage since the late eighteenth century.
for the first time in american history over half of the population lived in cities meaning towns and cities with more than 2 500 residents.
towns with less than 3 000 residents could hardly be called urban.
but some 16 million americans lived in the ten largest cities.
american society was relentlessly becoming more urban and less rural.
the south remained the most rural and poorest region of the nation.
only about half of the farmers in the former confederate states owned their land.
three quarters of farmers in the rest of the nation owned their lands.
the others were either tenants who rented lands or sharecroppers who gave the landowner a share of the crop in exchange for access to land.
most sharecroppers especially black sharecroppers were grimly poor in large part because the entire agricultural sector struggled with low crop prices during the twenties.
and most tenants and sharecroppers were in the south.
a new era of consumption america experienced so many dramatic changes during the twenties that people referred to it as a new era the robust u s economy became the envy of the world.
following the brief postwar recession in 1920 1921 economic growth soared to record levels.
jobs were plentiful and average income rose throughout the decade.
the nations total wealth almost doubled between 1920 and 1930 while wage workers enjoyed record breaking increases in average income.
by 1929 the united states enjoyed the highest standard of living in the world.
1032 chapter 23 a clash of cultures 1920 1929 construction led the way.
the war had caused people to postpone building offices plants homes and apartments.
by 1921 however a building boom was underway that would last the rest of the decade.
at the same time the remarkable growth of the automotive industry created an immediate need for roads and highways.
new construction and new cars stimulated other industries such as lumber steel concrete rubber gasoline and furniture.
technology also played a key role in the prosperity of the twenties.
manufacturing grew more mechanized and efficient.
powerful new machines electric motors steam turbines dump trucks tractors bulldozers steam shovels and more efficient ways of operating farms factories plants mines and mills generated dramatic increases in production.
in 1920 the nations factories produced 5 000 electric refrigerators in 1929 almost a million.
a growing consumer culture in the late nineteenth century the u s economy had been driven by commercial agriculture and large scale industrial production the building of railroads and bridges the manufacturing of steel and the construction of housing and businesses in cities.
during the twenties the dominant aspect of the economy involved an explosion of new consumer goods.
the success of mass production made mass consumption more important than ever.
a 1920 newspaper editorial insisted that with the war over the americans first importance to his country is no longer that of citizen but that of consumer to keep factory production humming required converting once frugal people into enthusiastic shoppers.
people may ruin themselves by saving instead of spending warned one economist.
during the great war the government had urged americans to work long hours conserve resources and do without.
after the war a new consumer culture encouraged carefree spending.
during the war a journalist noted in 1920 we accustomed ourselves to doing without to buying carefully to using economically.
but with the close of the war came reaction.
a veritable orgy of extravagant buying is going on.
reckless spending takes the place of saving waste replaces conservation to keep people buying businesses developed new ways for consumers to finance purchases over time layaway rather than have to pay cash up front buy now pay later.
as paying with cash and staying out of debt came to be seen as needlessly old fashioned practices consumer debt almost tripled during the twenties.
by 1929 almost 60 percent of american purchases were made on the installment plan.
during the new era advertising first developed in the late nineteenth century grew into a huge enterprise.
president calvin coolidge declared that a new era of consumption 1033 advertising had become the most potent influence in adopting and changing the habits and modes of life affecting what we eat what we wear and the work and play of the whole nation a modern home this 1925 westinghouse advertisement urges homemakers to buy its cozy glow jr heater and sol luk luminaire lamp among other new electrical appliances that would do anything for you in return 1034 chapter review summary a new era of consumption the american economy grew at its fastest rate in history during the 1920s led by an explosion in mass production and sales of new consumer goods.
innovations in production advertising and financing and a jump in the use of electricity enabled and encouraged millions of americans to purchase automobiles radios and other electrical appliances.
the automobile industry was at the center of these changes as ford motor company pioneered mass production using moving assembly lines a highly efficient method that helped make its cars affordable for a majority of americans.
the new consumer culture valued leisure self expression and self indulgence.
during the twenties consumer debt tripled.
innovations in communications especially the growth in radio ownership transportation finance and advertising also brought about a mass culture as more and more americans purchased national brand name items from retail chain stores listened to the same radio shows watched the same movies and followed the lives and careers of national celebrities and superstars.
the jazz age other new social and cultural trends and movements rapidly challenged the traditional order.
the carefree fads and attitudes of the 1920s perhaps best represented by the frantic rhythms of jazz music led writer f scott fitzgerald to call the decade the jazz age.
a new woman appeared best represented by flappers young women who challenged prewar restrictions with their short hemlines drinking smoking and open discussions of sex.
the majority of women however remained full time housewives and mothers or domestic servants and fewer young women pursued professional careers.
with the great migration continuing african americans in northern cities felt freer to speak out against racial injustice and express pride in their race.
the harlem renaissance movement gave voice to african american literature and music.
racial separatism and black nationalism grew popular under the leadership of marcus garvey while other african americans joined white supporters in the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp and supported its efforts to undo racism through education legislation and court challenges.
the modernist revolt many american artists and intellectuals were attracted to modernism a movement that had begun in europe before the great war and reflected new developments in science particularly albert einsteins theory of relativity and sigmund freuds exploration of how the subconscious mind shapes human behavior.
to be modern meant to break free of tradition to violate restrictions to shock the public and to make ones works difficult to explain or interpret.
americans were first exposed to modern art in a substantial way with the armory show of 1913 chronology wright brothers fly first motorized airplane ford motor company is founded national association for the advancement of colored people naacp is founded armory show introduces americans to modern art marcus garvey brings universal negro improvement association to new york prohibition begins f scott fitzgeralds this side of paradise is published warren g harding is elected president albert einstein receives nobel prize in physics first radio commercial is aired charles a lindbergh jr makes first solo transatlantic airplane flight key terms consumer culture p 1032 harlem renaissance p 1050 jazz age p 1041 negro nationalism p 1052 flappers p 1045 modernism p 1055 great migration p 1048 armory show p 1056 national association for the advancement of colored people naacp p 1049 lost generation p 1059 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.
the reactionary twenties black tuesday in this photograph p anic stricken crowds take to wall street as news of the plummeting stock market spread on the morning of tuesday october 29 1929 an account of the crash in the new york times wrote that the streets were crammed with a mixed crowd agonized little speculators.
sold out traders.
inquisitive individuals and tourists seeking.
a closer view of the national catastrophe.
where was it going to end t he self indulgent excesses of the lost generation and the frivolities of the jazz age made little sense to the vast majority of americans during the twenties.
most people still led traditional lives they aggressively defended established values old certainties and the comfort of past routines and they were shocked by the decades social turmoil and cultural rebelliousness.
they traced the germs of dangerous radicalism to the multiethnic cities teeming with immigrants and foreign ideas such as socialism communism and anarchism.
the reactionary conservatism of the 1920s fed on the popularity of nativism the fear of and prejudice against immigrants from countries outside of western europe and a militant protestantism that sought to restore the primacy of traditional christian morality.
reactionary conservatism and immigration restriction the united states has opened its borders and ports to more people from more countries than any other nation.
but newcomers have never been universally welcomed or embraced.
after the end of the great war masses of people emigrated from europe to the united states.
between 1919 and 1924 more than 600 000 people from southern and eastern europe most of them italians entered the united states along with 150 000 poles and 50 000 russians.
at the same time some 150 000 mexicans crossed the border most of them landed in the southwest and california.
in the early 1920s more than half of the white men and a third of the white women working in mines mills and factories focus questions 1 how did the reactionary conservatism during the 1920s manifest itself in social life and governmental policies.
2 to what extent did the policies of the republican party dominate the federal government during the twenties.
in what ways were these policies a rejection of progressivism.
3 how did herbert hoover emerge as the most popular political figure during the twenties.
4 what were the major causes of the great depression.
5 how did the great depression impact the american people.
1064 chapter 24 the reactionary twenties were immigrants some of whom had a passion for socialism or a narchism as well as a willingness to use violence to achieve their political goals.
fears of an invasion of foreign radicals led congress to pass the emergency immigration act of 1921 which limited total immigration to 150 000 a year and restricted newcomers from each european country to 3 percent of the total number of that nationality represented in the 1910 census.
three years later after people complained that too many eastern and southern europeans were still being admitted congress passed the immigration act of 1924 it reduced the number of admitted europeans to 2 percent of the 1890 census so as to include fewer new immigrants from southern and eastern europe jews italians poles and russians.
the purpose of the new quotas was to shrink the total number of immigrants to favor immigrants from northern and western europe and to reduce those from southern and eastern europe.
a kansas congressman expressed the prejudices against german and italian catholics felt by many rural american protestants on the one side is beer bolshevism unassimilating settlements and perhaps many flags on the other side is constitutional government one flag stars and stripes the immigration laws targeted particular groups.
for example they banned immigrants from japan or china.
the immigration act of 1924 however allowed newcomers from countries in the western hemisphere.
an unintended result was that people of latin american descent chiefly mexicans puerto ricans and cubans became the fastest growing ethnic minority during the twenties.
the number of mexicans living in texas increased tenfold between 1900 and 1930 in response to the needs of texas farmers for stoop laborers.
cotton picking suits the mexican was the common assertion among texas growers.
because mexican migrant workers were mostly homeless nomads willing to move with the seasons farm owners came to prefer them over black and white tenants and farm laborers.
sacco and vanzetti the nativism embedded in the new immigration laws reinforced the connection between european immigrants and political radicalism.
that connection erupted in the most widely publicized criminal case of the twenties.
on may 5 1920 two italian immigrants who described themselves as revolutionary anarchists eager to topple the american government shoemaker nicola sacco and fish peddler bartolomeo vanzetti were arrested outside boston massachusetts for stealing 16 000 from a shoe factory and killing the paymaster and a guard.
both men were armed with loaded pistols when reactionary conservatism and immigration restriction 1065 sacco and vanzetti the trial and conviction of these working class italian immigrants became a public spectacle amid the growing mood of nativism.
arrested both lied to police and both were identified by eyewitnesses.
the stolen money however was never found and several people claimed that they were with sacco and vanzetti far from the scene of the crime when it occurred.
the sacco and vanzetti case occurred at the height of italian immigration to the united states and against the backdrop of numerous terror attacks by anarchists some of which sacco and vanzetti had participated in.
the charged atmosphere called the red hysteria by one journalist ensured that the mens trial would be a public spectacle.
in july 1921 sacco and vanzetti were convicted and sentenced to death.
their legal appeals lasted six years before they were electrocuted on august 23 1927 still claiming their innocence.
to millions of workers and liberals around the world sacco and vanzetti became martyrs victims of capitalist injustice.
people still debate their guilt or innocence.
the new klan the most violent of the reactionary movements during the twenties was a revived ku klux klan the infamous post civil war group 1066 chapter 26 the second world war 1933 1945 adolf hitler hitler performs the nazi salute at a rally.
the giant banners triumphant music powerful oratory and expansive military parades were all designed to stir excitement and allegiance among nazis.
political parties except the nazis created a secret police force known as the gestapo and stripped people of voting rights.
there would be no more elections labor unions or strikes.
during the mid 1930s hitlers brutal nazi police state cranked up the engines of tyranny and terrorism propaganda and censorship.
two million brown shirted brawling thugs called storm troopers fanned out across the nation burning books and persecuting imprisoning and murdering communists jews gypsies and their sympathizers.
the expanding axis as the 1930s unfolded a catastrophic series of events in asia and europe sent the world hurtling toward disaster.
in 1931 1932 some 10 000 japanese troops had occupied manchuria in northeast china a territory rich in raw materials and deposits of iron ore and coal.
at the time china was fragmented by civil war between communists led by mao zedong and nationalists led by chiang k ai shek.
the japanese took advantage of chinas weakness to proclaim manchurias independence renaming it the republic of manchukuo in 1934 japan began an aggressive military buildup in anticipation of conquering all of east asia.
from isolationism to intervention 1155 the next year mussolini launched italys reconquest of ethiopia a weak nation in eastern africa that italy had controlled until 1896 when the league of nations branded mussolini an aggressor and imposed economic sanctions on italy the racist italian leader expressed surprise that european leaders would prefer a horde of barbarian negroes in ethiopia over italy the mother of civilization in 1935 hitler in flagrant violation of the versailles treaty began rebuilding germanys armed forces.
the next year he sent 35 000 soldiers into the rhineland the demilitarized buffer zone between france and germany.
in a staged vote 99 percent of the germans living in the rhineland approved hitlers action.
the failure of france and great britain to enforce the versailles treaty convinced hitler that the western democracies were cowards and would not try to stop him from achieving his goal of german dominance.
the year 1936 also witnessed the outbreak of the spanish civil war which began when spanish troops loyal to general francisco franco with the support of the roman catholic church revolted against the fragile new republican government.
hitler and mussolini rushed troops volunteers warplanes and military and financial aid to support francos fascist insurgency.
while peace in europe was unraveling the japanese government fell under the control of aggressive militarists.
in 1937 a government official announced that the tide has turned against the liberalism and democracy that once swept over the nation on july 7 1937 japanese and chinese soldiers clashed at chinas marco polo bridge near beijing.
the incident quickly escalated into a f ull scale conflict the sino japanese war.
by december the japanese had captured the nationalist chinese capital of nanjing whereupon the undisciplined soldiers ran amok looting the city and mercilessly murdering and raping civilians.
as many as 300 000 chinese were murdered in what came to be called the rape of nanjing.
thereafter the s ino japanese war bogged down into a stalemate.
from isolationism to intervention most americans responded to the mounting crises abroad by deepening their commitment to isolationism.
in his 1933 inaugural address president roosevelt announced that he would continue to promote what he called the good neighbor policy in the western hemisphere declaring that no nation has the right to intervene in the internal or external affairs of another true to his word roosevelt withdrew u s troops from nicaragua and haiti.
the nations deeply rooted isolationist mood was reinforced by a prominent senate inquiry into the role of bankers and businesses in the 1156 chapter 26 the second world war 1933 1945 revising the neutrality act in september 1939 president roosevelt decided that the united states must do more to stop aggressor nations.
he summoned congress into special session to revise the neutrality act.
i regret that congress passed the act the president said.
i regret equally that i signed the act after six weeks of heated debate congress passed the neutrality act of 1939 which allowed britain and france to send their ships to the united states to bring back american military supplies.
public opinion supported such measures as long as other nations did the actual fighting.
war in europe the war in europe settled into a three month stalemate during early 1940 as hitlers generals waited out the winter.
then in the early spring germany attacked again.
at dawn on april 9 nazi armies occupied denmark and landed along the norwegian coast.
german paratroopers the first ever used in warfare seized norways airports.
denmark fell in a day norway within a few weeks.
on may 10 german forces invaded the low countries belgium luxembourg and the netherlands holland.
luxembourg fell the first day the netherlands three days later.
belgium lasted until may 28 a few days later german tanks roared into northern france.
the fight beginning today hitler declared decides the fate of the german nation for the next thousand years his brilliant blitzkrieg lightning war strategy centered on speed.
fast moving columns of tanks motorized artillery and truck borne infantry all supported by warplanes and paratroopers moved so fast that they paralyzed their stunned opponents.
british and french troops sent to help the belgians were forced to make a frantic retreat to the english channel coast with the germans in hot pursuit.
on may 26 while german panzer divisions made up of tanks and other armored vehicles followed hitlers surprising order to rest and refuel great britain was able to organize a weeklong evacuation of british and french soldiers from the beaches at dunkirk on the northern french coast near the border with belgium.
despite attacks from german warplanes some 338 000 defeated and demoralized soldiers escaped to england leaving behind vast stockpiles of vehicles weaponry and ammunition.
wars are not won by evacuations observed prime minister churchill but there was a victory inside this deliverance while the evacuation was unfolding german forces decimated the remaining french armies.
tens of thousands of panicked french refugees clogged the roads to paris.
the crumbling french war effort prompted italys dictator mussolini to declare war on france and great britain which he dismissed as the reactionary democracies of the west on june 14 1940 german soldiers marched unop from isolationism to intervention 1161 posed into paris.
eight days later french leaders surrendered whereupon the germans established a puppet fascist government in the city of vichy.
the rapid fall of france stunned the world.
in the united states complacency about the nazis turned to fear and even panic as people realized the germans could eventually assault america.
the second world war was but ten months old yet germany ruled most of western europe.
only the neutral nations of spain sweden and switzerland had avoided the nazi onslaught.
great britain now stood alone against hitlers relentless military power.
the war is won an ecstatic hitler bragged to mussolini.
the rest is only a matter of time aggression in europe 1935 1939 500 kilometers ireland sweden north sea denmark great britain english channel estonia latvia lithuania netherlands atlantic sea finland norway 500 miles lt i c ba ar.
m 9 germany polish corridor r sept 1 ma 6 3 s ep m1939 a t rhine 1 93.
193 land belgium east prussia germany poland r ocean u s s r saar c ze x x sudetenchos x m lovakia land1 a 93 r xx xx x x france xx lux.
maginot line xx austria switz.
hungary romania ad italy ti ria fall of spanish republic mar.
1939 portugal yugoslavia s pa i n a black sea bulgaria c se apr.
albania spanish morocco m e d i t e turkey r greece r morocco algeria tunisia a n ita ly t o o et e ct 1 hiop a 935 ia n crete s e aggressive moves by axis powers axis powers l i b ya a egypt keeping in mind the terms of the treaty of versailles ending the first world war wwn64 explain why hitler began his campaign of expansion by invading the rhineland and figure m26 1 the sudetenland.
first proof why did the german attack on poland begin the second world war whereas hitlers previous invasions of austria and czechoslovakia did not.
1162 chapter 26 the second world war 1933 1945 tuskegee airmen the tuskegee airmen were the first african american military pilots.
here the first graduates are reviewed at tuskegee alabama in 1941.
dirt poor sharecroppers and tenant farmers many of them african americans to leave the land for steady work in new mills and factories.
sixty of the 100 army camps created during the war were in southern states further transforming local economies.
during the war the u s rural population decreased by 20 percent.
racial tension at home the most volatile social issue ignited by the war was african american participation in the military.
although the armed forces were still racially segregated in 1941 african americans rushed to enlist after the attack on pearl harbor.
as african american joe louis the world heavyweight boxing champion put it lots of things are wrong with america but hitler aint going to fix them altogether about a million african americans men and women served in the armed forces during the war.
arsenal of democracy 1179 black soldiers and sailors assigned to racially segregated units were initially excluded from combat units.
they loaded ships drove trucks dug latrines and handled supplies and mail.
black officers could not command white soldiers or sailors.
henry l stimson the secretary of war claimed that leadership is not embedded in the negro race military bases had segregated facilities and experienced frequent racial incidents in late 1944 however the need for more troops led the government to revisit its racial policies.
under pressure from the african american community as well as eleanor roosevelt general dwight eisenhower commander of the u s forces in europe agreed to let black volunteers fight in fi fty two all black fifty man platoons commanded by white officers.
a black officer said the decision was the greatest for african americans since enactment of the constitutional amendments following the civil war the black soldiers earned the reputation of being fierce fighters.
the same was true of some 600 african american pilots trained in tuskegee alabama.
the s o called tuskegee airmen flew more than 15 000 missions and their unquestionable excellence spurred military and civilian leaders to desegregate the armed forces after the war.
at wars end however the u s army reimposed segregation.
it would be several more years before the military was truly integrated.
mexican americans as rural dwellers moved west many farm counties experienced a labor shortage.
in an ironic a bout face local and federal authorities who before the war had forced migrant laborers back across the mexican border now recruited them to harvest crops on american farms.
the mexican government would not consent to provide the laborers however until the united states promised to ensure them decent working and living conditions.
the result was the creation of the bracero program in 1942 whereby mexico agreed to provide seasonal farmworkers on y ear long contracts.
under the bracero program some 200 000 mexican farmworkers entered the western united states mostly packed in cattle cars on trains.
at least that many more crossed the border as undocumented workers.
the rising tide of mexican americans in los angeles prompted a stream of anti mexican editorials and ugly racial incidents.
even though some 300 000 mexican americans served in the war and earned a higher percentage of congressional medals of honor than any other minority group racial prejudices still prevailed.
in southern california there was constant conflict between white servicemen and mexican american gang members and teenage zoot suiters zoot suits were flamboyant clothing worn by some young mexican american men.
in 1943 several thousand o ff duty sailors and soldiers joined 1180 chapter 26 the second world war 1933 1945 off to court latinos dressed in zoot suits are loaded onto a los angeles county sheriffs bus for a court appearance in june 1943 by hundreds of local whites rampaged through los angeles assaulting hispanics african americans and filipinos.
the weeklong violence came to be called the zoot suit riots native americans in the military indians supported the war effort more fully than any other group in american society.
almost a third of eligible native american men served in the armed forces.
many others worked in defense related industries and thousands of indian women volunteered as nurses or joined the waves.
as was the case with african americans indians benefited from the experiences afforded by the war by gaining vocational skills and a greater awareness of how to succeed within mainstream society.
why did so many native americans fight for a nation that had stripped them of their land and ravaged their heritage.
some felt that they had no choice.
mobilization for the war effort ended many new deal programs that had provided indians with jobs.
at the same time many viewed the nazis and japanese warlords as threats to their own homeland.
whatever their motivations indians distinguished themselves in the military.
unlike their african american counterparts indian servicemen were integrated into regular units with whites.
perhaps their most distinctive role was serving as code talkers every military branch used indians especially navajos to encode and decipher messages using indian languages unknown to the germans and japanese.
arsenal of democracy 1181 navajo code talkers the complex navajo language made it impossible for the germans and japanese to decode american messages.
here a code talker relays messages for u s marines in the battle of bougainville in the south pacific in 1943 discrimination against japanese americans the attack on pearl harbor ignited a hunger for vengeance against the nisei people of japanese descent living in the united states.
many americans saw no difference between the japanese who attacked pearl harbor and japanese americans.
as idahos governor declared a good solution to the jap problem would be to send them all back to japan then sink the island such hysteria helps explain why the u s government sponsored one of the worst violations of civil liberties during the twentieth century when more than 120 000 nisei were forcibly removed from their homes and transported to ten war relocation camps forced to sell their farms and businesses at great loss within forty eight hours ordered to bring with them only what they could carry the internees were sent by train and bus to ten barbed wire enclosed internment camps scattered across remote areas in the western states.
they lost not only their property but also their liberty.
president roosevelt initiated the relocation when he issued executive order 9066 on february 19 1942 authorizing the forcible removal of all 1182 chapter 26 the second world war 1933 1945 e thnic japanese living on the pacific coast.
it was perhaps his worst decision as president.
roosevelt called his action a military necessity although not a single incident of espionage involving japanese americans was proved.
as it turned out more than 70 percent of those affected were u s citizens.
on evacuation day burt wilson a white schoolboy in sacramento california was baffled as soldiers ushered the nisei children out of his school we wondered what had happened.
they took somebody out of eighth grade a boy named sammy who drew wonderful cartoons.
he was my friend and one day he was there and the next day he was gone.
and that was very difficult for us to understand because we didnt see sammy or any japanese american at least i didn t as the enemy.
few if any nisei were disloyal.
in fact 39 000 japanese americans served in the armed forces during the war and others worked as interpreters and translators.
but all were victims of fear and racial prejudice.
not until 1983 did the government acknowledge the injustice of the internment policy.
five years later a farewell to civil rights american troops escorted japanese americans by gunpoint to remote internment camps some of which were horse racing tracks whose stables served as housing.
the allied drive toward berlin 1183 it granted those nisei still living 20 000 each in compensation a tiny amount relative to what they had lost during four years of confinement.
the allied drive toward berlin by mid 1942 the home front was hearing good news from europe.
u s naval forces had been increasingly successful at destroying german u boats off the atlantic coast.
up to that point german submarines had sunk hundreds of allied cargo vessels killing 2 500 sailors.
stopping the submarine attacks was important because the grand alliance great britain the united states and the soviet union called for the defeat of germany first.
defeating the japanese could wait.
war aims and strategy a major consideration for allied military strategy was the fighting on the vast eastern front in the soviet union.
during 1941 1942 the nazis and soviets waged colossal battles.
the soviet population by far bore the brunt of the war against the nazis leading josef stalin to insist that the americans and british relieve the pressure on his troops by attacking the germans in western europe thereby forcing hitler to pull units away from the russian front.
meanwhile with most of the german army deployed on the russian front the british and american air forces flying from bases in england would bomb military and industrial targets in german occupied western europe and especially in germany itself while american and british generals prepared plans to attack nazi troops in north africa italy and france.
franklin roosevelt and winston churchill agreed that they needed to create a second front in western europe but they could not agree on the timing or location of an invasion.
u s military planners wanted to attack the germans in france before the end of 1942 the british however were wary of moving too fast.
an allied defeat on the french coast churchill warned was the only way in which we could possibly lose this war finally roosevelt decided to accept churchills compromise proposal for a joint a nglo american invasion of north africa which was occupied by german and italian armies not nearly as strong as those in europe.
the north africa campaign on november 8 1942 british and american forces landed in morocco and algeria on the north african 1184 chapter 26 the second world war 1933 1945 coast operation torch.
they were led by an untested l ittle known u s general dwight d eisenhower.
farther east british armies were pushing the germans and italians back across libya.
the americans lost badly in early battles.
in early 1943 however eisenhower soon known by his nickname ike found an audacious field commander in general george patton who said he loved war more than my life armed with i vory handled pistols and brimming with bravado patton showed american troops how to fight a war of speed and daring.
corporal morris zimmerman a soldier fighting under patton wrote his mother from north africa this is your son reporting from the land of arabs and wine sticky flies and red sand.
i have always wanted to cross an ocean to see what was on the other side and darned if i didnt hammered from all sides and unable to retreat some 250 000 germans and italians surrendered on may 12 1943 leaving all of north africa in allied control.
the continent had been redeemed said winston churchill.
ernie pyle a war correspondent embedded with the american army reported that major general george s patton patton commanded the u s invasion of sicily the largest amphibious action in the war up to that point.
he believed that war brings out all that is best in men the allied drive toward berlin 1185 the u s troops fought like veterans.
they were well handled.
we had enough of what we needed.
everything meshed perfectly and the end was inevitable.
tunisia has been a good w arm up field for our armies but he added the worst was yet to come the casablanca conference five months earlier in janu ary 1943 roosevelt churchill and the a nglo american military chiefs met at a seaside resort near casablanca the largest city in french morocco.
it was a historic occasion.
no u s president had ever flown abroad while in office and none had ever visited africa.
stalin chose to stay in the soviet union but he sent a message which again urged the allies to invade n azi controlled western europe to relieve the pressure on the russians.
at the casablanca conference the british convinced the americans that they should follow up the anticipated victory in north africa with an assault on the italian island of sicily before attacking italy itself.
roosevelt and churchill also decided to step up the bombing of germany and to increase shipments of military supplies to the soviet union and the nationalist chinese forces fighting the japanese.
before leaving the casablanca conference roosevelt announced with churchills blessing that the war would end only with the unconditional surrender of all enemy nations.
this decision was designed to quiet soviet suspicions that the americans and british might negotiate separately with hitler to end the war in western europe.
the announcement also reflected roosevelts determination that every person in germany should realize that this time germany is a defeated nation whatever its impact on soviet morale or enemy resistance however the decision to require unconditional surrender ensured the destruction of germany and japan that would create power vacuums along the western and eastern borders of the soviet union.
the battle of the atlantic while fighting raged in north africa the battle of the atlantic reached its climax.
great britain desperately needed more food and military supplies from the united states but german submarines operating in groups called wolfpacks were sinking the british vessels transporting american goods faster than british shipyards could replace them.
there could be no invasion of german occupied france until the u boat menace was defeated.
by july 1942 some 230 allied ships and almost 5 million tons of war supplies had been lost.
the only thing that ever frightened me during the war recalled churchill was the u boat peril by the end of 1942 however the british and americans had discovered ways to defeat the u boats.
british experts cracked the german naval radio 1186 chapter 26 the second world war 1933 1945 codes enabling allied convoys to steer clear of u boats or to hunt them down with long range warplanes called subchasers and anti submarine weapons deployed on warships.
new technology also helped as sonar and radar allowed allied ships to track submarines.
yet the best tactic against u boats was to group cargo vessels into tightly bunched convoys so that warships could protect them more effectively.
in may 1943 the allies destroyed forty one u boats.
thereafter the u boats were on the defensive and allied shipping losses fell significantly.
sicily and italy on july 10 1943 following the allied victory in north africa about 250 000 british and american troops landed on the coast of sicily.
general eisenhower called it the first page of the liberation of the european continent the island was in allied hands by august 17 bringing to an end benito mussolinis twenty years of fascist rule in italy.
on july 25 1943 the italian king had dismissed mussolini as prime minister and had him arrested.
the new italian government startled the allies when it offered not only to surrender but also to switch sides.
to prevent them from doing so hitler sent german armies into italy.
the italian campaign thereafter became a series of stalemated battles that left people wondering if it had been worth the cost.
winter came early to southern italy making life even more miserable for the soldiers.
the germans positioned themselves behind formidable defenses and rugged terrain that enabled them to slow the allied advance to a crawl.
italy was one hill after another said a u s soldier and when it was wet you were either going up too slow or down too fast but always the mud.
and every hill had a german machine gun on it allied casualties soared as the stalemate continued.
by february 1944 the two sides were in the words of u s commander mark w clark like two boxers in the ring both about to collapse mussolini plucked from prison by a daring german airborne commando raid became head of a puppet fascist government in northern italy as allied forces finally took control of the rest of the country.
on june 4 1944 the u s fifth army entered rome just two days before d day on the coast of france.
we were woken by trucks moving through the street one overjoyed italian remembered.
at first i thought it was the germans but then i heard american accents.
by dawn people were lining the streets.
i cried the tehran conference late in the fall of 1943 in tehran iran churchill and roosevelt had their first joint meeting with josef stalin.
their discussions focused on the planned invasion of n azi controlled france and a simultaneous russian offensive westward across eastern europe.
the three the allied drive toward berlin 1187 leaders agreed to create an international organization the united n ations to maintain peace after the war.
upon arriving back in the united states roosevelt confided to churchill his distrust of stalin saying that it was a ticklish business keeping the russians cozy with us because of the tension between communism and capitalism.
as general eisenhower stressed however the fate of britain and the united states depended on the soviets survival as an ally.
the prize we seek he said in 1942 is to keep 8 million russians soldiers in the war the strategic bombing of europe months of preparation went into the long anticipated allied invasion of german occupied france.
while waiting for d day the day the invasion would begin the u s army air force tried to pound germany into submission with an air campaign that dropped thousands of bombs and killed some 350 000 civilians.
yet the air offensive failed to shatter either german morale or w ar related production.
many bombs missed their targets because of thick clouds high winds and inaccurate navigational systems and many allied planes were shot down.
the bombing campaign however did force the germans to commit precious resources to air raid defense and eventually wore down their air force.
with allied air supremacy assured by 1944 the m uch anticipated invasion of hitlers fortress europe could move forward.
planning an invasion in early 1944 dwight d eisenhower arrived in london with a new title supreme commander of the allied expeditionary force aef that would invade n azi controlled western europe.
eisenhower faced enormous challenges ranging from creating an effective command structure to handling disagreements between president roosevelt and prime minister churchill.
eisenhower also faced the daunting task of planning operation overlord the daring assault on hitlers atlantic wall a formidable array of fortifications mines machine guns barbed wire and jagged beach obstacles along the french coastline.
an attack by sea against heavily fortified defenders was the toughest of military operations.
the planned invasion gave churchill nightmares when i think of the beaches.
choked with the flower of american and british youth.
i see the tides running red with their blood.
i have my doubts.
i have my doubts for months eisenhower neither an experienced strategist nor a combat commander dedicated himself to planning the risky invasion and managing the complex political and military rivalries among the allied leaders.
well organized and efficient he was a high energy perfectionist impatient and 1188 chapter 27 the cold war and the fair deal 1945 1952 fight for desegregation demonstrators led by activist a philip randolph left picket the democratic national convention on july 12 1948 calling for racial integration of the armed forces.
democrats were delighted.
many unionists who had gone over to the republicans in 1946 returned to the democrats because of trumans strong support.
journalist james wechsler reported that mr.
truman has reached the crucial fork in the road and turned unmistakably to the left congress however overturned the presidents veto and t aft hartley became law.
the number of strikes dropped sharply thereafter and representatives of management and labor learned to work together.
at the same time by 1954 fifteen state legislatures mainly in the south and west had used the taft h artley act to pass right to work laws forbidding union only workplaces.
those states thereafter recruited industries to relocate because of their low wages and nonunion policies.
civil rights another of trumans challenges was the bigotry faced by returning african american soldiers.
when one black veteran arrived home in a uniform decorated with combat medals he was welcomed by a white neighbor who said dont you forget.
that youre still a nigger the second world war had changed americas racial landscape in important ways however.
as a new york times editorial explained in early 1946 this is a particularly good time to campaign against the evils of bigotry prejudice expanding the new deal 1233 and race hatred because we have witnessed the defeat of enemies who tried to found a mastery of the world upon such cruel and fallacious policy african americans had fought in large numbers to overthrow the nazi regime of government sponsored racism and returning veterans were unwilling to put up with racial abuse at home.
the cold war also gave political leaders added incentive to improve race relations.
the soviets often compared racism in the united states to the nazis brutalization of the jews.
in the ideological contest against capitalism communists highlighted examples of american racism to win influence among the newly emerging nations of africa.
black veterans who spoke out against racial bigotry often risked their lives.
in 1946 two african american couples in rural georgia were gunned down by a white mob.
one of the murderers explained that george dorsey one of the victims was a good nigger until he went into the army.
but when he came out he thought he was as good as any white people in the fall of 1946 a delegation of civil rights activists urged president truman to condemn the ku klux klan and the lynching of african americans.
the delegation graphically described incidents of torture and intimidation against blacks in the south.
truman was horrified my god.
i had no idea that it was as terrible as that.
weve got to do something truman thereupon appointed a committee on civil rights to investigate violence against african americans.
a year later with trumans endorsement the commission issued a report to secure these rights which called for a federal anti lynching bill abolition of the poll tax designed to keep poor blacks from voting a voting rights act an end to racial segregation in the armed forces and a ban on racial segregation in public transportation.
southern democrats were furious.
south carolina governor j strom thurmond warned truman that the southern democratic vote was no longer in the bag thurmond would soon leave the party to form the dixiecrats in opposition to truman.
on july 26 1948 truman took a bolder step when he banned racial discrimination in the federal government.
four days later he issued an executive order ending racial segregation in the armed forces.
the air force and navy quickly complied but the army dragged its feet until the early 1950s.
by 1960 however the armed forces were the most racially integrated of all national organizations.
desegregating the military was truman claimed the greatest thing that ever happened to america jackie robinson meanwhile racial segregation was being dismantled in a much more public area professional baseball.
in april 1947 the brooklyn dodgers roster included the first african american to play major 1234 chapter 27 the cold war and the fair deal 1945 1952 jackie robinson robinsons unfaltering courage and superior athletic skills prompted the integration of sports drawing african american and latino spectators to the games.
here he greets his dominican fans at trujillo high school in santo domingo.
league baseball jack roosevelt jackie robinson.
he was born in 1919 in a georgia sharecroppers cabin the grandson of slaves.
six months later his father left town with a neighbors wife never to return.
robinsons mother moved the family to pasadena california where jackie became a marvelous all around athlete.
at ucla he was the first athlete in school history to letter in four sports baseball basketball football and track.
after serving in the army during world war ii he began playing professional baseball in the s o called negro leagues.
he did so well that major league scouts reported that he could play in the big leagues.
at that point branch rickey the president and general manager of the brooklyn dodgers interviewed robinson for three hours on august 28 1945 rickey asked robinson if he could face racial abuse without losing his temper.
robinson was shocked are you looking for a negro who is afraid to fight back rickey replied that he needed a pathbreaking negro player with guts enough not to fight back robinson assured him he was the best candidate to integrate baseball if you want to take this gamble i will promise there will be no incident he then signed robinson to a contract for 600 a month.
rickey expanding the new deal 1235 explained to his critics that he had found a terrific player who was a strong quiet warrior of incomparable courage capable of looking the other way when provoked.
and he was often provoked.
soon after robinson arrived for preseason practice many of his white dodger teammates refused to take the field with him.
manager leo durocher would have none of that.
as he told the team i dont care if the guy is yellow or black or if he has stripes.
im the manager of this team and i say he plays during the 1947 season teammates and opposing players viciously baited robinson.
pitchers hit him base runners spiked him and spectators booed him and drenched him in beer even as he led the dodgers to the national league championship and eventually six world series appearances.
in cincinnati reds fans posted a sign reading robinson we are going to kill you if you attempt to enter a ball game as crosley field hotels refused him rooms and restaurants denied him service.
hate mail arrived by the bucketful.
one sportswriter called robinson the loneliest man i have ever seen in sports on the other hand black spectators were electrified by robinsons courageous example and turned out in droves to watch him play.
a headline in a boston newspaper expressed the prevailing sentiment triumph of whole race seen in jackies debut in major league ball as time passed robinson won over many fans and players with his courage wit grit and talent.
as sportswriter red smith observed robinson was an example of the unconquerable doing the impossible during his first season with the dodgers robinson stole twice as many bases as anyone else in the national league and he was named rookie of the year.
between 1949 and 1954 robinson had a batting average of 327 among the best in baseball.
yankees catcher yogi berra said he could beat you in a lot of ways robinsons very presence on the field with lily white teams forced spectators sitting in racially divided bleachers to confront the hypocritical reality of segregation.
other teams soon began signing black players.
racial attitudes were changing slowly.
in 1947 robinson was voted the second most popular american behind singer bing crosby.
my life robinson remembered produced understanding among whites and it gave black people the idea that if i could do it they could do it too that blackness wasnt subservient to anything mexican americans in the far west mexican americans often grouped with other spanish speaking immigrants as hispanics or latinos continued to experience ethnic prejudice.
schools in arizona new mexico texas and california routinely segregated mexican american children from whites.
the 500 000 latino veterans were especially frustrated that their efforts in the war were not rewarded with equality at home.
they were frequently 1236 chapter 27 the cold war and the fair deal 1945 1952 trumans assumption that stalin and the soviets were behind the invasion of south korea led him to deepen the american commitment to stop communism.
the interests of the united states are global in character he explained.
a threat to the peace of the world anywhere is a threat to our security fearful that the soviets would use the korean conflict as a diversion to invade western europe he ordered a major expansion of u s military forces in europe and around the world.
truman also increased assistance to french troops fighting a communist independence movement in the french colony of indochina which included vietnam starting americas deepening military involvement in southeast asia.
another red scare the korean war excited another red scare at home as people grew fearful that communists were infiltrating american society.
since 1938 the house committee on un american activities huac had kept up a drumbeat of accusations about supposed communist agents in the federal government.
on march 21 1947 president truman signed an executive order also known as the loyalty order requiring federal government workers to undergo a background investigation to ensure they were not communists or even associated with communists or other subversive groups.
truman knew that the loyalty program violated civil liberties but he felt he had no choice.
he was responding to pressure from fbi director j edgar hoover and attorney general tom clark both of whom were convinced that there were numerous spies working inside the federal government.
truman was also eager to blunt criticism that he was not doing enough to ensure that soviet sympathizers were not working in government.
truman thought that the fear about communist subversives was misplaced.
people are very much wrought up about the communist bugaboo he wrote to pennsylvania governor george earle but i am of the opinion that the country is perfectly safe so far as communism is concerned by early 1951 the federal civil service commission had cleared more than 3 million people while only 378 had been dismissed for doubtful loyalty.
others however had resigned for fear they would be dismissed.
in 1953 president dwight d eisenhower revoked the loyalty order.
the hollywood ten charges that hollywood was a hotbed of communism led the house committee on un american activities to launch a full blown investigation of the motion picture industry.
the huac subpoenaed dozens of actors producers and directors to testify at its hearings held in los angeles in october 1947 ten witnesses refused to testify arguing that another red scare 1251 the red scare and hollywood several courageous movie stars attended the huac hearings to support their friends and colleagues who were accused of being communists.
left to right danny kaye june havoc humphrey bogart and lauren bacall seated.
the questioning violated their first amendment rights.
when asked if he were a member of the communist party screenwriter ring lardner jr replied i could answer but i would hate myself in the morning another member of the so called hollywood ten screenwriter dalton trumbo shouted as he left the hearings this is the beginning of an american concentration camp all ten were cited for contempt given prison terms and blacklisted banned from the film industry.
the witch hunt launched by the huac inspired playwright arthur miller who himself was blacklisted to write the crucible an award winning play produced in 1953 it is a dramatic account of the notorious witch trials in salem massachusetts at the end of the seventeenth century intended to alert audiences about the dangers of the anti communist hysteria.
alger hiss the spy case most damaging to the truman administration involved alger hiss president of the carnegie endowment for international peace who had served in several government agencies.
whittaker chambers a former soviet spy and later an editor of time magazine who reversed himself and became an informer testifying against supposed communists in the 1252 chapter 28 cold war america 1950 1959 dien bien phu viet minh soldiers march french captives to a prisoner camp in dien bien phu on may 7 1954 eisenhower snapped back you boys must be crazy.
we cant use those awful things against asians for the second time in less than ten years.
my god the president opposed u s intervention unless the british joined the effort.
when they refused eisenhower told the french that u s military action in vietnam was politically impossible on may 7 1954 the viet minh fighters overwhelmed the last french resistance.
the catastrophic defeat caused the collapse of the french government and signaled the end of french colonial rule in asia.
on july 20 1954 representatives of france britain the soviet union the peoples republic of china and the viet minh signed the geneva accords which gave laos and cambodia their independence and divided vietnam in two at the 17th parallel.
the geneva accords gave the viet minh communists control in the north the french would remain south of the line until nationwide foreign policy in the fifties 1297 postwar alliances the far east ussr sea of okhotsk m o n g o l i a manchuria north korea 1 000 miles 1 000 kilometers sea of japan japan south korea c h i n a bonin islands hanoi philippine thailand cambodia sea south china south sea vietnam philippines malaysia m ra at borneo i n guam u s caroline islands u s trust su indian ocean mariana islands d new guinea sulawesi celebes o n e s i java a west irian to indonesia timor nations having bilateral defense treaties with the u s members of seato communist bloc trust terr.
of new guinea aust.
of papua aust.
coral sea a u s t r a l i a how did the united states become increasingly involved in vietnam during the fifties.
why did the installation of ngo dinh diem by the french and the americans backfire and generate more conflict in vietnam.
wwn64 figure m28 2 first proof n north vietnam bay of bengal iwo jima cea ic o laos republic of china taiwan cif burma myanmar east pakistan pa hong kong g b.
india 1298 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 had done just enough to avoid being charged with having lost vietnam.
johnson initially sought to do the same fearing that any other course of action would jeopardize his great society programs in congress.
his path however took the united states into a deeper military commitment.
in november 1963 when president kennedy was assassinated there were 16 000 u s military advisers in south vietnam.
early in his presidency johnson doubted that vietnam was worth a more extensive military involvement.
in may 1964 he told his national security adviser mcgeorge bundy that he had spent a sleepless night worrying about vietnam it looks to me like we are getting into another korea.
i dont think its worth fighting for.
and i dont think we can get out.
its just the u s air strikes sustained bombing of biggest damned mess that i ever saw vietnam left 30 to 50 foot wide craters yet johnsons fear of appearing that can still be seen today.
weak abroad outweighed his misgivings.
by the end of 1965 there were 184 000 u s troops in vietnam in 1966 there were 385 000 and by 1969 at the height of the war effort 542 000 escalation in vietnam the official justification for the military e scalation a defense department term favored in the vietnam era was the tonkin gulf resolution passed by the senate on august 7 1964 on that day president johnson unknowingly acting on false information provided by the secretary of defense reported that on august 2 and 4 north vietnamese torpedo boats had attacked two u s warships in the gulf of tonkin off the coast of north vietnam.
as it turned out the american vessels had actually fired first in support of south vietnamese attacks against two north vietnamese islands attacks planned by american advisers.
whether the american warships were actually fired upon remains in dispute.
the tonkin gulf resolution empowered the president to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the united states the tragedy of vietnam 1351 and to prevent further aggression only two senators voted against the tonkin gulf resolution which johnson interpreted as equivalent to a congressional declaration of war since it allowed him to wage war as he saw fit.
in early 1965 johnson made the crucial decisions that committed america to full scale war in vietnam.
on february 5 1965 viet cong vc guerrillas attacked a u s base near pleiku in south vietnam killing and wounding more than 100 americans.
more attacks that week led johnson to approve operation rolling thunder the first sustained u s bombing of north vietnam.
thereafter there were essentially two fronts in the war one in north vietnam where u s warplanes continued a massive bombing campaign and the other in south vietnam where nearly all the ground combat occurred.
in march 1965 the u s commander general william c westmoreland greeted the first american combat troops in vietnam.
his strategy was focused not on capturing territory but on waging a war of attrition using overwhelming u s firepower to cause so many casualties that the viet cong and north vietnamese would give up their effort to undermine the south vietnamese government.
soon u s forces launched search and destroy operations against vc guerrillas throughout south vietnam reporting the body count on the evening newscasts.
but the viet cong made up of both men and women wore no uniforms and dissolved by day into the villages hiding among civilians.
their elusiveness exasperated american soldiers most of whom were not trained for such unconventional warfare in vietnams dense jungles and intense heat and humidity.
the escalating war brought rising u s casualties the number of killed wounded and missing which were announced each week on the television news.
criticism of the war grew but lbj stood firm.
we will not be defeated he told the nation.
we will not grow tired.
we will not withdraw the context for policy president johnsons decision to americanize the war flowed directly from the assumptions that had long guided u s foreign policy during the cold war.
the commitment to contain the spread of communism initiated by harry truman and continued by dwight eisenhower and john kennedy guided johnson as well.
why are we in vietnam the president asked during a speech in 1965.
we are there because we have a promise to keep.
to leave vietnam to its fate would shake the confidence of all these people in the value of american commitment what johnson did not say was that he dreaded being blamed for losing vietnam to communism as truman had been accused by republicans of losing china to communists led by mao zedong.
1352 chapter 30 rebellion and reaction 1960s and 1970s eight miles high illegal drugs marijuana amphetamines cocaine peyote hashish heroin and lsd the acid test were common within the counterculture.
said todd gitlin a former sds president more and more to get access to youth culture in the late 1960s you had to get high the byrds sang about getting eight miles high and bob dylan proclaimed that everybody must get stoned in fact getting stoned was one of the favorite activities of the millions who participated in the 1967 summer of love a series of events protesting the vietnam war and celebrating the youth revolt.
the initial event was actually held april 15 when a peace march in new york city attracted 300 000 participants the most ever assembled for a single event up to that time.
perhaps the most publicized activity of the summer of love occurred in san francisco where more than 100 000 hippies flower children converged.
the loosely organized council for the summer of love intended the gathering to be the first step in a grassroots revolution opposing the war by celebrating alternative lifestyles listening to rock music experimenting with mind altering drugs wearing psychedelic clothing and indulging in casual sex.
the yippies the countercultural alternative to sds and the new left was the zany youth international party better known as the yippies founded by two irreverent pranksters jerry rubin and abbie hoffman.
often calling themselves groucho marxists the yippies were bent on thumbing their noses at conventional laws and behavior and mocking capitalism and the consumer culture.
abbie hoffman explained that their conception of revolution is that its fun they wanted to form an alliance between hippies and weathermen a blending of pot and politics and to overthrow the power structure.
rubin claimed that the first part of the yippie program is to kill your parents since they are our first oppressors he added that the widespread use of psychedelic drugs among young americans signifies the total end of the protestant ethic screw work we want to know ourselves the yippie platform called for peace in vietnam absolute personal freedom free birth control and abortions and legalization of marijuana and lsd.
hoffman had no interest in making the yippies a traditional political organization.
we shall not defeat amerika by organizing a political party he declared.
we shall do it by building a new nation a nation as rugged as the marijuana leaf the anarchistic yippies organized marijuana smoke ins threw pies in the faces of political figures nominated a squealing pig for the presidency urged voters to cast their ballots for none of the above and forever young the youth revolt 1373 threatened to put lsd in the city of chicagos water supply during the 1968 democratic national convention.
communes for some the counterculture involved experimenting with alternative living arrangements especially intentional communities or communes communal living in urban areas such as san franciscos h aight ashbury district new yorks greenwich village chicagos uptown and atlantas 14th street neighborhood were popular for a time as were rural communes.
thousands of hippie romantics flocked to the countryside eager to liberate themselves from parental and institutional restraints live in harmony with nature and coexist in love and openness.
the participants in the back to the little house on the commune this land movement as it became known photograph of the members of the were seeking to deepen their sense of family of the mystic arts commune in oregon was featured on the cover of life self and forge authentic community magazines july 18 1969 edition.
out here one of the rural communalists reflected weve got the earth and ourselves and god above.
we came for simplicity and to rediscover god yet all but a handful of the back to the land experiments collapsed within a few months or years.
almost none of those attracted by rural life actually knew how to farm and many were not willing to do the hard work that living off the land required.
the hippies will not change america a journalist predicted because change means pain and the hippie subculture is rooted in the pleasure principle newsweek magazine reported trouble in hippieland in 1968 noting that most of the flower children were seriously disturbed youngsters incapable of sustaining an alternative to mainstream life.
in a candid reflection a young hippie confessed that we are so stupid so unable to cope with anything practical a resident of paper farm in northern california which started in 1968 and collapsed a year later said of its participants they had no commitment to the land a big problem.
all would take food from the land but 1374 chapter 30 rebellion and reaction 1960s and 1970s t alkative member of the silent majority who was a bundle of racial ethnic and political prejudices.
enthroned in his easy chair archie railed against blacks jews italians gays feminists hippies and liberals including his live in daughter and her hippie husband.
at one point he says i aint no bigot.
im the first guy to say it aint your fault that youse are colored the producer of the series norman lear sought to provoke viewers to question their own prejudices.
in fact however many of the 50 million people watching each saturday night identified with archies narrow minded values.
richard nixon richard nixon appealed to the working and m iddle class whites who feared that america was being corrupted by permissiveness anarchy and the tyranny of the rebellious minority.
he explicitly appealed to voters who did not break the law people who pay their taxes and go to work people who send their children to school who go to their churches people who are not haters people who love this country above all he promised to restore law and order in 1952 senator robert a taft of ohio known as mr.
republican had characterized young senator nixon as a little man in a big hurry with a mean and vindictive streak a grocers son from whittier california nixon was a humorless man of fierce ambition and extraordinary perseverance.
raised in a family that struggled with poverty he had to claw and struggle to the top and he nursed a deep resentment of people who had an easier time of it the moneyed class.
nixon was smart shrewd cunning and doggedly determined to succeed in politics.
he was also famously hard to get to know.
republican senator barry goldwater described nixon as the most complete loner ive ever known throughout his career nixon displayed violent mood swings punctuated by raging temper tantrums profanity and anti semitic outbursts.
he was driven as much by anger and resentment as by civic duty.
critics nicknamed him tricky dick because he was a good liar.
in his speech accepting the republican nomination in 1968 nixon pledged to find the truth to speak the truth and live with the truth in fact however he often did the opposite.
one of his presidential aides admitted that we did often lie mislead deceive try to use the media and to con them nixons appointments in his first term nixon selected for his cabinet and staff only white men who would blindly carry out his orders.
john mitchell the gruff attorney general who had been a senior partner in nixons nixon and the revival of conservatism 1387 new york law firm was his closest confidant.
h r bob haldeman a former advertising executive served as chief of staff.
as haldeman explained every president needs a son of a bitch and im nixons john ehrlichman a seattle attorney and college schoolmate of haldeman was chief domestic policy adviser.
john w dean iii an associate deputy in the office of the u s attorney general became the white house legal counsel.
nixon tapped as secretary of state his old friend william rogers who had served as attorney general under dwight d eisenhower.
nixon however had no intention of making rogers the nations chief diplomat.
instead the president virtually ignored rogers while forging an unlikely partnership with dr henry kissinger a brilliant german born harvard political scientist who had become the nations leading foreign policy expert.
kissingers thick accent owlish appearance and outsized ego had helped to make him an international celebrity courted by presidents of both parties.
in 1969 nixon named kissinger his national security adviser and in 1973 kissinger became secretary of state.
nixon and kissinger formed an odd but effective diplomatic team.
both were outsiders who preferred operating in secret both were insecure and even paranoid at times and both mistrusted and envied the others power and prestige.
nixon would eventually grow tired of kissingers efforts at self promotion and his frequent threats to resign if he did not get his way.
for his part kissinger lavished praise on nixon in public while in private dismissing the presidents meatball mind and criticizing his excessive drinking.
yet for all of their differences they worked well together in part because they both loved intrigue power politics and diplomatic flexibility and in part because of their shared vision of a multipolar world order beginning to replace the bipolar cold war as the united states slowly withdrew from vietnam.
the southern strategy a major reason for nixons election victories in 1968 and 1972 was his shrewd southern strategy designed to win over white southern democrats upset by the civil rights revolution.
of all the nations regions the south had long been the most conservative.
the majority of white southern voters were religious and patriotic fervently a nti c ommunist and a nti union and skeptical of s ocial welfare programs.
for a century whites in the solid south had steadfastly voted for democrats.
this trend reflected lingering resentments dating to the civil war and reconstruction against abraham lincoln and his republican successors for imposing northern ways of life on the south including racial integration.
during the late sixties and seventies however a surging economy and a spurt of population growth transformed the south.
1388 chapter 31 conservative revival 1977 1990 for jimmy carter who carried only six states.
it was the second worst defeat of an incumbent president in the twentieth century behind william howard taft in 1912.
the popular vote was 44 million 51 percent for reagan to carters 35 million 41 percent with 7 percent going to john anderson a moderate republican who ran as an independent.
reagans resounding victory signaled a major realignment of voters in which many so called reagan democrats conservative white southern protestants and blue collar northern catholics crossed over to the republican party.
the reagan era had begun.
the reagan revolution democrats who dismissed s ixty nine year old ronald reagan the oldest man to assume the presidency as a third rate actor and mental lightweight underrated his many virtues.
few people in public life had reagans stage presence or confidence.
he may have been a mediocre actor but no one played the part of president better.
his remarkable ability to make americans believe again in the greatness of their country won him two presidential elections in 1980 and 1984 and ensured the victory of his anointed successor vice president george h w bush in 1988 just how revolutionary the reagan era was remains a subject of debate but it cannot be denied that reagans actions and beliefs set the tone for the decades political and economic life.
reagans first term fellow conservatives president reagan said in a speech in 1981 our moment has arrived he and others were determined to get america moving again in his inaugural address he promised to help americans renew our faith and hope in their nation as a shining city on a hill for the rest of the world to emulate.
reagan helped restore the prestige of the presidency through the force of his personality and the appeal of his ideas and ideals.
he succeeded for three main reasons.
first he focused on a few priorities slowing the rate of inflation lowering tax rates reducing the scope of the federal government increasing military spending and conducting an anti soviet foreign policy and he pursued those goals with what an aide called a warmly ruthless intensity.
second reagan unlike carter was skilled at negotiating with congressional leaders and foreign heads of states.
he also recognized that politics is a profession built on compromises.
because the democrats controlled congress reagan was forced to convince the public to pressure their legislators to support his initiatives.
as a former union leader reagan was a masterful the reagan revolution 1429 the election of 1980 wa or ca mt id nv nd wy ut az co sd ks ok nm wi mi ny ia ne tx hi mn nh 4 vt 3 pa oh il in 25 wv va 26 13 mo 6 12 ky 9 nc tn 10 ar sc ms al ga la fl me ma 14 ri 4 ct 8 nj 17 de 3 md 10 dc 3 electoral vote popular vote ak ronald reagan republican 44 000 000 jimmy carter democrat 35 000 000 why wwn64 was ronald reagan such an appealing candidate in 1980.
m31 1 whatfigure factors contributed to reagans overwhelming victory.
first proof negotiator with congress willing to modify his positions while sustaining his overarching goals accepting a partial success and then going back again and again for the rest of what he wanted.
third reagans infectious optimism gave people a sense of renewed confidence.
voters wanted to believe his insistent claim that america could do no wrong.
an uncommon politician he avoided both the arrogance and s elf importance that often accompany the highest office.
public affection for reagan spiked just two months into his presidency when an assassination attempt left him with a punctured lung and a bullet lodged near his heart.
the witty reagan told doctors as they prepared for surgery please tell me youre republicans his gritty response to his injuries created an outpouring of support that gave added momentum to his presidency.
the democratic speaker of the house tip oneill told colleagues that reagan has become a hero.
we cant argue with a man as popular as he is 1430 chapter 31 conservative revival 1977 1990 reagan inherited an economy in shambles the annual rate of inflation had reached 13 percent and unemployment hovered at 7 5 percent.
none of this fazed him however.
his philosophy was simple government is not the solution to our problem.
government is the problem at the same time the cold war was heating up again.
the soviet union had just invaded afghanistan and had placed missiles with nuclear weapons in the nations of central and eastern europe under its control which threatened all of europe.
but reagan refused to be intimidated.
he discarded the earlier policies of containment and dtente in favor of a confrontational posture against the soviet union which he summarized as we win you lose he convinced congress to support a huge increase in the military budget deployed u s missiles in europe and sought to root out communist insurgencies in central america.
reaganomics on august 1 1981 president reagan signed the economic recovery tax act erta which cut personal income taxes by 25 percent lowered the maximum rate from 70 to 50 percent for 1982 and offered a broad array of tax concessions.
the bill was the centerpiece of what reagan called his common sense economic plan.
while theorists called the philosophy behind the plan supply side economics journalists dubbed the presidents proposals reaganomics.
simply put reaganomics argued that the stagflation of the seventies had resulted from excessive corporate and personal income taxes which weakened incentives for individuals and businesses to increase productivity save money and reinvest in economic expansion.
the reaganomics solution was to slash tax rates especially on the wealthy in the belief that they would spend their tax savings on business expansion and consumer goods the supply side of the economy.
such spending advocates believed would provide trickle down benefits to the masses.
by generating economic growth reaganomics promised to produce enough new tax revenues from rising corporate profits and personal incomes to pay for the tax cuts.
in the short term however erta did not work as planned.
the federal budget deficit grew and by november 1981 the economy was officially in recession.
managing the budget to offset the loss of government tax revenues david stockman president reagans budget director proposed sharp reductions in federal spending including social security and medicare the two most expensive and most popular federal programs.
liberal democrats howled at stockmans proposal and reagan responded that he was committed to maintaining the safety net of government services for the truly the reagan revolution 1431 a miss for reaganomics a throng of more than 5 000 senior citizens staged a demonstration in downtown detroit against reagans decision to make cuts in social security and other federal programs supporting the elderly in 1982 needy according to stockman reagan was too kind gentle and sentimental to make the drastic cuts needed to balance the budget.
the reagan administration also continued huge federal subsidies to corporations and agribusinesses what critics called welfare for the rich in the end reagan never dismantled the major new deal programs that he had savagely criticized.
conservative political columnist george will explained reagans failure to make substantial cuts in federal spending by noting that americans are conservative.
what they want to conserve is the new deal within a year stockman realized that the cuts in domestic spending approved by reagan had fallen far short of what would be needed to balance the budget in four years as the president had promised.
massive increases in military spending greatly complicated the situation.
in essence reagan gave the defense department a blank check.
over the next five years the administration would spend some 1 2 trillion on military expenses.
something had to give.
in the summer of 1981 stockman warned that were heading for a crash landing on the budget.
were facing potential deficit numbers so big that they could wreck the presidents entire economic program the fast growing federal deficit which had helped trigger the worst economic recession since 1432 chapter 31 conservative revival 1977 1990 bush struggled to understand the fluid new international scene.
he spoke of a new world order but never defined it admitting he had trouble with the vision thing he faced a challenge in the republican primary from patrick buchanan the conservative commentator and former white house aide who adopted the slogan america first and called on bush to bring home the boys the excitement over the victory in the gulf war also gave way to anxiety over the depressed economy.
in addressing the recession bush tried a clumsy balancing act on the one hand acknowledging that people are hurting while on the other telling americans that this is a good time to buy a car by 1991 the public approval rating of his economic policy had plummeted to 18 percent.
the election of 1992 at the 1992 republican national convention patrick buchanan who had won about a third of the votes in the partys primaries blasted bush for breaking his pledge not to raise taxes and for becoming the biggest spender in american history as the 1992 election unfolded however bushs real problem proved to be his failed effort to improve the economy.
a popular bumper sticker reflected the growing public frustration saddam hussein still has his job.
what about you in contrast the democrats at their convention presented an image of moderate forces in control.
for several years the democratic leadership council led by arkansas governor william jefferson clinton had been pushing the party from the liberal left to the center.
the 1992 campaign also featured a third party candidate texan h ross perot a puckish billionaire who found a large audience for his criticism of reaganomics as voodoo economics a phrase originally used by bush in the 1980 republican primary before he was named the v ice presidential candidate.
born in 1946 in hope arkansas bill clinton never knew his biological father a traveling salesman who died before his son was born.
as a teen clinton yearned to be a political leader on a national scale.
he attended georgetown university in washington d c won a rhodes scholarship to oxford university and earned a law degree from yale university where he met his future wife hillary rodham.
clinton returned to arkansas and won election as the states attorney general.
by 1979 at age thirty two he was the youngest governor in the country.
he served three more terms as arkansas governor and emerged as a dynamic national leader of the new democrats committed to winning back the m iddle class whites reagan democrats who had voted republican during the 1980s.
in seeking the democratic nomination clinton promised to cut the defense budget provide tax relief for the middle class and create a massive the presidency of george h w bush 1455 economic aid package to help the former republics of the soviet union forge democratic societies.
witty intelligent and charismatic with an in depth knowledge of public policy clinton projected energy youth and optimism reminding many of john f kennedy his boyhood hero.
but beneath clintons charisma and expertise were several flaws.
the new york times explained that clinton was emotionally needy indecisive and undisciplined he had also earned a w ell deserved reputation for h alf truths exaggerations and talking out of both sides of his mouth.
clinton bill clinton and al gore the used opinion polls to shape his stances democratic candidates celebrate the on issues pandered to s pecial interest end of their presidential campaign in groups and flip flopped on contro clintons hometown of little rock versial subjects leading critics to label arkansas on november 3 1992 him slick willie even more enticing to the media were charges that clinton was a chronic adulterer and that he had manipulated the reserve officers training corps rotc program during the vietnam war to avoid military service.
clintons evasive denials could not dispel a lingering mistrust of his character.
after a series of bruising primaries clinton won the democratic presidential nomination and promised to restore the hopes of the forgotten middle class he chose senator albert al gore jr of tennessee as his running mate.
gore described himself as a raging moderate flushed with their convention victory and sporting a t en point lead over bush in the polls the c linton gore team hammered the president on economic issues.
clinton pledged that if elected he would cut the federal budget deficit in half in four years while reducing taxes on middle class americans.
such promises helped clinton win with 370 electoral votes and about 43 percent of the vote.
bush received 168 electoral votes and 39 percent of the vote.
perot garnered 19 percent of the popular vote more than any t hird party candidate since theodore roosevelt in 1912 as 1992 came to an end bill clinton the new democrat prepared to lead the united states through the last decade of the twentieth century.
the urgent question of our time he said is whether we can make change our friend and not our enemy clinton would embrace unexpected changes while ushering america into the twenty first century.
chapter review summary the carter presidency while jimmy carter had some notable achievements such as the camp david accords his administration suffered from legislative inexperience a deepening economic recession soaring inflation and the iranian hostage crisis.
his sermonizing about the need for americans to lead simpler lives compounded the publics loss of faith in his presidency.
the rise of conservatism ronald reagans charm coupled with disillusionment over carters presidency won reagan the election in 1980 the republican insurgency was dominated by christian conservatives like those who made up the moral majority.
the migration of older americans and others to conservative southern and western states increased the voting power of the so called sunbelt where voters were socially conservative and favored lower taxes and a smaller less intrusive federal government.
reaganomics reagan introduced a supply side economic philosophy commonly called reaganomics that championed tax cuts for the rich reductions in government regulations cuts to social welfare programs and increased defense spending.
reagan was unable to cut domestic spending however and the tax cuts failed to pay for themselves as promised.
the result was a dramatic increase in the national debt.
the end of the cold war reagans military buildup including preliminary development of a space based a ntiballistic missile system called the strategic defense initiative sdi helped force the soviets to the negotiating table to conclude the intermediate range nuclear forces inf treaty the beginning of the end of the cold war.
but reagans foreign policy efforts were badly tarnished by the iran contra affair in which members of his administration sold american made armaments to iran in exchange for iranian influence to secure the release of american hostages held in lebanon despite the presidents public claims that he would never deal with terrorists.
america in the 1980s americans in the eighties not only experienced unprecedented prosperity but also rising poverty and homelessness.
conservatives condemned and dismissed hiv aids as a gay disease.
the development of the microprocessor paved the way for the computer revolution which dramatically increased productivity and communications while generating whole new industries.
consumerism flourished all too well during the eighties the result of which was massive public and private debt.
a new world order toward the end of the 1980s democratic political m ovements emerged in eastern europe.
in the soviet union mikhail g orbachevs steps to restructure the economy perestroika and promote more open policies glasnost led to further reform and the collapse of the soviet empire.
but new trouble spots quickly emerged.
iraq led by saddam hussein invaded n eighboring kuwait in 1990 when iraq did not withdraw american led allied forces launched operation desert storm and the iraqis surrendered within six weeks.
chronology november 1979 november 1989 december 1989 president carter helps negotiate the camp david accords tax revolt in california leads to the passage of proposition 13 islamist militants storm the u s embassy in tehran and take fifty two americans hostage ronald reagan elected president president reagan enacts major tax cuts president reagan authorizes development of the strategic defense initiative sdi reagan delivers his famous berlin wall speech george h w bush is elected president berlin wall is torn down u s troops invade panama and capture manuel noriega iraq forced from kuwait in the first gulf war breakup of the ussr bill clinton is elected president key terms camp david accords p 1419 glasnost p 1441 iranian hostage crisis p 1421 intermediate range nuclear forces inf treaty 1987 p 1442 moral majority p 1426 reaganomics p 1430 strategic defense initiative sdi p 1435 iran contra affair p 1439 perestroika p 1441 microprocessor p 1443 hiv aids p 1447 operation desert storm 1991 p 1452 new democrats p 1454 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.
twenty first century america 1993 present youth speaks the occupy wall street movement was born when thousands of protesters many of them unemployed young adults occupied wall street the famous financial district in downtown manhattan to protest the tyrannical power of corporate america.
the grassroots movement soon spread across the nation then the world.
here members of the movement stage a protest outside the new york stock exchange in september 2011 t he united states entered the final decade of the twentieth century triumphant.
american persistence in fighting and financing the cold war had contributed to the collapse of the soviet union and the birth of democracy and capitalism in eastern europe.
by the end of the century the united states was the worlds only superpower.
yet no sooner did the century come to an end than americas sense of physical security and material comfort was shattered by terrorist attacks in 2001 on new york city and washington d c the attacks killed thousands plunged the economy into recession and raised profound questions about national security.
in leading the fight against global terrorism the united states became embroiled in long costly and controversial wars in iraq and a fghanistan.
opposition to the wars would provide much of the momentum for democrat barack obama to win election in 2008 as the nations first african american president.
obama entered the white house at the same time that the united states and europe were experiencing the great recession a prolonged economic downturn that threatened the global banking system caused widespread unemployment and ignited social unrest and political tensions at home and abroad.
focus questions 1 what were the major population trends demographics in the united states during the t wenty first century.
how did they impact the nations politics.
2 what were the accomplishments and the setbacks of bill clintons presidency.
3 what was the impact of global terrorism on the united states during the presidency of george w bush.
how effective was his war on terror 4 what were the issues and developments during bushs second term that helped lead to barack obamas historic victory in the 2008 presidential election.
5 what were president obamas priorities at home and abroad.
how effective were his efforts to pursue them.
1460 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present supreme courts decision he asked voters to rally around president elect bush and move forward.
partisan rancor he urged must be put aside the ferocious sparring between the two national parties was not put aside however in part because bush chose as key advisers men known for their brusqueness and strong ideological convictions.
one of them r ichard dick cheney a former wyoming congressman and influential m ember of the nixon ford and bush administrations quickly became the most p owerful vice president in history.
cheney so secretive that he often appeared sinister used his long experience with the government bureaucracy to fill the administration with like minded associates who helped him control the flow of information to the president.
he became a domineering influence on the inexperienced bush.
a change of direction george w bush had promised to cut taxes for the wealthy increase military spending oppose strict environmental regulations and privatize social security by investing workers retirement pension funds in the stock market.
first however he had to deal with a sputtering economy.
by march 2001 the economy was in recession for the first time in more than a decade.
bush decided that cutting taxes was the best way to boost economic growth.
on june 7 2001 he signed the economic growth and tax relief act which cut 1 35 trillion in taxes.
instead of paying for themselves in renewed economic growth however the bush tax cuts led to a sharp drop in federal revenue producing in turn a fast growing budget deficit as the clinton surpluses were quickly used up.
huge increases in the costs of medicare and medicaid resulting from the aging of the baby boom generation contributed to the soaring deficits as did m ilitary expenditures caused by an unexpected war.
bush was also distracted by global crises.
islamic militants around the world bitterly resented what they viewed as the imperial globalization of u s culture and power.
with increasing frequency they used terrorism including suicide bombings to gain notoriety exact vengeance and generate fear and insecurity.
throughout the nineties the united states had fought a losing struggle against global terrorist groups in part because terrorism thrives in nations with weak governments overwhelmed by rapid population growth scarce resources widespread poverty and huge numbers of unemployed young men symptoms many nations were suffering.
the ineffectiveness of u s intelligence agencies in tracking the movements and intentions of militant extremists became tragically evident in the late summer of 2001 a chaotic start to a new century 1477 9 11 a new day of infamy at 8 45 a m on september 11 2001 the continental united states was attacked for the first time since 1814 when a passenger airliner that had been hijacked by islamist terrorists slammed into the north tower of the world trade center in new york city.
eighteen minutes later a second hijacked jumbo jet crashed into the south tower.
the twin towers 110 stories tall and filled with 50 000 workers burned fiercely the infernos forcing hundreds of desperate people to jump to their deaths as t housands more on the floors below the points of impact struggled to evacuate.
the steel structures quickly collapsed from the intense heat destroying surrounding buildings and killing nearly 3 000 people including more than 400 firefighters police officers and emergency responders.
the southern end of manhattan ground zero became a hellish scene of twisted steel suffocating smoke wailing sirens and panicked people.
while the catastrophic drama in new york city was unfolding a third hijacked plane crashed into the pentagon in washington d c a fourth airliner september 11th smoke pours out of the north tower of the world trade center as the south tower bursts into flames after being struck by a second hijacked airplane.
both iconic buildings would collapse within an hour.
1478 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present the election of 2004 wa or ca mt id nv nd wy ut az co mn sd ia ne ks ok nm tx hi ak nh 4 vt 3 wi mi ny pa oh 20 wv va mo 5 13 ky 8 nc tn 11 ar sc ms al ga la fl il in me ma 12 ri 4 ct 7 nj 15 de 3 md 10 dc 3 electoral vote popular vote george w bush republican 60 700 000 john kerry democrat 57 400 000 how did the war in iraq polarize american politics.
did the election of 2004 give republicans a mandate for change.
wwn66 figure in what ways m32 2 first proof evertheless kerry conceded the election.
the outcome he stressed n should be decided by voters not a protracted legal battle by narrowly winning ohio bush captured 286 electoral votes to kerrys 251 yet in some respects the election was not so close.
bush received 3 5 million more votes nationwide than kerry and republicans increased their majorities in both houses of congress.
a reelected bush pledged to bring democracy and stability to iraq trim the federal deficit pass a major energy bill create more jobs and privatize social security funds by investing them in the stock m arket.
i earned capital in the campaign political capital and now i intend to spend it he told reporters.
second term blues george bushs second term was beset by thorny political problems a sluggish economy and continuing turmoil in iraq.
in 2005 he pushed through congress an energy bill and a central american free trade act.
but his effort to second term blues 1485 privatize social security retirement accounts by enabling individuals to invest their accumulated pension dollars themselves went nowhere and soaring budget deficits made many fiscal conservatives feel betrayed by the supposedly conservative bush.
the editors of the economist an influential conservative newsmagazine declared that bush had become the least popular re elected president since richard nixon hurricane katrina in 2005 president bushs eroding public support suffered another blow.
in late august a killer hurricane named katrina slammed into the gulf coast devastating large areas of alabama mississippi and louisiana.
katrina left more than 1 000 dead and millions homeless and hopeless especially in new orleans.
local officials and the federal emergency management agency fema were caught unprepared as the catastrophe unfolded and confusion and incompetence abounded.
in the face of blistering criticism bush accepted responsibility for the balky federal response and accepted the resignation of the fema director.
rebuilding the gulf coast would take a long time and a lot of money.
the backlash over the federal response to katrina contributed to a devastating defeat for republicans in the november 2006 congressional the aftermath of hurricane katrina two men use boards to paddle through high water in flood devastated new orleans.
1486 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present the election of 2008 wa or ca mt id nv nd wy ut az co sd ne 1 dem.
ks ok nm tx hi ak mn ia nh 4 vt 3 wi mi ny pa oh 20 wv va mo 5 13 ky 8 nc tn 11 ar sc ms al ga la fl il in me ma 12 ri 4 ct 7 nj 15 de 3 md 10 dc 3 electoral vote popular vote barack obama democrat 69 500 000 john mccain republican 59 900 000 how did the economic crisis affect the outcome of the election.
similarities and differences between the map of the 2004 election first proof and the map of the 2008 election.
wwn64 figure what are the m32 3 college 365 to 173 obama also helped the democrats win solid majorities in both houses of congress.
within days of his victory obama adopted a bipartisan approach in s electing his new cabinet members.
he appointed hillary clinton secretary of state retained republican robert gates as secretary of defense selected retired general james jones who had campaigned for mccain as his national s ecurity adviser and appointed eric holder as the nations first african a merican attorney general.
but picking a bipartisan cabinet proved easier than forging a bipartisan presidency.
obamas first term president obama and his administration inherited two unpopular wars and the worst economic situation in eighty years.
his most pressing challenge was to keep the great recession from becoming a prolonged depression.
unemployment in early 2009 had passed 8 percent and was still rising.
the financial sector remained paralyzed and public confidence had plummeted.
a historic new presidency 1491 one visible sign of the great recessions effects was the sharp decline in mexicans emigrating to the united states.
in 2000 some 700 000 mexicans had crossed the rio grande but by 2010 the number had dropped to less than 150 000 as it became easier for people to improve their quality of life in mexico and harder to do so in the united states.
by 2014 some experts believed that more mexicans were leaving the u s than entering it.
to enable banks to start lending again the new administration continued the tarp program that provided massive government bailouts to the largest banks and financial institutions.
the bailouts were attacked by both the left and the right as deeply unfair to most struggling americans.
treasury secretary timothy geithner later explained we had to do whatever we could to help people feel their money was safe in the banking system even if it made us unpopular had they not saved the big banks obama and geithner argued the economy would have crashed.
preserving the banking system did not create many jobs however.
to do so in mid february 2009 congress passed and obama signed an 832 billion economic stimulus bill called the american recovery and reinvestment act.
the bill included cash distributions to states for construction projects to renew the nations infrastructure roads bridges levees government buildings and the electricity grid money for renewable energy systems and 212 billion in tax reductions for individuals and businesses as well as funds for food stamps and unemployment benefits.
it was the largest government infusion of cash into the economy in history.
in the end however it was not enough to generate a robust economic recovery but obamas actions did save the nation and the world economy from a financial meltdown.
health care reform the economic crisis merited barack obamas full attention but he chose as his top legislative priority a controversial federal health insurance program.
from his first day in office obama stressed his intention to reform a health care system that was bankrupting families bankrupting businesses and bankrupting our government at the state and federal level the united states home to the worlds costliest health system was the only rich nation without a national health care program.
since 1970 the proportion of uninsured people had been steadily rising along with health care costs.
in 2010 roughly 50 million americans 16 percent of the population most of them poor young or people of color had no health insurance.
the presidents goal in creating the patient protection and affordable care act aca which republican critics labeled obamacare was to make health insurance more affordable and make health care accessible for everyone.
the 940 billion law proposed in 2009 and debated for a year centered on the 1492 chapter review summary changing demographics from 1980 to 2010 the population of the united states grew by 25 percent to 306 million.
the nation was quickly becoming even more racially and ethnically diverse and a wave of immigration from latin america allowed hispanics to surpass african americans as the nations largest minority.
by 2012 the u s population included more foreign born and first generation residents than ever before.
divided government just two years after the election of new democrat bill clinton in 1992 republican speaker of the house newt gingrich crafted his contract with america and achieved a republican landslide in the midterm elections of 1994 despite the bipartisan success of the 1993 north american free trade act nafta and the personal responsibility and work opportunity act of 1996 and a prosperous high tech new economy that helped balance the federal b udget clintons private life produced a sex scandal that resulted in impeachment proceedings against him.
clinton was ultimately acquitted and went on to intervene in the balkans to stop ethnic cleansing and to broker the l and for peace wye river accords in the middle east.
global terrorism the 9 11 a ttacks led president george w bush to declare a war on terror that commenced with the u s invasion of afghanistan to capture osama bin laden and oust the islamist taliban government.
through the usa patriot act congress authorized the federal government to monitor americans for possible terrorist activities at home.
the bush doctrine declared americas right to initiate preemptive military strikes against terrorists or rogue nations possessing weapons of mass destruction wmds.
in 2003 bush invoked this doctrine against saddam hussein the leader of iraq.
the ensuing second iraq war removed hussein from power but turned up no wmds.
a historic election the 2008 presidential primary campaigns featured democratic senators hillary rodham clinton the first formidable female candidate and barack obama the first truly contending african american candidate as well as republican senator john mccain the oldest candidate in history.
obama won his partys nomination and went on to take the election becoming the nations first african american president.
his victory resulted in large part from public dismay about the great recession as well as voters weariness with president bush.
obamas priorities obamas first priority was to shore up the failing economy which he attempted through controversial wall street bailouts and a huge economic stimulus package.
yet the recovery remained slow and unequal widening the economic divide and spawning the short lived occupy wall street movement.
the affordable care act obamacare incited increasingly bitter opposition from the conservative tea party.
obama was more successful in winning public support to reduce american military deployment abroad removing all combat troops from iraq in 2011 and downsizing their presence in afghanistan.
obama also intervened in the nations culture wars endorsing same sex marriage and a path to citizenship for undocumented residents.
chronology bill clinton elected president 1993 congress passes nafta 1995 the contract with america 1996 congress passes prwoa 1998 president clinton impeached and acquitted 2000 george w bush elected after controversial recount september 11 2001 terrorists attack new york city operation enduring freedom begins in afghanistan march 2003 iraq war begins with operation iraqi freedom august 2005 hurricane katrina devastates gulf coast global financial markets collapse great recession begins 2009 barack obama becomes the nations first black president congress passes the affordable care act obamacare august 2011 al qaeda leader osama bin laden killed 2013 u s.
supreme court overturns the defense of marriage act doma in united states v windsor 2015 u s.
supreme court upholds the affordable care act and decides that same sex couples have a constitutional right to marry october 2001 key terms north american free trade agreement nafta p 1463 usa patriot act 2001 p 1479 contract with america p 1464 weapons of mass destruction wmds p 1480 personal responsibility and work opportunity act of 1996 prwoa p 1466 globalization p 1467 ethnic cleansing p 1470 war on terror p 1478 bush doctrine p 1480 great recession p 1487 affordable care act aca also called obamacare p 1491 tea party p 1497 same sex marriage p 1500 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.

new world encounters contents and learning objectives native american histories before the conquest pg.
4 imagining a new world pg.
16 what explains cultural differences among native american groups before european conquest.
how did spanish conquest of central and south america transform native american cultures.
the french claim canada pg.
20 a world transformed pg.
8 what was the character of the french empire in canada.
how did europeans and native americans interact during the period of first contact.
the english enter the competition pg.
21 west africa ancient and complex societies pg.
11 what was the character of the west african societies that european traders first encountered.
europe on the eve of conquest pg.
15 how do you explain spains central role in new world exploration and colonization.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab why did england not participate in the early competition for new world colonies.
an unpromising beginning mystery at roanoke pg.
24 what role did the spanish play in the failure of the roanoke colony.
feature essay the columbian exchange and the global environment ecological revolution chapter review chapter 1.
but instead of waiting passively for judgment day the puritans examined them selves for signs of grace for hints that god had in fact placed them among his elect a member of this select group they argued would try to live according to scripture to battle sin and eradicate corruption.
for the puritans the logic of everyday life was clear.
if the church of england contained unscriptural elements clerical vestments for example then they must be eliminated.
if the pope in rome was in league with the antichrist then protestant kings had better not form alliances with catholic states.
if god condemned licentiousness and intoxication then local officials should punish whores and drunks.
there was nothing improper about an occasional beer or passionate physical love within marriage but when sex and drink became ends in themselves the puritans thought englands ministers and magistrates should read the document john winthrop a model of christian charity 1830 voters in massachusetts who were called freemen reelected john winthrop governor many times an indication of his success in translating puritan values into practical policy.
persons of this temperament were more combative than the pilgrims had been.
they wanted to purify the church of england from within and before the 1630s at least separatism held little appeal for them.
from the puritan perspective the early stuarts james i and charles i seemed unconcerned about the spiritual state of the nation.
james tolerated corruption within his own court he condoned gross public extravagance.
his foreign policy appeased european catholic powers.
at one time he even tried to marry his son to a catholic princess.
neither king showed interest in purifying the anglican church.
in fact charles assisted the rapid advance of william laud a bishop who represented everything the puritans detested.
laud defended church ceremonies that they found obnoxious.
he persecuted puritan ministers forcing them either to conform to his theology or lose their licenses to preach.
as long as parliament met puritan voters in the various boroughs and countries throughout england elected men sympathetic to their point of view.
these outspoken representatives criticized royal policies and hounded laud.
because of their defiance charles decided in 1629 to rule england without parliament and four years later named laud archbishop of canterbury.
the last doors of reform slammed shut.
the corruption remained.
john winthrop the future governor of massachusetts bay was caught up in these events.
little about his background suggested such an auspicious future.
he owned a small manor in suffolk one that never produced sufficient income to support his growing family.
he dabbled in law.
but the core of winthrops life was his faith in god a faith so intense his contemporaries immediately identified him as a puritan.
the lord he concluded was displeased with england.
time for reform was running out.
in may 1629 he wrote to his wife i am verily perswaded god will bringe some heavye affliction upon this lande and that speedylye he was however confident that the lord would provide a shelter and a hidinge place for us other puritans some wealthier and politically better connected than winthrop reached similar conclusions about englands future.
they turned their attention to the possibility of establishing a colony in america and on march 4 1629 their massachusetts bay company obtained a charter directly from the king.
charles and his advisers apparently thought the massachusetts bay company was a commercial venture no different from the dozens of other joint stock companies that had recently sprung into existence.
winthrop and his associates knew better.
on august 26 1629 twelve of them met secretly and signed the cambridge agreement.
they pledged to be ready in our persons and with such of our severall familyes as are to go with us.
to embark for the said plantation by the first of march next there was one loophole.
the charters of most joint stock companies designated a specific place where business meetings were to be held.
for reasons not entirely clear a timely bribe is a good guess the charter of the massachusetts bay company did not contain this standard clause.
it could hold meetings anywhere the stockholders called freemen desired even america and if they were in america the king and his archbishop could not easily interfere in their affairs.
reforming england in america a city on a hill the winthrop fleet departed england in march 1630 by the end of the first year almost two thousand people had arrived in massachusetts bay and before the great migration concluded in the early 1640s more than sixteen thousand men and women had arrived in the new puritan colony.
a great deal is known about the background of these particular settlers.
a large percentage of them originated in an area northeast of london called east anglia a region in which puritan ideas had taken deep root.
london kent and the west country also contributed to the stream of emigrants.
in some instances entire villages were reestablished across the atlantic.
many bay colonists had worked as farmers in england but a surprisingly large number came from industrial centers such as norwich where cloth was manufactured for the export trade.
whatever their backgrounds they moved to massachusetts as nuclear families fathers mothers and their dependent children a form of migration strikingly different from the one that peopled virginia and maryland.
moreover because the settlers had already formed families in england the colonys sex ratio was more balanced than that found in the chesapeake colonies.
finally and perhaps more significantly once they had arrived in massachusetts these men and women survived.
indeed their life expectancy compares favorably to that of modern americans.
many factors help explain this phenomenon clean drinking water and a healthy climate for example.
while the puritans could not have planned to live longer than did colonists in other parts of the new world this remarkable accident reduced the emotional shock of long distance migration.
the first settlers possessed another source of strength and stability.
they were bound together by a common sense of purpose.
god they insisted had formed a special covenant with the people of massachusetts bay.
on his part the lord expected them to live according to scripture to reform the church in other words to create an old testament city on a hill that would stand as a beacon of righteousness for the rest of the christian world.
if they fulfilled their side of the bargain the settlers could anticipate peace and prosperity.
no one not even the lowliest servant was excused from this divine covenant for as winthrop stated wee must be knitt together in this worke as one man even as the first ships were leaving england john cotton a popular puritan minister urged the emigrants to go forth with a publicke spirit looking not on your owne things only but also on the things of others many people throughout the ages have espoused such communal rhetoric but these particular men and women went about the business of forming a new colony as if they truly intended to transform a religious vision into social reality.
the bay colonists gradually came to accept a highly innovative form of church government known as congregationalism.
under the system each village church was independent of outside interference.
the american puritans of course wanted nothing of bishops.
the people the saints were the church and as a body they pledged to uphold gods law.
in the salem church for example the members covenanted with the lord and with one another and do bind ourselves in the presence of god to walk together in all his ways simply because a person happened to live in a certain community did not mean he or she automatically belonged to the local church.
th e churches of massachusetts were voluntary institutions and in order to join one a man or woman had to provide testimony a confession of faith before neighbors who had already been admitted as full members.
it was a demanding process.
whatever the personal strains however most men and women in early massachusetts aspired to full membership which entitled them to the sacraments and gave some of them responsibility for choosing ministers disciplining backsliders and determining difficult questions of theology.
although women and blacks could not vote for ministers they did become members of the congregational churches.
over the course of the seventeenth century women made up an increasingly large share of the membership.
some aspects of community religiosity in early massachusetts may of course strike modern americans as morbid.
ministers expected people convicted of capital crimes to offer a full public confession of their sins just before their own execution.
such rituals reinforced everyday moral values by reminding ordinary men and women those who listened to the confession of the fatal consequences awaiting those who ignored the teachings of scripture.
in creating a civil government the bay colonists faced a particularly difficult challenge.
their charter allowed the investors in a joint stock company to set up a business organization.
when the settlers arrived in america however company leaders men like winthrop moved quickly to transform the commercial structure into a colonial government.
an early step in this direction took place on may 18 1631 when the category of freeman was extended to all adult males who had become members of a congregational church.
this decision greatly expanded the franchise of massachusetts bay and historians estimate that during the 1630s at least 40 percent of the colonys adult males could vote in elections.
while this percentage may seem low by modern or even jacksonian standards it was higher than anything the emigrants would have known in england.
the freemen voted annually for a governor a group of magistrates called the court of assistants and after 1634 deputies who represented the interests of the individual towns.
even military officers were elected every year in massachusetts bay.
two popular misconceptions about this government should be dispelled.
it was neither a democracy nor a theocracy.
the magistrates elected in massachusetts did not believe they represented the voters much less the whole populace.
they ruled in the name of the electorate but their responsibility as rulers was to god.
in 1638 winthrop warned against overly democratic forms since the best part of the people is always the least and of that best part the wiser is always the lesser and second the congregational ministers possessed no formal political authority in massachusetts bay.
they could not even hold civil office and it was not unusual for the voters to ignore the recommendations of a respected minister such as john cotton.
in new england the town became the center of public life.
in other regions of british america where the county was the focus of local government people did not experience the same density of social and institutional interaction.
in massachusetts complete the assignment the children who refused to come home captivity and conversion on myhistorylab feature essay the children who refused to come home captivity and conversion portrait of esther wheelwright as an ursuline nun.
t he spread of terrorism throughout the modern world and reports of journalists and civilian workers captured in war zones have forced many americans to contemplate a deeply unsettling question how would they behave if they were kidnapped by members of a group hostile to the fundamental values of the united states.
such concerns are not new.
during the colonial period new englanders who settled along the frontier with french canada knew that at any moment they might be carried away to quebec or montreal as captives and under fearful conditions might discover the fragility of their own ethnic and religious identities.
between 1675 and 1763 the french and british empires waged almost constant war.
often the conflicts turned on dynastic rivalries in europe but whatever the causes the fighting extended to north america where in an effort to contain the expansion of english settlement the french and their indian allies raided exposed communities from the coast of maine to western massachusetts.
during these years approximately 1 641 english colonists were taken captive nearly half of them children and many other people died in the violent clashes.
on the long trek back to canada the french and indians killed those prisoners who resisted or who were too weak to keep up the pace.
the reverend cotton mather new englands most influential late seventeenth century minister invited his parishioners to imagine the terrifying experience of capture the captives.
are every minute looking when they shall be roasted alive to make a sport and a feast for the most execrable cannibals.
captives that must see their nearest relations butchered before their eyes and yet be afraid of letting those eyes drop a tear although the french aimed to advance their imperial designs through attacks on english settlements their indian allies often entered the frontier wars for different reasons.
the abenaki for example harbored grievances against the english colonists from earlier conflicts and hoped with the help of the french to reap vengeance on them.
other indian groups regarded the english captives as a source of revenue.
after all someone from massachusetts was sure to offer a ransom for an unfortunate relative and as one might predict in such a market the price of liberation rose substantially over time.
the mohawk indians however viewed the captives as replacements for warriors killed in battle and whenever possible they worked to incorporate the new englanders into their own culture.
they knew from experience that children especially young girls offered the best prospects for successful adoption.
for the french and many of their indian allies who had converted to catholicism religion served to justify frontier violence.
french officials championed the catholic faith and they regarded new englanders not only as representatives of the british empire but also as protestant heretics.
the english gave as good as they got.
they accepted as absolute truth that catholicism was an utterly corrupt religion and that priests especially jesuits could not be trusted in spiritual matters.
french religious and political leaders looked upon new england captives as possible converts to catholicism for in this ongoing imperial controversy news that an english protestant had given up his or her faith for rome represented a major symbolic victory.
as historian james axtell explained if the english could not preserve their religious identities as captives then their pretensions to the status as gods chosen people.
would be cast in grave doubt the odds of converting young new englanders to catholicism in these circumstances must have appeared extraordinarily small.
the captives taken in war had come from highly religious communities where they had received regular instruction in the basic tenets of reformed protestantism.
as children puritans learned to equate the pope with satan.
their forefathers had traveled to the new world to cleanse the church of england from practices associated with catholicism.
and yet amazingly once they arrived in canada a significant number of prisoners perhaps as much as fifty percent accepted the catholic faith married french or indian spouses and settled comfortably into the routines of life in canada.
one such convert was esther wheelwright.
abenaki indians captured her in wells maine in 1703 when she was only seven years old and adopted her.
she was later taken in by nuns who taught her french.
she became a keen student of catholicism.
over time the sincerity of her new faith won her many admirers and eventually esther renamed esther marie joseph de lenfant jesus became an ursuline nun.
some years later she was appointed superior of the entire ursuline order in canada.
when new englanders attempted to negotiate her release they discovered that she does not wish to return because of the change of her religion esthers mother and father reluctantly accepted their daughters decision.
they even gave money to her convent and in recognition of their generosity and forgiveness she sent a portrait of herself as a nun to her bewildered protestant family.
in the long contest for religious and cultural superiority eunice williams posed an even more difficult challenge for new englanders.
after all she was the daughter of a leading congregational minister no one doubted the quality of her religious instruction.
eunices ordeal began on february 29 1704 when a large force of french and indians overran deerfield an agricultural community in western massachusetts.
within a short time the raiders killed many inhabitants including several members of her family.
her mother died during the long march to canada.
eventually the reverend williams negotiated his freedom as well as that of several surviving children.
eunice refused to join them.
she had fallen in love with an indian and although friends and relatives begged her to reject catholicism and life among the kahnawake mohawks she politely but firmly rejected their pleas.
over the next several decades eunice and her indian husband visited new england.
on one occasion in 1741 her cousin the reverend solomon williams pointed out in a sermon that eunice had accepted the thickness of popish darkness superstition lamenting her pitiful and sorrowful condition he urged her to reaffirm the faith of her father.
unhappily for solomon eunice had forgotten all that she once knew of the english language and so the force of his shrill condemnation was lost on her.
no society easily accepts rejection.
new englanders struggled to comprehend why so many of their children would not come home and they tried as best they could to explain to themselves why eunice and the other captives refused to be redeemed.
they assured each other that crafty priests had bribed or even coerced the children.
a few ministers such as cotton mather and eunices father suggested that god had punished the protestant communities for their sinful behavior.
whatever contemporaries may have thought of these accounts modern historians have demonstrated that catholic priests seldom employed force or promises of worldly goods in winning converts.
some captives may have felt gratitude to the french and indians who had spared their lives.
but undoubtedly love marriage and a growing sense of security in a new society helped sever ties with a new england culture that slowly faded from memory.
the reverend john williamss own narrative of the deerfield captives entitled the redeemed captive returning to zion 1707 addressed the crisis.
it became a best seller in a colony eager to hear the story of those redeemed from captivity those returned to the fold.
at the end of the day however the problem of abandoning ones nation and ones faith continued to haunt ordinary men and women who fervently identified with england and protestantism.
by turning their backs on european civilization english culture and the protestant religion these captives challenged foundational values even more powerfully than did the french and indians.
questions for discussion 1 why did so many new england captives refuse to return home.
2 why did the french and indians view english children especially young girls as the most likely converts to their religion and way of life.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies groups of men and women voluntarily covenanted together to observe common goals.
the community constructed a meetinghouse where religious services and town meetings were held.
this powerful sense of shared purpose something that later americans have greatly admired should not obscure the fact that the founders of new england towns also had a keen eye for personal profit.
seventeenth century records reveal that speculators often made a good deal of money from selling shares in village lands.
but acquisitiveness never got out of control and recent studies have shown that entrepreneurial practices rarely disturbed the peace of the puritan communities.
inhabitants generally received land sufficient to build a house to support a family.
although villagers escaped the kind of feudal dues collected in other parts of america they were expected to contribute to the ministers salary pay local and colony taxes and serve in the militia.
limits of religious dissent the european settlers of massachusetts bay managed to live in peace at least with each other.
this was a remarkable achievement considering the chronic instability that plagued other colonies at this time.
the bay colonists disagreed over many issues sometimes vociferously whole towns disputed with neighboring villages over common boundaries.
but the people inevitably relied on the civil courts to mediate differences.
they believed in a rule of law and in 1648 the colonial legislature called the general court drew up the lawes and liberties the first alphabetized code of law printed in english.
this is a document of fundamental importance in american constitutional history.
in clear prose it explained to ordinary colonists their rights and responsibilities as citizens of the commonwealth.
the code engendered public trust in government and discouraged magistrates from the arbitrary exercise of authority.
the puritans never supported the concept of religious toleration.
they transferred to the new world to preserve their own freedom of worship about religious freedom of those deemed heretics they expressed little concern.
the most serious challenges to puritan orthodoxy in massachusetts bay came from two brilliantly charismatic individuals.
the first roger williams arrived in 1631 and immediately attracted a body of loyal followers.
indeed everyone seemed to have liked williams as a person.
williamss religious ideas however created controversy.
he preached extreme separatism.
the bay colonists he exclaimed were impure in the sight of the lord so long as they remained even nominal members of the church of england.
moreover he questioned the validity of the colonys charter since the king had not first purchased the land from the indians a view that threatened the integrity of the entire colonial experiment.
williams also insisted that the civil rulers of massachusetts had no business punishing settlers for their religious beliefs.
it was gods responsibility not mens to monitor peoples consciences.
the bay magistrates were prepared neither to tolerate heresy nor to accede to williamss other demands and in 1636 after attempts to reach a compromise had failed they banished him from the colony.
williams worked out the logic of his ideas in providence a village he founded in what would become rhode island.
the magistrates of massachusetts bay rightly concluded that the second individual anne hutchinson posed an even graver threat to the peace of the commonwealth.
this extremely intelligent woman her husband william and her children followed john cotton to the new world in 1634 even contemporaries found her religious ideas usually termed antinomianism somewhat confusing.
whatever her thoughts hutchinson shared them with other bostonians many of them women.
her outspoken views scandalized orthodox leaders of church and state.
she suggested that all but two ministers in the colony had lost touch with the holy spirit and were preaching a doctrine in the congregational churches that was little better than that of archbishop laud.
when authorities demanded she explain her unusual opinions she suggested that she experienced divine inspiration independently of either the bible or the clergy.
in other words hutchinsons teachings could not be tested by scripture a position that seemed dangerously subjective.
indeed hutchinsons theology called the very foundation of massachusetts bay into question.
without clear external standards one persons truth was as valid as anyone elses and from winthrops perspective hutchinsons teachings invited civil and religious anarchy.
but her challenge to authority was not simply theological.
as a woman her aggressive speech sparked a deeply misogynistic response from the colonys male leaders.
when this woman described congregational ministers some of them the leading divines of boston as unconverted men the general court intervened.
for two very tense days in 1637 the ministers and magistrates of massachusetts bay crossexamined hutchinson in this intense theological debate she more than held her own.
she knew as much about the bible as did her inquisitors.
hutchinson defied the ministers and magistrates to demonstrate exactly where she had gone wrong.
just when it appeared hutchinson had outmaneuvered indeed thoroughly embarrassed her opponents she let down her guard declaring forcefully that what she knew of god came by an immediate revelation.
by the voice of his own spirit to my soul here was what her accusers had suspected all along but could not prove.
she had confessed in open court that the spirit can live without the moral law.
this antinomian statement fulfilled the worst fears of the bay rulers and they were relieved to exile hutchinson and her followers to rhode island.
mobility and division massachusetts bay spawned four new colonies three of which survived to the american revolution.
new hampshire became a separate colony in 1677 its population grew very slowly and for much of the colonial period new hampshire remained economically dependent on massachusetts its commercial neighbor to the south.
far more people were drawn to the fertile lands of the connecticut river valley.
in 1636 settlers founded the villages of hartford windsor and wethersfield.
no one forced these men and women to leave massachusetts and in their new surroundings they created a society that looked much like the one they had reforming england in america connecti cut r maine part of mass.
new hampshire part of mass.
hudson r portsmouth massachusetts bay salem boston hartford new haven providence plymouth wethersfield connecticut new haven new haven conn conn new n e t h e r l and narragansett bay rhode island atlantic ocean not surprisingly these men and women appreciated the need for toleration.
no one was persecuted in rhode island for his or her religious beliefs.
one might have thought the separate rhode island communities would cooperate for the common good.
they did not.
villagers fought over land and schemed with outside speculators to divide the tiny colony into even smaller pieces.
in 1644 parliament issued a patent for the providence plantations and in 1663 the rhode islanders obtained a royal charter.
these successes did not calm political turmoil.
for most of the seventeenth century colonywide government existed in name only.
despite their constant bickering however the settlers of rhode island built up a profitable commerce in agricultural goods.
allies and enemies plymouth windsor 100 miles 100 kilometers new england colonies 1650 the early settlers quickly carved up new england.
new haven briefly flourished as a separate colony before being taken over by connecticut in 1662 long island later became part of new york plymouth was absorbed into massachusetts and in 1677 new hampshire became a separate colony.
known in the bay colony.
through his writings thomas hooker connecticuts most prominent minister helped all new englanders define congregational church polity.
puritans on both sides of the atlantic read hookers beautifully crafted works.
in 1639 representatives from the connecticut towns passed the fundamental orders a blueprint for civil government and in 1662 charles ii awarded the colony a charter of its own.
in 1638 another group led by theophilus eaton and the reverend john davenport settled new haven and several adjoining towns along long island sound.
these emigrants many of whom had come from london lived briefly in massachusetts bay but then insisted on forming a puritan commonwealth of their own one that established a closer relationship between church and state than the bay colonists had allowed.
the new haven colony never prospered and in 1662 it was absorbed into connecticut.
rhode island experienced a wholly different history.
from the beginning it drew people of a highly independent turn of mind and according to one dutch visitor rhode island was the receptacle of all sorts of riff raff people.
all the cranks of new england retire thither this description of course was an exaggeration.
roger williams founded providence in 1636 two years later anne hutchinson took her followers to portsmouth.
other groups settled around narragansett bay.
puritan expansion in new england did not occur unopposed.
during the 1620s the pequots a numerous tribe whose home territory centered on the thames and mystic rivers dominated the trade of southern new england.
the pequots collected furs from other indian peoples in the region sold them to the dutch and then resold the european goods they obtained to their indian clients.
this middleman status proved highly profitable for the pequots giving them first access to the metal weapons firearms and other tools sold by the dutch.
their commercial and military power allowed the pequots to impose their political control over much of the region and to force their trading partners to pay them tribute.
the founding of the english colonies offered potential new trading partners for the indians of new england.
the pilgrims and puritans may have come to new england for religious reasons but this did not stop them from participating in the regions lucrative fur trade.
the pequots resented this intrusion.
they saw the english traders as a threat to their regional power.
the english for their part saw the dutch and their pequot trading partners as a challenge to english control of new england.
in 1636 an english trader named john oldham was killed by unknown indians.
the english eventually came to blame the pequots resulting in war.
the english allied themselves with the mohegan indians a tribe that had formerly been tributaries to the pequots and the narragansetts who had recently had some of their land seized by the pequots.
the pequot nation was already in decline when the war started.
the pequots had been ravaged by epidemic disease in 1619 and 1633 from a pre contact population of 13 000 only 3 000 pequots remained.
the pequot war as it came to be known all but destroyed the tribe.
the english and their allies quickly routed the pequots.
the english waged an especially vicious campaign.
for example in 1637 english soldiers surrounded a pequot village on the mystic river that contained mostly women children and old men.
the english soldiers set the village on fi re and then shot down any pequots who tried to escape.
after the war the english took most of the surviving pequots as slaves giving some to their allies and selling the remainder to the english plantations in the west indies.
the english won the war but their savage tactics alienated their indian allies.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies diversity in the middle colonies how did ethnic diversity shape the development of the middle colonies.
new york new jersey pennsylvania and delaware were settled for quite different reasons.
william penn for example envisioned a quaker sanctuary the duke of york worried chiefly about his own income.
despite the founders intentions however some common characteristics emerged.
each colony developed a strikingly heterogeneous population men and women of different ethnic and religious backgrounds.
this cultural diversity became a major influence on the economic political and ecclesiastical institutions of the middle colonies.
the raucous partisan public life of the middle colonies foreshadowed later american society.
anglo dutch rivalry on the hudson by the early decades of the seventeenth century the dutch had established themselves as europes most aggressive traders.
holland a small loosely federated nation possessed the worlds largest merchant fleet.
its ships vied for the commerce of asia africa and america.
dutch rivalry with spain a fading though still formidable power was in large measure responsible for the settlement of new netherland.
while searching for the ce fran abenaki lake champlain new york lake ontario mahican ware r ela hudson r mass.
na r ehan susqu d pennsylvania n h albany iroquois confederation ie er ke a l connecticut r.
w ne delaware lenni lenape conn new york east jersey germantown philadelphia susquehannock md.
va west jersey atlantic ocean three counties of delaware 100 miles 100 kilometers middle colonies 1685 until the revolution the iroquois blocked european expansion into western new york.
the jerseys and pennsylvania initially attracted english and irish quakers who were soon joined by thousands of protestant irish and germans.
elusive northwest passage in 1609 henry hudson an english explorer employed by a dutch company sailed up the river that now bears his name.
further voyages led to the establishment of trading posts in new netherland and on the connecticut river although permanent settlement at new netherland did not occur until 1624 the area also seemed an excellent base from which to attack spains colonies in the new world.
the directors of the dutch west india company sponsored two small outposts fort orange albany located well up the hudson river and new amsterdam new york city on manhattan island.
the first dutch settlers were not actually colonists.
rather they were salaried employees and their superiors in holland expected them to spend most of their time gathering animal furs.
they did not receive land for their troubles.
needless to say this arrangement attracted relatively few dutch immigrants.
the colonys population may have been small only 270 in 1628 but it contained an extraordinary ethnic mix.
one visitor to new amsterdam in 1644 maintained he had heard eighteen different languages spoken in the city.
even if this report was exaggerated there is no doubt the dutch colony drew english finns germans and swedes.
by the 1640s a sizable community of free blacks probably former slaves who had gained their freedom through self purchase had developed in new amsterdam adding african tongues to the cacophony of languages.
the colonys culture was further fragmented by new england puritans who left massachusetts and connecticut to stake out farms on eastern long island.
new netherland lacked capable leadership.
the company sent a number of director generals to oversee judicial and political affairs.
without exception these men were temperamentally unsuited to govern an american colony.
they adopted autocratic procedures lined their own pockets and in one case blundered into a war that needlessly killed scores of indians and settlers.
the company made no provision for an elected assembly.
as much as they were able the scattered inhabitants living along the hudson river ignored company directives.
they felt no loyalty to the trading company that had treated them so shabbily.
long island puritans complained bitterly about the absence of representative institutions.
the dutch system has aptly been described as unstable pluralism in august 1664 the dutch lost their tenuous hold on new netherland.
the english crown eager to score an easy victory over a commercial rival dispatched a fleet of warships to new amsterdam.
the commander of this force colonel richard nicolls ordered the colonists to surrender.
the last director general a colorful character named peter stuyvesant 1647 1664 rushed wildly about the city urging the settlers to resist the english.
but no one obeyed.
even the dutch remained deaf to stuyvesants appeals.
they accepted the articles of capitulation a generous agreement that allowed dutch nationals to remain in the province and to retain their property.
charles ii had already granted his brother james the duke of york a charter for the newly captured territory and much else besides.
the duke became absolute proprietor over maine marthas vineyard nantucket long island and the rest of new york all the way to delaware bay.
the king perhaps diversity in the middle colonies read the document father isaac jogues description of new york 1640 it had been under the dutch west india company a loose collection of independent communities ruled by an ineffectual central government.
confusion in new jersey only three months after receiving a charter for new york the duke of york made a terrible mistake something this stubborn humorless man was prone to do.
as a gift to two courtiers who had served charles during the english civil war the duke awarded the land lying between the hudson and delaware rivers to john lord berkeley and sir george carteret.
this colony was named new jersey in honor of carterets birthplace the isle of jersey in the english channel.
when nicolls heard what the duke had done he exploded.
in his estimation this fertile region contained the most improveable land in all new york and to give it away so casually seemed the height of folly.
the dukes impulsive act bred confusion.
soon it was not clear who owned what in new jersey.
before nicolls had learned of jamess decision the governor had allowed migrants from new england to take up farms west of the map of new york city presented to james duke of york the future james ii shortly after the english hudson river.
he promised the settlers an captured new amsterdam from the dutch in 1664 opportunity to establish an elected assembly a headright system and liberty of wanted to encircle new englands potentially disloyal puritan conscience.
in exchange for these privileges nicolls asked only that population but whatever his aims may have been he created a they pay a small annual quitrent to the duke.
the new proprietors bureaucratic nightmare.
berkeley and carteret recruited colonists on similar terms.
they assumed of course that they would receive the rent money.
during the english civil war the duke had acquired a thorthe result was chaos.
some colonists insisted that nicolls had ough aversion to representative government.
after all parliament authorized their assembly.
others equally insistent claimed that had executed the dukes father charles i and raised up oliver berkeley and carteret had done so.
both sides were wrong.
neither cromwell.
the new proprietor had no intention of letting such a the proprietors nor nicolls possessed any legal right whatsoever participatory system take root in new york.
i cannot but suspect to set up a colonial government.
james could transfer land to the duke announced that an assembly would be of dangerous favorite courtiers but no matter how many times the land changed consequence the long islanders felt betrayed.
in part to appease hands the government remained his personal responsibility.
these outspoken critics governor nicolls one of the few compeknowledge of the law failed to quiet the controversy.
through it all tent administrators to serve in the middle colonies drew up in the duke showed not the slightest interest in the peace and welfare march 1665 a legal code known as the dukes laws.
it guaranteed of the people of new jersey.
religious toleration and created local governments.
berkeley grew tired of the venture.
it generated headaches there was no provision however for an elected assembly or rather than income and in 1674 he sold his proprietary rights for that matter for democratic town meetings.
the legal code disapto a group of surprisingly quarrelsome quakers.
the sale necespointed the puritan migrants on long island and when the dukes sitated the division of the colony into two separate governments officers attempted to collect taxes these people protested that they known as east and west jersey.
neither half prospered.
carteret were inslavd under an arbitrary power and his heirs tried unsuccessfully to turn a profit in east jersey.
the dutch kept silent.
for several decades they remained in 1677 the quaker proprietors of west jersey issued a remarka large unassimilated ethnic group.
they continued to speak able democratic plan of government the laws concessions and their own language worship in their own churches dutch agreements.
but they fought among themselves with such intenreformed calvinist and eye their english neighbors with sity that not even william penn could bring tranquility to their suspicion.
in fact the colony seemed little different from what chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies affairs.
penn wisely turned his attention to the unclaimed territory across the delaware river.
the west jersey proprietors went bankrupt and in 1702 the crown reunited the two jerseys into a single royal colony.
in 1700 the population of new jersey stood at approximately fourteen thousand.
largely because it lacked a good deepwater harbor the colony never developed a commercial center to rival new york city or philadelphia.
its residents lived on scattered often isolated farms villages of more than a few hundred people were rare.
visitors commented on the diversity of the settlers.
there were colonists from almost every european nation.
congregationalists presbyterians quakers baptists anabaptists and anglicans somehow managed to live together peacefully in new jersey.
read the document william penn model for government 1681 quakers in america how did the quaker religion influence the development of pennsylvania.
the founding of pennsylvania cannot be separated from the history of the quaker movement.
believers in an extreme form of antinomianism the quakers saw no need for a learned ministry since one persons interpretation of scripture was as valid as anyone elses.
this radical religious sect a product of the social upheaval in england during the civil war gained its name from the derogatory term that english authorities sometimes used to describe those who tremble at the word of the lord the name persisted even though the quakers preferred being called professors of the light or more commonly friends.
quaker beliefs and practice by the time the stuarts regained the throne in 1660 the quakers had developed strong support throughout england.
one person responsible for their remarkable success was george fox 1624 1691 a poor shoemaker whose own spiritual anxieties sparked a powerful new religious message that pushed beyond traditional reformed protestantism.
according to fox he experienced despair so that i had nothing outwardly to help me.
but then i heard a voice which said there is one even christ jesus that can speak to thy condition throughout his life fox and his growing number of followers gave testimony to the working of the holy spirit.
indeed they informed ordinary men and women that if only they would look they too would discover they possessed an inner light this was a wonderfully liberating invitation especially for persons of lower class origin.
with the lords personal assistance they could attain greater spiritual perfection on earth.
gone was the stigma of original sin discarded was the notion of eternal predestination.
everyone could be saved.
quakers practiced humility in their daily lives.
they wore simple clothes and employed old fashioned forms of address that set them apart from their neighbors.
friends refused to honor worldly position and accomplishment or to swear oaths in courts of law.
they were also pacifists.
according to fox all persons were william penn 1644 1718 received a charter for pennsylvania from king charles ii in 1681 penn intended his colony to serve as a religious haven for both his fellow quakers who faced persecution both from the church of england and from the puritans in new england and for members of other persecuted protestant sects.
equal in the sight of the lord a belief that generally annoyed people of rank and achievement.
moreover the quakers never kept their thoughts to themselves.
they preached conversion constantly spreading the truth throughout england ireland and america.
the friends played important roles in the early history of new jersey rhode island and north carolina as well as pennsylvania.
in some places the publishers of truth wore out their welcome.
english authorities harassed the quakers.
thousands including fox himself were jailed and in massachusetts bay between 1659 and 1661 puritan magistrates ordered several friends put to death.
such measures proved counterproductive for persecution only inspired the martyred quakers to redouble their efforts.
penns holy experiment william penn lived according to the inner light a commitment that led eventually to the founding of pennsylvania.
penn possessed a curiously complex personality.
he was an athletic quakers in america person who threw himself into intellectual pursuits.
he was a bold visionary capable of making pragmatic decisions.
he came from an aristocratic family and yet spent his entire adult life involved with a religious movement associated with the lower class.
precisely when penns thoughts turned to america is not known.
he was briefly involved with the west jersey proprietorship.
this venture may have suggested the possibility of an even larger enterprise.
in any case penn negotiated in 1681 one of the more impressive land deals in the history of american real estate.
charles ii awarded penn a charter making him the sole proprietor of a vast area called pennsylvania literally penns woods.
the name embarrassed the modest penn but he knew better than to look the royal gift horse in the mouth.
why the king bestowed such generosity on a leading quaker remains a mystery.
perhaps charles wanted to repay an old debt to penns father.
the monarch may have regarded the colony as a means of ridding england of its troublesome quaker population or quite simply he may have liked penn.
in 1682 the new proprietor purchased from the duke of york the so called three lower counties that eventually became delaware.
this astute move guaranteed that pennsylvania would have access to the atlantic and determined even before philadelphia had been established that it would become a commercial center.
in designing his government penn drew heavily on the writings of james harrington 1611 1677.
this english political philosopher argued that no government could ever be stable unless it refl ected the actual distribution of landed property within society.
both the rich and poor had to have a voice in political affairs neither should be able to overrule the legitimate interests of the other class.
the frame of government envisioned a governor appointed by the proprietor a 72 member provincial council responsible for initiating legislation and a 200 person assembly that could accept or reject the bills presented to it.
penn apparently thought the council would be filled by the colonys richest landholders or in the words of the frame persons of most note for their wisdom virtue and ability the governor and council were charged with the routine administration of justice.
smaller landowners spoke through the assembly.
it was a clumsy structure and in america the entire edifice crumbled under its own weight.
settling pennsylvania penn promoted his colony aggressively throughout england ireland and germany.
he had no choice.
his only source of revenue was the sale of land and the collection of quitrents.
penn commissioned pamphlets in several languages extolling the quality of pennsylvanias rich farmland.
the response was overwhelming.
people poured into philadelphia and the surrounding area.
in 1685 alone eight thousand immigrants arrived.
most of the settlers were irish welsh and english quakers and they generally moved to america as families.
but penn opened the door to men and women of all nations.
he asserted that the people of pennsylvania are a collection of divers nations in europe as french dutch germans swedes danes finns scotch irish and english the settlers were by no means all quakers.
the founder of germantown francis daniel pastorius called the vessel that read the document letter by william penn to the committee of the free society of traders 1683 william penns plan for philadelphia shows the city laid out where the schuylkill and delaware rivers parallel each other.
four of the five public squares were intended to be parks while the fifth at the center was designated for public buildings.
today it is the site of philadelphias city hall.
brought him to the new world a noahs ark of religions and within his own household there were servants who subscribed to the roman catholic to the lutheran to the calvinistic to the anabaptist and to the anglican church and only one quaker ethnic and religious diversity were crucial in the development of pennsylvanias public institutions and its politics took on a quarrelsome quality absent in more homogeneous colonies such as virginia and massachusetts.
penn himself emigrated to america in 1682 his stay however was unexpectedly short and unhappy.
the council and assembly reduced now to more manageable size fought over the right to initiate legislation.
wealthy quaker merchants most of them residents of philadelphia dominated the council.
by contrast the assembly included men from rural settlements and the three lower counties who showed no concern for the holy experiment.
penn did not see his colony again until 1699 during his absence much had changed.
the settlement had prospered.
its agricultural products especially its excellent wheat were in demand throughout the atlantic world.
despite this economic success however the population remained deeply divided.
even the quakers had briefly split into hostile factions.
penns handpicked governors had failed to win general support for the proprietors policies and one of them exclaimed in anger that each quaker prays for his neighbor on first days and then preys on him the other six as the seventeenth century closed few colonists still shared the founders desire to create a godly paternalistic society.
in 1701 legal challenges in england again forced penn to depart for the mother country.
just before he sailed penn signed the charter of liberties a new frame of government chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies that established a unicameral or one house legislature the only one in colonial america and gave the representatives the right to initiate bills.
penn also allowed the assembly to conduct its business without proprietary interference.
the charter provided for the political separation of the three lower counties delaware from pennsylvania something people living in the area had demanded for years.
this hastily drafted document served as pennsylvanias constitution until the american revolution.
his experience in america must have depressed penn now both old and sick.
in england penn was imprisoned for debts incurred by dishonest colonial agents and in 1718 pennsylvanias founder died a broken man.
planting the carolinas how did the barbadian background of the early settlers shape the economic development of the carolinas.
in some ways carolina society looked much like the one that had developed in virginia and maryland.
in both areas white planters forced african slaves to produce staple crops for a world market.
but such superficial similarities masked substantial regional differences.
in fact the south certainly the fabled solid south of the early nineteenth century did not exist during the colonial period.
the carolinas joined much later by georgia stood apart from their northern neighbors.
as a historian of colonial carolina explained the southern colonies were never a cohesive section in the same way that new england was.
the great diversity of population groups.
discouraged southern sectionalism proprietors of the carolinas carolina was a product of the restoration of the stuarts to the english throne.
court favorites who had followed the stuarts into exile during the civil war demanded tangible rewards for their loyalty.
new york and new jersey were obvious plums.
so too was carolina.
sir john colleton a successful english planter returned from barbados organized a group of eight powerful courtiers who styled themselves the true and absolute lords proprietors of carolina.
on march 24 1663 the king granted these proprietors a charter to the vast territory between virginia and florida and running west as far as the south seas the failure of similar ventures in the new world taught the carolina proprietors valuable lessons.
unlike the first virginians for example this group did not expect instant wealth.
rather the proprietors reasoned that they would obtain a steady source of income from rents.
what they needed of course were settlers to pay those rents.
recruitment turned out to be no easy task.
economic and social conditions in the mother country improved considerably after its civil war and english people were no longer so willing to transfer to the new world.
even if they had shown interest the cost of transporting settlers across the atlantic seemed prohibitively expensive.
the proprietors concluded therefore that with the proper incentives a generous land policy for example they could attract men and women from established american colonies and thereby save themselves a great deal of money.
unfortunately for the men who owned carolina such people were not easily persuaded.
they had begun to take for granted certain rights and privileges and as the price of settlement they demanded a representative assembly liberty of conscience and a liberal headright system.
colleton and his associates waited for the money to roll in but to their dismay no one seemed particularly interested in moving to the carolina frontier.
a tiny settlement at port royal failed.
one group of new englanders briefly considered taking up land in the cape fear area but these people were so disappointed by what they saw that they departed leaving behind only a sign that tended not only to the disparagement of the land.
but also to the great discouragement of all those that should hereafter come into these parts to settle by this time a majority of surviving proprietors had given up on carolina.
the barbadian connection anthony ashley cooper later earl of shaftesbury was the exception.
in 1669 he persuaded the remaining carolinian proprietors to invest their own capital in the colony.
without such financial support cooper recognized the project would surely fail.
once he received sufficient funds this energetic organizer dispatched three hundred english colonists to port royal under the command of joseph west.
the fleet put in briefly at barbados to pick up additional recruits and in march 1670 after being punished by atlantic gales that destroyed one ship the expedition arrived at its destination.
only one hundred people were still alive.
the unhappy settlers did not remain long at port royal an unappealing low lying place badly exposed to spanish attack.
they moved northward locating eventually along the more secure ashley river.
later the colonys administrative center charles town it did not become charleston until 1783 was established at the junction of the ashley and cooper rivers.
cooper also wanted to bring order to the new society.
with assistance from john locke the famous english philosopher 1632 1704 cooper devised the fundamental constitutions of carolina.
like penn cooper had been influenced by the writings of harrington.
the constitutions created a local aristocracy consisting of proprietors and lesser nobles called landgraves and cassiques terms as inappropriate to the realities of the new world as was the idea of creating a hereditary landed elite.
persons who purchased vast tracts of land automatically received a title and the right to sit in the council of nobles a body designed to administer justice oversee civil affairs and initiate legislation.
a parliament in which smaller landowners had a voice and could accept or reject bills drafted by the council.
the very poor were excluded from political life altogether.
cooper thought his scheme maintained the proper balance of government between aristocracy and democracy a concept central to harringtons philosophy.
not surprisingly the constitutions had little impact on the actual structure of government.
planting the carolinas before 1680 almost half the men and women who settled in the port royal area came from barbados.
this small caribbean island which produced an annual fortune in sugar depended on slave labor.
by the third quarter of the seventeenth century barbados had become overpopulated.
wealthy families could not provide their sons and daughters with sufficient land to maintain social status and as the crisis intensified barbadians looked to carolina for relief.
these migrants many of whom were quite rich traveled to carolina both as individuals and family groups.
some even brought gangs of slaves with them to the american mainland.
the barbadians carved out plantations on the tributaries of the cooper river and established themselves immediately as the colonys most powerful political faction.
so it was wrote historian richard dunn that these caribbean pioneers helped to create on the north american coast a slave based plantation society closer in temper to the islands they fled from than to any other mainland english settlement much of the planters time was taken up with the search for a profitable crop.
the early settlers experimented with a number of plants tobacco cotton silk and grapes.
the most successful items turned out to be beef skins and naval stores especially tar used to maintain ocean vessels.
by the 1680s some carolinians had built up great herds of cattle seven or eight hundred head in some cases.
traders who dealt with indians brought back thousands of deerskins from the interior and they often returned with indian slaves as well.
these commercial resources together with tar and turpentine enjoyed a good market.
it was not until the 1690s that englands principal mainland colonies original purpose virginia new amsterdam new york plymouth commercial venture 1607 commercial venture 1613 made english colony 1664 captain john smith peter stuyvesant duke of york tobacco furs grain 64 560 19 107 refuge for english 1620 absorbed by separatists massachusetts 1691 commercial venture 1623 william bradford grain john mason refuge for english puritans refuge for english catholics expansion of massachusetts refuge for dissenters from massachusetts commercial venture john winthrop wood naval stores grain wood included with massachusetts 4 958 55 941 tobacco 34 100 lord baltimore george calvert thomas hooker grain 25 970 roger williams grain 5 894 peter minuit william penn grain 2 470 anthony ashley cooper anthony ashley cooper sir george carteret wood naval 10 720 stores tobacco naval stores 5 720 rice indigo grain 14 010 william penn grain 18 950 james oglethorpe rice wood naval stores 5 200 in 1750 new hampshire massachusetts maryland connecticut rhode island new sweden delaware date of founding north carolina 1638 included in penn grant 1681 given separate assembly 1703 commercial venture 1663 south carolina commercial venture 1663 new jersey consolidation of new 1664 english territory quaker settlement refuge for english quakers discourage spanish 1733 expansion charity pennsylvania georgia principal founder major export estimated population ca.
1700 name sources u s bureau of the census historical statistics of the united states colonial times to 1970 washington dc 1975 john j mccusker and russell r menard the economy of british america 1607 1789 chapel hill 1985 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies pennsylvania claimed by virginia ee r an tuscarora ca north pe carolina r r chattahoochee wilmington cape fear south carolina yamasee georgetown charles town savannah creek added to georgia 1763 st marks albemarle sound r new bern r d oa br georgia chesapeake bay.
rr catawba roa no ke a fe pa cherokee williamsburg virginia d ee ap i ch la ta un mo s in e pe te nn es s carolina grant 1663 n j baltimore del.
shenandoah r james r spani the founding of georgia md.
va er sa l ge mu oc the planters came to appreciate fully the value of rice but once they had done so it quickly became the colonys main staple.
proprietary carolina was in a constant political uproar.
factions vied for special privilege.
the barbadian settlers known locally as the goose creek men resisted the proprietors policies at every turn.
a large community of french huguenots located in craven county distrusted the barbadians.
the proprietors an ineffectual group following the death of cooper appointed a series of utterly incompetent governors who only made things worse.
one visitor observed that the inhabitants of carolina should be as free from oppression as any people in the universe.
if their own differences amongst themselves do not occasion the contrary by the end of the century the commons house of assembly had assumed the right to initiate legislation.
in 1719 the colonists overthrew the last proprietary governor and in 1729 the king created separate royal governments for north and south carolina.
r chapt er 2 coo sa atlantic ocean altamaha r sh st augustine timucua f carolina grant 1663 ri da the early history of georgia was strikingly different from that of britains other mainland colonies.
its settlement was really an act of aggression against spain a country that had as good a claim to this area as did the english.
during the eighteenth century the two nations were often at war see chapter 2.
during much of the seventeenth century these initial differences grew stronger as each region responded to different environmental conditions and developed its own traditions.
the various local societies in which families like the witherspoons put down roots reflected several critical elements supply of labor abundance of land unusual demographic patterns and commercial ties with european markets.
in the chesapeake for example an economy based almost entirely on a single staple tobacco created an insatiable demand for indentured servants and black slaves.
in massachusetts bay the extraordinary longevity of the founders generated a level of social and political stability that virginians and marylanders did not attain until the very end of the seventeenth century.
by 1660 it seemed regional differences had undermined the idea of a unified english empire in america.
during the reign of charles ii however a trend toward cultural convergence began.
although subcultures had evolved in strikingly different directions countervailing forces such as common language and religion gradually pulled english american settlers together.
parliament took advantage of this trend and began to establish a uniform set of rules for the expanding american empire.
the process was slow and uneven often sparking violent colonial resistance.
by the end of the seventeenth century however england had made significant progress toward transforming new world provinces into an empire that produced needed raw materials and purchased manufactured goods.
if a person was black and enslaved however he or she was more apt to experience oppression rather than opportunity in british america.
chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society sources of stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century what factors explain the remarkable social stability achieved in early new england.
seventeenth century new englanders successfully replicated in america a traditional social order they had known in england.
the transfer of a familiar way of life to the new world seemed less difficult for these puritan migrants than it did for the many english men and women who settled in the chesapeake colonies.
their contrasting experiences fundamental to an understanding of the development of both cultures can be explained at least in part by the extraordinary strength and resilience of new england families.
immigrant families and new social order early new englanders believed god ordained the family for human benefit.
it was essential to the maintenance of social order since outside the family men and women succumbed to carnal temptation.
such people had no one to sustain them or remind them of scripture.
without family care declared the reverend benjamin wadsworth the labour of magistrates and ministers for reformation and propagating religion is likely to be in great measure unsuccessful the godly family at least in theory was ruled by a patriarch father to his children husband to his wife the source of authority and object of unquestioned obedience.
the wife shared responsibility for the raising of children but in decisions of importance especially those related to property she was expected to defer to her spouse.
the new englanders concern about the character of the godly family is not surprising.
this institution played a central role in shaping their society.
in contrast to those who migrated to the colonies of virginia and maryland new englanders crossed the atlantic within nuclear families.
that is they moved within established units consisting of a father mother and their dependent children rather than as single youths and adults.
people who migrated to america within families preserved local english customs more fully than did the youths who traveled to other parts of the continent as single men and women.
the comforting presence of immediate family members reduced the shock of adjusting to a strange environment three thousand miles from home.
even in the 1630s the ratio of men to women in new england was fairly well balanced about three males for every two females.
persons who had not already married in england before coming to the new world could expect to form nuclear families of their own.
the great migration of the 1630s and early 1640s brought approximately twenty thousand persons to new england.
after 1642 the english civil war reduced the flood of people moving to massachusetts bay to a trickle.
nevertheless by the end of the century the population of new england had reached almost one hundred twenty thousand an amazing increase considering the small number of original immigrants.
the explanation for this impressive growth lies in the long lives enjoyed by early new englanders.
put simply people who under normal conditions would have died in contemporary europe lived in new england.
indeed the life expectancy of seventeenth century settlers was not very different from our own.
males who survived infancy might have expected to see their seventieth birthday.
twenty percent of the men of the first generation reached the age of eighty.
the figures for women were only slightly lower.
why the early settlers lived so long is not entirely clear.
no doubt pure drinking water a cool climate that retarded the spread of fatal contagious disease and a dispersed population promoted general good health.
longer life altered family relations.
new england males lived not only to see their own children reach adulthood but also to witness the birth of grandchildren.
one historian john murrin has suggested that new englanders invented grandparents.
in other words this society produced real patriarchs males of recognized seniority and standing.
this may have been one of the first societies in recorded history in which a person could reasonably anticipate knowing his or her grandchildren a demographic surprise that contributed to social stability.
the traditions of particular families and communities literally remained alive in the memories of the colonys oldest citizens.
commonwealth of families the life cycle of the seventeenth century new england family began with marriage.
young men and women generally initiated courtships.
if parents exercised a voice in such matters it was to discourage union with a person of unsound moral character.
in this highly religious society there was not much chance that young people would stray far from shared community values.
the overwhelming majority of the regions population married for in new england the single life was not only morally suspect but also physically difficult.
a couple without land could not support an independent and growing family in these agrarian communities.
while men generally brought farmland to the marriage prospective brides were expected to provide a dowry worth approximately one half what the bridegroom offered.
women often contributed money or household goods.
the household was primarily a place of work very demanding work.
the primary goal of course was to clear enough land to feed the family.
additional cultivation allowed the farmer to produce a surplus that could then be sold or bartered and since agrarian families required items that could not be manufactured at home metal tools for example they usually grew more than they consumed.
early american farmers were not economically self sufficient the belief that they were is a popular misconception.
during the seventeenth century men and women generally lived in the communities of their parents and grandparents.
new englanders usually managed to fall in love with a neighbor and most marriages took place between men and women living less than 13 miles apart.
moving to a more fertile region might have increased their earnings but such thoughts seldom occurred to early new englanders.
religious values a sense of common purpose and the importance of family reinforced traditional communal ties.
towns in fact were collections of families not individuals.
over time these families intermarried so the community became an elaborate kinship network.
social historians have discovered that in many new england towns the original founders dominated local politics and economic affairs for several generations.
not surprisingly newcomers who were not absorbed into the family system tended to move away from the village with greater frequency than did the sons and daughters of the established lineage groups.
sources of stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century congregational churches were also built on a family foundation.
during the earliest years of settlement the churches accepted persons who could demonstrate they were among gods elect members were drawn from a broad social spectrum.
once the excitement of establishing a new society had passed however new englanders began to focus more attention on the spiritual welfare of their own families.
this quite normal parental concern precipitated a major ecclesiastical crisis.
the problem was the status of the children within a gathered church.
sons and daughters of full church members regularly received baptism usually as infants but as these people grew to adulthood they often failed to provide testimony of their own election moreover they wanted their own children to be baptized.
a church synod a gathering of congregational ministers responded to this generational crisis by adopting the so called half way covenant 1662.
the compromise allowed the grandchildren of persons in full communion to be baptized even though their parents could not demonstrate conversion.
congregational ministers assumed that god cast the line of election in the loins of godly parents colonists regarded education as primarily a family responsibility.
parents were supposed to instruct children in the principles of christianity and so it was necessary to teach boys and girls how to read.
in 1642 the massachusetts general court reminded the bay colonists of their obligation to catechize their families.
five years later the legislature ordered towns containing at least fifteen families to open an elementary school supported by local taxes.
villages of a hundred or more families had to maintain more advanced grammar schools which taught a basic knowledge of latin.
at least eleven schools were operating in 1647 and despite their expense new schools were established throughout the century.
this family based education system worked.
a large majority of the regions adult males could read and write an accomplishment not achieved in the chesapeake colonies for another century.
the literacy rate for women was somewhat lower but by the standards of the period it was still impressive.
a printing press operated in cambridge as early as 1639 the new england primer first published in 1690 in boston by benjamin harris taught children the alphabet as well as the lords prayer.
this primer announced women as inferior to men.
other historians however depict the colonial period as a golden age for women.
according to this interpretation wives worked alongside their husbands.
they were not divorced from meaningful productive labor.
they certainly were not transformed into the frail dependent beings allegedly much admired by middle class males of the nineteenth century.
both views provide insights into the lives of early american women but neither fully recaptures their community experiences.
womens labor and the skilled services that they provided were essential for the economic survival of colonial households.
to be sure women worked on family farms.
they did not however necessarily do the same jobs that men performed.
women usually handled separate tasks including cooking washing clothes making dairying gardening and caring for young children.
girls began to help their mothers with some of this work as early as age four beginning their domestic education so that they could one day manage their own household.
the average puritan woman in this period married in her early twenties compared to the midtwenties for puritan men and it was common for young women who were not yet married to be hired out as servants in other households.
just putting food on the table was an impressive chore in an age before modern conveniences.
women helped butcher meat harvested garden crops built and tended cooking fires and read the document prenuptial agreement 1653 he who neer learns his abc forever will a blockhead be.
but he who to his books inclined will soon a golden treasure find.
many new englanders memorized the entire poem.
after 1638 young men could attend harvard college the first institution of higher learning founded in englands mainland colonies.
the school was originally intended to train ministers and of the 465 students who graduated during the seventeenth century more than half became congregational divines.
harvard had a demanding curriculum.
the boys read logic rhetoric divinity and several ancient languages including hebrew.
yale college followed harvards lead admitting its first students in 1702 womens lives in puritan new england the role of women in the agrarian societies north of the chesapeake is a controversial subject among colonial historians.
some scholars point out that common law as well as english custom treated puritans viewed marriage as a civil compact rather than a religious sacrament.
the families created through marriage formed both the social and economic foundation of puritan society.
chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society read the document one of her children anne bradstreet before the birth of was extremely difficult to obtain in any colony before the american revolution.
indeed a person married to a cruel or irresponsible spouse had little recourse but to run away or accept the unhappy situation.
yet most women were neither prosperous entrepreneurs nor abject slaves.
surviving letters indicate that men and women generally accommodated themselves to the gender roles they thought god had ordained.
one of early americas most creative poets anne bradstreet wrote movingly of the fulfillment she had found with her husband.
in a piece titled to my dear and loving husband bradstreet declared if ever two were one then surely we.
if ever man were lovd by wife then thee if ever wife was happy in a man compare with me ye woman if you can.
although puritan couples worried that the affection they felt for a husband or a wife might turn their thoughts away from gods perfect love this was a danger they were willing to risk.
social hierarchy in new england during the seventeenth century the new england colonies attracted neither noblemen nor paupers.
the absence of these social groups meant that the american social structure seemed incomplete by contemporary european standards.
anne bradstreet c 1612 1672 was a puritan wife mother and poet.
a collection of her poems entitled the tenth muse lately sprung up in america was the first work the settlers were not displeased that the poor remained in ever published in englands american colonies.
the old world.
the lack of very rich persons and in this period great wealth frequently accompanied noble title stood for long hours inside large open hearth fireplaces tending was quite another matter.
according to the prevailing hierarchical to dishes as they roasted or simmered.
this last task sometimes view of the structure of society well placed individuals were natural resulted in injury when stray sparks caught clothing on fire.
rulers people intended by god to exercise political authority over often wives and the overwhelming majority of adult the rank and file.
migration forced the colonists however to choose seventeenth century women were married raised poultry or their rulers from men of more modest status.
one minister told a performed extra sewing or spinning and thereby achieved some plymouth congregation that since its members were not furnished economic independence.
when people in one new england comwith any persons of special eminency above the rest to be chosen by munity chided a man for allowing his wife to peddle her fowl he you into office of government they would have to make due with responded i meddle not with the geese nor turkeys for they are neighbors not beholding in them the ordinariness of their persons hers in fact during this period women were often described as the colonists gradually sorted themselves out into distinct social deputy husbands a label that drew attention to their dependence on groupings.
persons who would never have been natural rulers in family patriarchs as well as to their roles as decision makers.
england became provincial gentry in the various northern colonies.
women also joined churches in greater number than men.
it helped of course if an individual possessed wealth and education within a few years of founding many new england congregations but these attributes alone could not guarantee a newcomer would contained two female members for every male a process historians be accepted into the local ruling elite at least not during the early describe as the feminization of colonial religion contemporaries decades of settlement.
in massachusetts and connecticut puritan offered different explanations for the gender shift.
cotton mather the voters expected their leaders to join congregational churches and leading congregational minister of massachusetts bay argued that defend orthodox religion.
god had created far more godly women than men.
others thought the winthrops dudleys and pynchons just to cite a few that the life threatening experience of childbirth gave women a of the more prominent families fulfilled these expectations and deeper appreciation of religion.
the quakers gave women an even in public affairs they assumed dominant roles.
they took their larger role in religious affairs which may help to explain the popularresponsibilities quite seriously and certainly did not look kindly on ity of this sect among ordinary women.
anyone who spoke of their ordinariness a colonist who jokingly in political and legal matters society sharply curtailed the called a puritan magistrate a just ass found himself in deep rights of colonial women.
according to english common law a trouble with civil authorities.
wife exercised no control over property.
she could not for examthe problem was that while most new englanders accepted ple sell land although if her husband decided to dispose of their a hierarchical view of society they disagreed over their assigned holdings he was free to do so without her permission.
divorce places.
both massachusetts bay and connecticut passed sumptuary the challenge of the chesapeake environment laws statutes that limited the wearing of fine apparel to the wealthy and prominent to curb the pretensions of those of lower status.
yet such restraints could not prevent some people from rising and others from falling within the social order.
governor john winthrop provided a marvelous description of the unplanned social mobility that occurred in early new england.
during the 1640s he recorded in his diary the story of a master who could not afford to pay a servants wages.
to meet this obligation the master sold a pair of oxen but the transaction barely covered the cost of keeping the servant.
in desperation the master asked the employee a man of lower social status how shall i do.
when all my cattle are gone the servant replied you shall then serve me so you may have your cattle again in the margin of his diary next to this account winthrop scribbled insolent most northern colonists were yeomen independent farmers who worked their own land.
while few became rich in america even fewer fell hopelessly into debt.
their daily lives especially for those who settled new england centered on scattered little communities where they participated in village meetings church related matters and militia training.
possession of land gave agrarian families a sense of independence from external authority.
as one man bragged to those who had stayed behind in england here are no hard landlords to rack us with high rents or extorting fines.
here every man may be master of his own labour and land.
and if he have nothing but his hands he may set up his trade and by industry grow rich it was not unusual for northern colonists to work as servants at some point in their lives.
this system of labor differed greatly from the pattern of servitude that developed in seventeenth century virginia and maryland.
new englanders seldom recruited servants from the old world.
the forms of agriculture practiced in this region mixed cereal and dairy farming made employment of large gangs of dependent workers uneconomic.
rather new england families placed their adolescent children in nearby homes.
these young persons contracted for four or five years and seemed more like apprentices than servants.
servitude was not simply a means by which one group exploited another.
it was a form of vocational training program in which the children of the rich as well as the poor participated.
by the end of the seventeenth century the new england puritans had developed a compelling story about their own history in the new world.
the founders had been extraordinarily godly men and women and in a heroic effort to establish a purer form of religion pious families had passed over the vast ocean into this vast and howling wilderness although the children and grandchildren of the first generation sometimes questioned their own ability to please the lord they recognized the mission to the new world had been a success they were as prosperous as ever there is peace plenty the country flourisheth the challenge of the chesapeake environment what factors contributed to political unrest in the chesapeake region during this period.
an entirely different regional society developed in englands chesapeake colonies virginia and maryland.
this contrast with new england seems puzzling.
after all the two areas were founded at roughly the same time by men and women from the same mother country.
in both regions settlers spoke english accepted protestantism and gave allegiance to one crown.
and yet to cite an obvious example seventeenth century virginia looked nothing like massachusetts bay.
in an effort to explain the difference colonial historians have studied environmental conditions labor systems and agrarian economies.
the most important reason for the distinctiveness of these early southern plantation societies however turned out to be the chesapeakes death rate a frighteningly high mortality that tore at the very fabric of traditional family life.
family life at risk unlike new englands settlers the men and women who emigrated to the chesapeake region did not move in family units.
they traveled to the new world as young unmarried servants youths cut off from the security of traditional kin relations.
although these immigrants came from a cross section of english society most had been poor to middling farmers.
it is now estimated that 70 to 85 percent of the white colonists who went to virginia and maryland during the seventeenth century were not free that is they owed four or five years labor in exchange for the cost of passage to america.
if the servant was under age 15 he or she had to serve a full seven years.
the overwhelming majority of these laborers were males between the ages of 18 and 22 in fact before 1640 the ratio of males to females stood at 6 to 1 this figure dropped to about 2 to 1 by the end of the century but the sex ratio in the chesapeake was never as favorable as it had been in early massachusetts.
most immigrants to the chesapeake region died soon after arriving.
it is difficult to ascertain the exact cause of death in most cases but malaria and other diseases took a frightful toll.
recent studies also indicate that drinking water contaminated with salt killed many colonists living in low lying areas.
throughout the entire seventeenth century high mortality rates had a profound effect on this society.
life expectancy for chesapeake males was about 43 some ten to twenty years less than for men born in new england.
for women life was even shorter.
a full 25 percent of all children died in infancy another 25 percent did not see their twentieth birthdays.
the survivors were often weak or ill unable to perform hard physical labor.
these demographic conditions retarded normal population increase.
young women who might have become wives and mothers could not do so until they had completed their terms of servitude.
they thus lost several reproductive years and in a society in which so many children died in infancy late marriage greatly restricted family size.
moreover because of the unbalanced sex ratio many adult males simply could not find wives.
migration not only cut them off from their english families but also deprived them of an opportunity to form new ones.
without a constant flow of immigrants the population of virginia and maryland would have actually declined.
high mortality compressed the family life cycle into a few short years.
one partner in a marriage usually died within seven years.
only one in three chesapeake marriages survived as long as a decade.
not only did children not meet grandparents they often did not even know their own parents.
widows and widowers quickly remarried bringing children by former unions into their new homes and it was not uncommon for a child to grow chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society up with persons to whom he or she bore no blood relation.
the psychological effects of such experiences on chesapeake settlers cannot be measured.
people probably learned to cope with a high degree of personal insecurity.
however they adjusted it is clear family life in this region was vastly more impermanent than it was in the new england colonies during the same period.
womens lives in chesapeake society women were obviously in great demand in the early southern colonies.
possibly as a result women married much younger in the south than in new england with most married by their late teens.
chesapeake men on the other hand often married for the first time in their late twenties if they married at all.
some historians have argued that scarcity heightened the womans bargaining power in the marriage market.
if she was an immigrant she did not have to worry about obtaining parental consent.
she was on her own in the new world and free to select whomever she pleased.
if a woman lacked beauty or strength if she were a person of low moral standards she could still be confident of finding an american husband.
such negotiations may have provided chesapeake women with a means of improving their social status.
nevertheless liberation from some traditional restraints on seventeenth century women must not be exaggerated.
most women came to the colonies as indentured servants.
masters often frowned on romantic relationships for fear it would distract from work.
if a man and woman wished to marry and the would be brides term of indenture was not up the prospective groom would have to come up with the money to purchase his intendeds contract.
as servants women were also vulnerable to sexual exploitation by their masters.
once married a woman in the south took on the same duties as her counterparts in new england though field work likely took up more of her time as households tried to make a go of it in the tobacco economy.
because of the high mortality rate in the chesapeake young women often found themselves caring for children that her husband brought to the family from his first marriage.
moreover in this unhealthy environment childbearing was extremely dangerous and women in the chesapeake usually died twenty years earlier than their new england counterparts.
the structure of planter society colonists who managed somehow to survive grew tobacco as much tobacco as they possibly could.
this crop became the chesapeake staple and since it was relatively easy to cultivate anyone with a few acres of cleared land could harvest leaves for export.
cultivation of tobacco did not however produce a society roughly equal in wealth and status.
to the contrary tobacco generated inequality.
some planters amassed large fortunes others barely subsisted.
labor made the difference for to succeed in this staple economy one had to control the labor of other men and women.
more workers in the fields meant larger harvests and of course larger profits.
since free persons showed no interest in growing another mans tobacco not even for wages wealthy planters relied on white laborers who were not free as well as on slaves.
the social structure that developed in the seventeenth century chesapeake reflected a wild often unscrupulous scramble to bring men and women of three races black white and indian into various degrees of dependence.
great planters dominated chesapeake society.
the group was small only a trifling portion of the population of virginia and maryland.
these ambitious men arrived in america with capital.
they invested immediately in laborers and one way or another they obtained huge tracts of the best tobacco growing land.
the members of this gentry were not technically aristocrats for they did not possess titles that could be passed from generation to generation.
they gave themselves military titles sat as justices of the peace on the county courts and directed local anglican church affairs as members of the vestry.
over time these gentry families intermarried so frequently that they created a vast network of cousins.
during the eighteenth century it was not uncommon to find a half dozen men with the same surname sitting simultaneously in the virginia house of burgesses.
freemen formed the largest class in chesapeake society.
their origins were strikingly different from those of the gentry or for that matter from those of new englands yeomen farmers.
chesapeake freemen traveled to the new world as indentured servants and by sheer good fortune managed to remain alive to the end of their contracts.
if they had dreamed of becoming great planters they were gravely disappointed.
most seventeenth century freemen lived on the edge of poverty.
some freemen of course did better in america than they would have in contemporary england but in both virginia and maryland historians have found a sharp economic division separating the gentry from the rest of white society.
below the freemen came indentured servants.
membership in this group was not demeaning after all servitude was a temporary status.
but servitude in the chesapeake colonies was not the benign institution it was in new england.
great planters purchased servants to grow tobacco.
no one seemed overly concerned whether these laborers received decent food and clothes much less whether they acquired trade skills.
young people thousands of them cut off from family ties sick often to the point of death unable to obtain normal sexual release regarded their servitude as a form of slavery.
not surprisingly the gentry worried that unhappy servants and impoverished freemen what the planters called the giddy multitude would rebel at the slightest provocation a fear that turned out to be fully justified.
sometime after the 1680s the precise date is impossible to establish a dramatic demographic shift occurred.
although infant mortality remained high life expectancy rates for those who survived childhood in the chesapeake improved significantly and for the first time in the history of virginia and maryland important leadership positions went to men who had actually been born in america.
this transition has been described by one political historian as the emergence of a creole majority in other words as the rise of an indigenous ruling elite.
before this time immigrant leaders had died without heirs or had returned as quickly as possible to england.
the members of the new creole class took a greater interest in local government.
their activities helped give the tobacco colonies the kind of political and cultural stability that had eluded earlier generations of planter adventurers.
not surprisingly it was during this period of demographic transition that creole leaders founded the college of william and mary 1693 and authorized the construction of an impressive new capital called williamsburg.
these were changes that in the words of one creole virginian provided the colony with a sense of permanence and legitimacy.
it had never before possessed race and freedom in british america the key to success in this creole society was ownership of slaves.
those planters who held more blacks could grow more tobacco and thus could acquire fresh capital needed to purchase additional laborers.
over time the rich not only became richer they also formed a distinct ruling elite that newcomers found increasingly difficult to enter.
opportunities for advancement also decreased for freemen in the region.
studies of mid seventeenth century maryland reveal that some servants managed to become moderately prosperous farmers and small officeholders.
but as the gentry consolidated its hold on political and economic institutions ordinary people discovered it was much harder to rise in chesapeake society.
those men and women with more ambitious dreams headed for pennsylvania north carolina or western virginia.
social institutions that figured importantly in the daily experience of new englanders were either weak or nonexistent in the chesapeake colonies.
in part the sluggish development resulted from the continuation of high infant mortality rates.
there was little incentive to build elementary schools for example if half the children would die before reaching adulthood.
the great planters sent their sons to england or scotland for their education and even after the founding of the college of william and mary in virginia the gentry continued to patronize english schools.
as a result of this practice higher education in the south languished for much of the colonial period.
tobacco influenced the spread of other institutions in the region.
planters were scattered along the rivers often separated from their nearest neighbors by miles of poor roads.
since the major tobacco growers traded directly with english merchants they had no need for towns.
whatever items they required were either made on the plantation or imported from europe.
other than the centers of colonial government jamestown and later williamsburg and st marys city and later annapolis there were no villages capable of sustaining a rich community life before the late eighteenth century.
seventeenth century virginia did not even possess a printing press.
in fact governor sir william berkeley bragged in 1671 there are no free schools nor printing in virginia for learning has brought disobedience and heresy.
into the world and printing had divulged them.
god keep us from both race and freedom in british america how did african american slaves preserve an independent cultural identity in the new world.
many people who landed in the colonies had no desire to come to the new world.
they were africans taken as slaves to cultivate rice sugar and tobacco.
as the native americans were exterminated and the supply of white indentured servants dried up european planters demanded ever more african laborers.
roots of slavery a great deal is known about the transfer of african peoples across the atlantic.
during the entire history of this human commerce between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries slave traders carried almost eleven million blacks to the americas.
most of these men and women were sold in brazil or in the caribbean.
a relatively small number of africans reached british north america and of this group the majority arrived after 1700 slavery existed in each of the thirteen colonies but the vast majority of slaves lived in the southern colonies where masters put them to work on plantations that grew staple crops for export.
because slaves performed hard physical labor planters preferred purchasing young males.
in many early slave communities men outnumbered women by a ratio of two to one.
english colonists did not hesitate to enslave black people or for that matter native americans.
while the institution of slavery had long before died out in the mother country new world settlers quickly discovered how well this particular labor system operated in the spanish and portuguese colonies.
the decision to bring african slaves to the colonies therefore was based primarily on economic considerations.
english masters however seldom justified the practice purely in terms of planter profits.
indeed they adopted a quite different pattern of rhetoric.
english writers associated blacks in africa with heathen religion barbarous behavior sexual promiscuity in fact with evil itself.
from such a racist perspective the enslavement of africans seemed unobjectionable.
the planters maintained that if black slaves converted to christianity shedding their supposedly savage ways they would benefit from their loss of freedom.
africans first landed in virginia in 1619 as a cargo of slaves stolen by a dutch trader from a spanish merchant ship in the caribbean.
for the next fifty years the status of the colonys black people remained unclear.
english settlers classified some black laborers as slaves for life as chattel to be bought and sold at the masters will.
but other africans became servants presumably for stated periods of time and it was even possible for a few blacks to purchase their freedom.
several seventeenth century africans became successful virginia planters.
these rare exceptions in a long history of oppression remind modern americans that once long ago it was possible to imagine a more open less racially defined society.
see the feature essay anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek pp.
one reason virginia lawmakers tolerated such confusion was that the black population remained very small.
by 1660 fewer than fifteen hundred people of african origin lived in the entire colony compared to a white population of approximately twenty six thousand and it hardly seemed necessary for the legislature to draw up an elaborate slave code to control so few men and women.
if the planters could have obtained more black laborers they certainly would have done so.
there is no evidence that the great planters preferred white indentured servants to black slaves.
the problem was supply.
during this period slave traders sold their cargoes on barbados or the other sugar islands of the west indies where they fetched higher prices than virginians could afford.
in fact before 1680 most blacks who reached englands colonies on the north american mainland came from barbados or through new netherland rather than directly from africa.
by the end of the seventeenth century the legal status of virginias black people was no longer in doubt.
they were slaves for life and so were their children after them.
this transformation reflected changes in the supply of africans to british north america.
after 1672 the royal african company was chartered to meet the colonial planters demands for black laborers.
historian k g davies terms this organization the strongest and most effective of all european companies formed exclusively for the african chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society view the closer look african slave trade 1451 1870 europe 2 north america at l a n t i c o c e a n british north america 4 2 mexico and central america 42 west indies 6 spanish south america west africa 6 guianas africa central africa equator 38 brazil pa c i f i c ocean southeast africa south america main source of slaves percentage of slaves brought to various transatlantic destinations origins and destinations of african slaves 1619 1760 although many african slaves were carried to britains north american colonies far more slaves were sold in the caribbean sugar colonies and brazil where because of horrific health conditions the death rate far exceeded that of the british mainland colonies.
trade between 1695 and 1709 more than eleven thousand africans were sold in virginia alone many others went to maryland and the carolinas.
although american merchants most of them based in rhode island entered the trade during the eighteenth century the british continued to supply the bulk of the slaves to the mainland market for the entire colonial period.
the expanding black population apparently frightened white colonists for as the number of africans increased lawmakers drew up ever stricter slave codes.
it was during this period that racism always a latent element in new world societies was fully revealed.
by 1700 slavery was unequivocally based on the color of a persons skin.
blacks fell into this status simply because they were black.
a vicious pattern of discrimination had been set in motion.
even conversion to christianity did not free the african from bondage.
the white planter could deal with his black property as he alone saw fit and one revolting virginia statute excused masters who killed slaves on the grounds that no rational person would purposely destroy his own estate black women constantly had to fear sexual violation by a master or his sons.
children born to a slave woman became slaves regardless of the fathers race.
unlike the spanish colonies where persons of lighter color enjoyed greater privileges in society the english colonies tolerated no mixing of the races.
mulattoes and pure africans received the same treatment.
constructing african american identities the slave experience varied substantially from colony to colony.
the daily life of a black person in south carolina for example was quite different from that of an african american who happened to live in pennsylvania or massachusetts bay.
the size and density of the slave population determined in large measure how successfully blacks could maintain a separate cultural identity.
in the lowlands of south carolina during the eighteenth century 60 percent of the population was black.
the men and women were placed on large isolated rice plantations and their contact with whites was limited.
in these areas blacks developed creole languages which mixed the basic vocabulary of english with words borrowed from various african tongues.
until the end of the nineteenth century one creole language gullah was spoken on some of the sea islands along the georgia south carolina coast.
slaves on the large rice plantations also were able to establish elaborate and enduring kinship networks that may have helped reduce the more dehumanizing aspects of bondage.
in the new england and middle colonies and even in virginia african americans made up a smaller percentage of the population 40 percent in virginia 8 percent in pennsylvania and 3 percent in massachusetts.
in such environments contact between race and freedom in british america outlandish negroes as they were called were forced by blacks as well as whites to accept elements of english culture.
it was especially important for newcomers to speak english.
consider for example the pain of young olaudah equiano an african sold in virginia in 1757 this 12 year old slave declared i was now exceedingly miserable and thought myself worse off than any.
of my companions for they could talk to each other in english but i had no person to speak to that i could understand.
in this state i was constantly grieving and pining and wishing for death despite such wrenching experiences black slaves creatively preserved elements of an african heritage.
the process of establishing african american traditions involved an imaginative reshaping of african and european customs into something that was neither african nor european.
it was african american.
the slaves accepted christianity but they did so on their own terms terms their masters seldom fully understood.
blacks transformed christianity into an expression of religious feeling in which an african element remained vibrant.
in music and folk art they gave voice to a cultural identity that even the most degrading conditions could not eradicate.
a major turning point in the history of african american people occurred during the early decades of the eighteenth century.
at this time blacks living in englands mainland colonies began to reproduce successfully.
the number of live births exceeded deaths and from that date the expansion of the african american population owed more to natural increase than to the importation of new slaves.
even though thousands of new africans arrived each year the creole population was always much larger than that of the immigrant blacks.
not that white masters allowed african american family life to interfere with the work routines of the plantation.
husbands and wives often belonged except for brief excursions on deck for forced exercise slaves remained below decks where the air to different masters and found it hard to find grew foul from the vomit blood and excrement in which the terrified victims lay.
some slaves went insane others refused to eat.
on many voyages between 5 and 20 percent of slaves perished from time to visit one another.
difficulties in formdisease and other causes which was another reason for captains to pack their ships tightly.
ing stable families meant that slave women often did not bear children until relatively late in life.
slave women usually worked in the fields alongside men.
blacks and whites was more frequent than in south carolina and elderly female slaves often no longer physically fit for field labor georgia.
these population patterns had a profound effect on northern were assigned to watch children while their parents toiled durand chesapeake blacks for while they escaped the physical drudging the long work day.
despite these hardships north american ery of rice cultivation they found the preservation of an indepenblacks enjoyed a healthier climate and better diet than did other dent african identity difficult.
in northern cities slaves working as new world slaves resulting in a demographic shift that did not take domestics and living in the houses of their masters saw other blacks place in the caribbean or south american colonies until a much but had little opportunity to develop creole languages or reaffirm a later date.
common african past.
although mainland blacks lived longer than the blacks of in eighteenth century virginia native born or creole blacks jamaica or barbados they were after all still slaves.
they propeople who had learned to cope with whites on a daily basis looked tested their debasement in many ways some in individual acts of with contempt on slaves who had just arrived from africa.
these view the closer look plan and sections of a slave ship and an illustration of a slave camp complete the assignment anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek on myhistorylab feature essay anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek a few months after anthony johnson died in 1670 a virginia court ruled that because he was a negro and by consequence an alien the 250 acres of land that he had owned should revert to england.
shown here is a portion of the court document with that decree.
d uring the first decades of settlement a larger proportion of virginias black population achieved freedom than at any time until the civil war ended slavery.
despite considerable obstacles these free black men and women their number in these early years was quite small formed families acquired property earned community respect and helped establish a distinctive african american culture.
one member of this group was anthony johnson an immigrant who rose from slavery to prominence on virginias eastern shore.
johnson came to virginia aboard the english vessel james in 1621 just two years after the first blacks had arrived in the colony.
as a slave known simply as antonio a negro johnson found life a constant struggle for survival.
working in the tobacco fields of the bennett plantation located on the south side of the james river he endured long hours poor rations fearful epidemics and haunting loneliness conditions that more often than not brought an early death to slaves as well as indentured servants.
johnson however was a tough intelligent and lucky man.
exactly how johnson achieved freedom is not known.
early records reveal that while still living at the bennett plantation he took a wife mary a negro woman anthony was fortunate to find her.
because of an exceedingly unequal sex ratio in early virginia few males regardless of color had an opportunity to form families.
anthony and mary reared at least four children.
even more remarkable in a society in which most unions were broken by death within a decade their marriage lasted more than forty years.
sometime during the 1630s anthony and mary gained their freedom perhaps with the help of someone named johnson.
their bondage probably ended through self purchase an arrangement that allowed enterprising slaves to buy their liberty through labor.
later again under unknown circumstances the johnsons migrated to northampton county on the eastern shore of virginia.
during the 1640s they acquired an estate of 250 acres on pungoteague creek where they raised cattle horses and hogs and cultivated tobacco.
to work these holdings anthony johnson apparently relied on the labor of indentured servants and at least one black slave named casor.
as the patriarch of pungoteague creek johnson participated as fully as most whites in northampton society.
he traded with wealthy white landowners and apparently shared their assumptions about the sanctity of property and the legitimacy of slavery.
when two white neighbors attempted to steal casor johnson hauled them into court and forced them to return his laborer.
on another occasion johnson appealed to the court for tax relief after an unfortunate fire destroyed much of his plantation.
the johnsons also maintained close ties with other free blacks such as anthony payne and emmanuel driggus who had similarly attained freedom and prosperity through their own efforts.
johnsons strongest links were with his family.
although his children lived in separate homes after reaching adulthood his two sons laid out holdings in the 1650s adjacent to their fathers plantation and in times of crisis parents and children participated in family conferences.
these close bonds persisted even after the johnson clan moved to somerset county maryland in the 1660s and anthony johnsons subsequent death.
when he purchased land in somerset in 1677 johnsons grandson a third generation free black colonist named his plantation angola perhaps in memory of his grandfathers african homeland.
interpreting johnsons remarkable life has proved surprisingly difficult.
an earlier generation of historians considered johnson a curiosity a sort of black englishman who did not fit neatly into familiar racial categories.
even some recent writers concerned about tracing the roots of slavery and prejudice in the united states have paid scant attention to johnson and the other free blacks on the eastern shore.
most historians would now agree that johnsons life illustrated the complexity of race relations in early virginia.
his surprising progression from slave to slaveholder and his easy participation in the world of the white gentry and in a network of black friendships and family ties demonstrated that relations among blacks and whites conformed to no single pattern in the fluid society of mid seventeenth century virginia.
rather they took a variety of forms conflict cooperation exploitation accommodation depending on the goals status experience and environment of the participants.
race was only a single factor and by no means the decisive one shaping relations among colonists.
the opportunities that had been available to anthony johnson and other virginia blacks however disappeared during the last quarter of the seventeenth century.
a growing reliance on slave labor rather than white indentured servitude brought about a rapid increase in the black population of virginia and an accompanying curtailment of civil liberties on racial grounds.
the rise of a group of great planters who dominated the colonial economy soon drove free black farmers into poverty.
no longer did they enjoy the security as had one black farmer in the 1640s of having myne owne ground and i will work when i please and play when i please it is not surprising that after 1706 a time when virginias experiment in a genuinely multiracial free society was all but over the johnson family disappeared from the colonial records.
when modern americans discuss the history of race relations in the united states they might consider the factors that allowed some of the first blacks who settled in america to achieve economic and social success.
questions for discussion 1 how does the life of anthony johnson illustrate the complexity of race relations in early virginia.
2 why did the opportunities that free blacks like anthony johnson enjoyed disappear in virginia in the late seventeenth century.
chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society violence others in organized revolt.
the most serious slave rebellion of the colonial period was the stono uprising which took place in september 1739 one hundred fifty south carolina blacks rose up and seizing guns and ammunition murdered several white planters.
with colours displayed and two drums beating they marched toward spanish florida where they had been promised freedom.
the local militia soon overtook the rebellious slaves and killed most of them.
although the uprising was short lived such incidents helped persuade whites everywhere that their own blacks might secretly be planning bloody revolt.
when a white servant woman in new york city announced in 1741 that blacks intended to burn the town authorities executed 34 suspected arsonists 30 blacks and 4 whites and dispatched 72 others either to the west indies or to madeira off the north coast of africa.
while the level of interracial violence in colonial society was quite low everyone recognized that the blacks in the words of one virginia governor longed to shake off the fetters of slavery even within the constraints of slavery african americans sometimes found opportunities that afforded a degree of personal freedom.
recent scholarship has discovered for example that during the eighteenth century a large number of black men became mariners.
it is now estimated that by 1803 african americans held at least 18 percent of all jobs open to american seamen and although the number of positions may have been fewer before the revolution read the document olaudah equiano the middle passage 1788 read the document james oglethorpe the stono rebellion 1739 slave masters often claimed that their slaves loved them and were happy to live in bondage.
but events like the stono uprising or rebellion of 1739 proved this reassuring fiction to be untrue.
southern whites lived in constant fear that their slaves might one day rise up and repay violence with violence.
black colonial sailors many of them slaves sought work on sailing vessels to escape the drudgery of life on rice or tobacco plantations.
these african american seamen connected black communities scattered throughout the caribbean and along the mainland coast bringing news about distant rebellions and spreading radical political ideologies to slaves who might otherwise not have known much about the transforming events of the eighteenth century.
rise of a commercial empire why did england discourage free and open trade in colonial america.
as a young boy olaudah equiano c 1745 1797 was kidnapped from his home in what is now nigeria and sold into slavery in america.
equiano eventually earned his freedom by working as a sailor.
british abolitionists pointed to the narrative of his extraordinary life to highlight the evils of the slave trade.
until the middle of the seventeenth century english political leaders largely ignored the american colonists.
private companies and aristocratic proprietors had created these societies some for profit others for religious sanctuary but in no case did the crown provide financial or military assistance.
after the restoration of charles ii in 1660 intervention replaced indifference.
englishmen of various sorts courtiers merchants parliamentarians concluded that the colonists should be brought more tightly under the control of the mother country.
the newly restored stuart monarchy began to establish rules for the entire empire and the planters of the chesapeake as well as the puritans of new england soon discovered they were not as independent as they had imagined.
the regulatory policies that evolved during this period formed a framework for an empire that survived with only minor adjustment until 1765 rise of a commercial empire response to economic competition england.
since the americans had to pay import duties in england for this purpose colonists did not count as englishmen on such items as sugar and tobacco the legislation also provided the crown with another source of income.
in 1663 parliament passed a second navigation act known as the staple act which stated that with a few noted exceptions nothing could be imported into america unless it had first been transshipped through england a process that greatly added to the price ultimately paid by colonial consumers.
the navigation acts attempted to eliminate the dutch against whom the english fought three wars in this period 1652 1654 1664 1667 and 1672 1674 as the intermediaries of american commerce.
just as english merchants were celebrating their victory however an unanticipated rival appeared on the scene new england merchant ships sailed out of boston salem and newport to become formidable world competitors in maritime commerce.
view the map maine lumber skins lake o lak n h ntario beef cattle n y sheep hogs rie ee beef cattle conn n j pa ine of 1763 am ati on l regulating colonial trade p cl ro skins lumber md.
whales newport new york philadelphia wheat del.
skins cod boston r i skins beef cattle after some legislation in that direction during the commonwealth parliament passed a navigation act in 1660 the statute was the most important piece of imperial legislation drafted before the american revolution.
colonists from new hampshire to south carolina paid close attention to the details of this statute which stated 1 that no ship could trade in the colonies unless it had been constructed in either england or america and carried a crew that was at least 75 percent english for these purposes colonists counted as englishmen and 2 that certain enumerated goods of great value that were not produced in england tobacco sugar cotton indigo dyewoods ginger could be transported from the colonies only to an english or another colonial port.
in 1704 parliament added rice and molasses to the enumerated list in 1705 rosins tars and turpentines needed for shipbuilding were included.
the act of 1660 was masterfully conceived.
it encouraged the development of domestic shipbuilding and prohibited european rivals from obtaining enumerated goods anywhere except in colonial products part of mass.
n lake huro by the 1660s the dominant commercial powers of europe adopted economic principles that later critics would term mercantilism.
proponents of this position argued that since trading nations were engaged in a fierce competition for the worlds resources mostly for raw materials transported from dependent colonies one nations commercial success translated directly into a loss for its rivals.
it seemed logical therefore that england would want to protect its own markets from france or holland.
for seventeenth century planners free markets made no sense.
they argued that trade tightly regulated by the central government represented the only way to increase the nations wealth at the expense of competitors.
many discussions of mercantilism suggested that english policy makers during the reign of charles ii had developed a wellintegrated set of ideas about the nature of international commerce and a carefully planned set of mercantilist government policies to implement them.
they did nothing of the sort.
administrators responded to particular problems usually on an individual basis.
in 1668 charles informed his sister the thing which is nearest the heart of the nation is trade and all that belongs to it national interest alone however did not shape public policy.
instead the needs of several powerful interest groups led to the rise of english commercial regulation.
each group looked to colonial commerce to solve a different problem.
for his part the king wanted money.
for their part english merchants were eager to exclude dutch rivals from lucrative american markets and needed government assistance to compete successfully with the dutch even in virginia or massachusetts bay.
from the perspective of the landed gentry who sat in parliament england needed a stronger navy and that in turn meant expansion of the domestic shipbuilding industry.
and almost everyone agreed england should establish a more favorable balance of trade that is increase exports decrease imports and grow richer at the expense of other european states.
none of these ideas was particularly innovative but taken together they provided a blueprint for englands first empire.
atlantic ocean corn hemp hogs norfolk wheat beef cattle naval stores beef cattle lumber n c hogs lumber naval stores wheat and corn beef cattle naval s c stores beef cattle tobacco rice and indigo fishing charles town ga ironworks savannah corn 200 miles 200 kilometers shipbuilding rum distilleries colonial products the above interactive map of colonial products demonstrates the economic reliance of the colonies on exports of certain raw materials food and agricultural products.
chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society during the 1660s the colonists showed little enthusiasm for the new imperial regulations.
reaction to the navigation acts varied from region to region.
virginians bitterly protested them.
the collection of english customs on tobacco greatly reduced the colonial planters profits.
moreover the exclusion of the dutch from the trade meant that growers often had to sell their crops at artificially low prices.
the navigation acts hit the small planters especially hard for they were least able to absorb increased production costs.
even though the governor of virginia lobbied on the planters behalf the crown turned a deaf ear.
by 1670 import duties on tobacco accounted for almost 100 000 a sum the king could scarcely do without.
at first new englanders simply ignored the commercial regulations.
indeed one massachusetts merchant reported in 1664 that boston entertained near one hundred sail of ships this year of ours and strangers the strangers of course were the dutch who had no intention of obeying the navigation acts so long as they could reach colonial ports.
some new england merchants found clever ways to circumvent the navigation acts.
these crafty traders picked up cargoes of enumerated goods such as sugar or tobacco sailed to another colonial port thereby technically fulfilling the letter of the law and then made directly for holland or france.
along the way they paid no customs.
to plug the loophole parliament passed the navigation act of 1673 this statute established a plantation duty a sum of money equal to normal english customs duties to be collected on enumerated products at the various colonial ports.
new englanders could now sail wherever they pleased within the empire but they could not escape paying customs.
despite these legal reforms serious obstacles impeded the execution of imperial policy.
the customs service did not have enough effective agents in american ports to enforce the navigation acts fully and some men sent from the mother country did more harm than good.
edward randolph head of the imperial customs service in new england was such a person.
he was dispatched to boston in 1676 to gather information about the conduct of colonial trade.
his behavior was so obnoxious his reports about new englanders so condescending that he became the most hated man in late seventeenth century massachusetts.
parliament passed the last major piece of imperial legislation in 1696 among other things the statute tightened enforcement procedures putting pressure specifically on the colonial governors to keep englands competitors out of american ports.
the act of 1696 also expanded the american customs service and for the first time set up vice admiralty courts in the colonies.
this decision eventually rankled the colonists.
established to settle disputes that occurred at sea viceadmiralty courts required neither juries nor oral cross examination both traditional elements of the common law.
but they were effective and sometimes even popular for resolving maritime questions quickly enough to send the ships to sea again with little delay.
the members of parliament believed these reforms would belatedly compel the colonists to accept the navigation acts and in large measure they were correct.
by 1700 american goods transshipped through the mother country accounted for a quarter of all english exports an indication the colonists found it profitable to obey the commercial regulations.
in fact during the eighteenth century smuggling from europe to america dried up almost completely.
colonial factions spark political revolt 1676 1691 how did colonial revolts affect the political culture of virginia and new england.
the navigation acts created an illusion of unity.
english administrators superimposed a system of commercial regulation on a number of different often unstable american colonies and called it an empire.
but these statutes did not remove long standing differences.
within each society men and women struggled to bring order out of disorder to establish stable ruling elites to diffuse ethnic and racial tensions and to cope with population pressures that imperial planners only dimly understood.
during the final decades of the seventeenth century these efforts sometimes sparked revolt.
first the virginians rebelled and then a few years later political violence swept through maryland new york and massachusetts bay englands most populous mainland colonies.
these events were not in any modern sense of the word ideological.
in each colony the local gentry split into factions usually the outs versus the ins and each side proclaimed its political legitimacy.
civil war in virginia bacons rebellion after 1660 the virginia economy suffered a prolonged depression.
returns from tobacco had not been good for some time and the navigation acts reduced profits even further.
into this unhappy environment came thousands of indentured servants people drawn to virginia as the governor explained in hope of bettering their condition in a growing country the reality bore little relation to their dreams.
a hurricane destroyed one entire tobacco crop and in 1667 dutch warships captured the tobacco fleet just as it was about to sail for england.
indentured servants complained about lack of food and clothing.
no wonder that virginias governor sir william berkeley despaired of ever ruling a people where six parts of seven at least are poor endebted discontented and armed in 1670 he and the house of burgesses disfranchised all landless freemen persons they regarded as troublemakers but the threat of social violence remained.
enter nathaniel bacon.
this ambitious young man arrived in virginia in 1674 he came from a respectable english family and set himself up immediately as a substantial planter.
but he wanted more.
bacon envied the government patronage monopolized by berkeleys cronies a group known locally as the green spring faction.
when bacon attempted to obtain a license to engage in the fur trade he was rebuffed.
this lucrative commerce was reserved for the governors friends.
if bacon had been willing to wait he probably would have been accepted into the ruling clique but as subsequent events would demonstrate bacon was not a man of patience.
events beyond bacons control thrust him suddenly into the center of virginia politics.
in 1675 indians reacting to white encroachment attacked several outlying plantations killing a few colonists and virginians expected the governor to send an army to retaliate.
instead early in 1676 berkeley called for the construction of a line of defensive forts a plan that seemed to the settlers both expensive and ineffective.
indeed the strategy raised embarrassing questions.
was berkeley protecting his own fur monopoly.
was he planning to reward his friends with contracts to build useless forts.
colonial factions spark political revolt 1676 1691 read the document later refused to grant her a pardon.
another outspoken rebel lydia chiesman defended her husband before governor berkeley noting that the man would not have joined bacons forces had she not persuaded him to do so.
therefore lydia chiesman concluded.
since what her husband had done was by her meanes and so by consequence she most guilty that she might be hanged and he pardoned when charles ii learned of the fighting in virginia he dispatched a thousand regular soldiers to jamestown.
by the time they arrived berkeley had regained full control over the colonys government.
in october 1676 bacon died after a brief illness and within a few months his band of rebel followers had dispersed.
berkeley now an old and embittered man was recalled to england in 1677 his successors especially lord culpeper 1680 1683 and lord howard of effingham 1683 1689 seemed interested primarily in enriching themselves at the expense of the virginia planters.
their self serving policies coupled with the memory of near anarchy helped heal divisions within the virginia ruling class.
for almost a century in fact the local gentry formed a united front against greedy royal appointees.
nathaniel bacons declaration july 30 1676 in 1676 nathaniel bacon and about 500 men from the virginia frontier marched on the colonial capital of jamestown to demand access to indian lands.
when the house of burgesses took too long in responding the rebels set fire to the capital.
while people speculated about such matters bacon stepped forward.
he boldly offered to lead a volunteer army against the indians at no cost to the hard pressed virginia taxpayers.
all he demanded was an official commission from berkeley giving him military command and the right to attack other indians not just the hostile susquehannocks.
the governor steadfastly refused.
with some justification berkeley regarded his upstart rival as a fanatic on the subject of indians.
the governor saw no reason to exterminate peaceful tribes simply to avenge the death of a few white settlers.
what followed would have been comic had not so many people died.
bacon thundered against the governors treachery berkeley labeled bacon a traitor.
both men appealed to the populace for support.
on several occasions bacon marched his followers to the frontier but they either failed to find the enemy or worse massacred friendly indians.
at one point bacon burned jamestown to the ground forcing the governor to flee to the colonys eastern shore.
bacons bumbling lieutenants chased berkeley across chesapeake bay only to be captured themselves.
thereupon the governor mounted a new campaign.
as bacons rebellion dragged on it became increasingly apparent that bacon and his gentry supporters had only the vaguest notion of what they were trying to achieve.
the members of the planter elite never seemed fully to appreciate that the rank and file soldiers often black slaves and poor white servants had serious legitimate grievances against berkeleys corrupt government and were demanding substantial reforms not just a share in the governors fur monopoly.
although women had not been allowed to vote in colony elections they made their political views clear enough during the rebellion.
some were apparently more violent than others.
sarah glendon for example agitated so aggressively in support of bacon that berkeley the glorious revolution in the bay colony during john winthrops lifetime massachusetts settlers developed an inflated sense of their independence from the mother country.
after 1660 however it became difficult even to pretend that the puritan colony was a separate state.
royal officials such as edward randolph demanded full compliance with the navigation acts.
moreover the growth of commerce attracted new merchants to the bay colony men who were anglicans rather than congregationalists and who maintained close business contacts in london.
these persons complained loudly of puritan intolerance.
the anglican faction was never large but its presence coupled with randolphs unceasing demands divided bay leaders.
a few puritan ministers and magistrates regarded compromise with england as treason a breaking of the lords covenant.
other spokesmen recognizing the changing political realities within the empire urged a more moderate course.
in 1675 in the midst of this ongoing political crisis the indians dealt the new englanders a terrible setback.
metacomet a wampanoag chief the whites called king philip declared war against the colonists.
the powerful narragansett indians whose lands the settlers had long coveted joined metacomet and in little more than a year of fighting the indians destroyed scores of frontier villages killed hundreds of colonists and disrupted the entire regional economy.
more than one thousand indians and new englanders died in the conflict.
the war left the people of massachusetts deeply in debt and more than ever uncertain of their future.
as in other parts of colonial america the defeated indians were forced off their lands compelled by events to become either refugees or economically marginal figures in white society.
in 1684 the debate over the bay colonys relation to the mother country ended abruptly.
the court of chancery sitting in london and acting on a petition from the king annulled the charter of the massachusetts bay company.
in one stroke of a pen the patent that chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society winthrop had so lovingly carried to america in 1630 the foundation for a city on a hill was gone.
the decision forced the most stubborn puritans to recognize they were part of an empire run by people who did not share their particular religious vision.
james ii a monarch who disliked representative institutions after all parliament a representative assembly had executed his father charles i decided to restructure the government of the entire region in the dominion of new england.
in various stages from 1686 to 1689 the dominion incorporated massachusetts connecticut rhode island plymouth new york new jersey and new hampshire under a single appointed royal governor.
for this demanding position james selected sir edmund andros pronounced andrews a military veteran of tyrannical temperament.
andros arrived in boston in 1686 and within a matter of months he had alienated everyone puritans moderates and even anglican merchants.
not only did andros abolish elective assemblies but he also enforced the navigation acts with such rigor that he brought about commercial depression.
andros declared normal town meetings illegal collected taxes the people never approved and packed the courts with supporters who detested the local population.
eighteenthcentury historian and royal governor thomas hutchinson compared andros unfavorably with the roman tyrant nero.
early in 1689 news of the glorious revolution reached boston.
the previous fall the ruling class of england had deposed james ii an admitted catholic and placed his protestant daughter mary and her husband william of orange on the throne as joint monarchs see the chart of the stuart monarchs on p 31.
as part of the settlement william and mary accepted a bill of rights a document stipulating the constitutional rights of all englishmen.
almost immediately the bay colonists overthrew the hated andros regime.
the new england version of the glorious revolution april 18 1689 was so popular that no one came to the governors defense.
andros was jailed without a single shot having been fired.
according to cotton mather a leading congregational minister the colonists were united by the most unanimous resolution perhaps that was ever known to have inspird any people however united as they may have been the bay colonists could not take the crowns support for granted.
william iii could have declared the new englanders rebels and summarily reinstated andros.
but thanks largely to the tireless lobbying of increase mather cottons father who pleaded the colonists case in london william abandoned the dominion of new england and in 1691 massachusetts received a new royal charter.
this document differed substantially from the company patent of 1629 the freemen no longer selected their governor.
the choice now belonged to the king.
membership in the general court was determined by annual election and these representatives in turn chose the men who sat in the council or upper house subject always to the governor veto.
moreover the franchise restricted here as in other colonies to adult males was determined on the basis of personal property rather than church membership a change that brought massachusetts into conformity with general english practice.
on the local level town government remained much as it had been in winthrops time.
contagion of witchcraft the instability of the massachusetts government following andross arrest what reverend samuel willard described as the short anarchy accompanying our late revolution allowed what under normal political conditions would have been an isolated though ugly local incident to expand into a major colonial crisis.
excessively fearful men and women living in salem village a small unprosperous farming community nearly overwhelmed the new rulers of massachusetts bay.
accusations of witchcraft were not uncommon in seventeenth century new england.
puritans believed that an individual might make a compact with the devil but during the first decades of settlement authorities executed only about fifteen alleged witches.
sometimes villagers simply left suspected witches alone.
never before had fears of witchcraft plunged an entire community into panic.
the terror in salem village began in early 1692 when several adolescent girls began to behave in strange ways.
they cried out for no apparent reason they twitched on the ground.
when concerned neighbors asked what caused their suffering the girls announced they were victims of witches seemingly innocent persons who lived in the community.
the arrest of several alleged witches did not relieve the girls fits nor did prayer solve the problem.
additional accusations were made and at least one person confessed providing a frightening description of the devil as a thing all over hairy all the face hairy and a long nose in june 1692 a special court convened and began to send men and women to the gallows.
by the end of the summer the court had hanged nineteen people another was pressed to death.
several more suspects died in jail awaiting trial.
then suddenly the storm was over.
led by increase mather a group of prominent congregational ministers belatedly urged leniency and restraint.
especially troubling to the clergymen was the courts decision to accept spectral evidence that is reports of dreams and visions in which the accused appeared as the devils agent.
worried about convicting people on such dubious testimony mather declared it were better that ten suspected witches should escape than that one innocent person should be condemned the colonial government accepted the ministers advice and convened a new court which promptly acquitted pardoned or released the remaining suspects.
after the salem nightmare witchcraft ceased to be a capital offense.
no one knows exactly what sparked the terror in salem village.
the community had a history of religious discord and during the 1680s the people split into angry factions over the choice of a minister.
economic tensions played a part as well.
poorer more traditional farmers accused members of prosperous commercially oriented families of being witches.
the underlying misogyny of the entire culture meant the victims were more often women than men.
terror of attack by native americans may also have played a part in this ugly affair.
indians in league with the french in canada had recently raided nearby communities killing people related to the families of the bewitched salem girls and significantly during the trials some victims described the devil as a tawny man for further discussion of the salem witchcraft trials see witches and the law pp.
the glorious revolution in new york and maryland the glorious revolution in new york was more violent than it had been in massachusetts bay.
divisions within new yorks ruling class ran deep and involved ethnic as well as religious differences.
english newcomers and powerful anglo dutch families who conclusion local aspirations within an atlantic empire had recently risen to commercial prominence in new york city opposed the older dutch elite.
much like nathaniel bacon jacob leisler was a man entangled in events beyond his control.
leisler the son of a german minister emigrated to new york in 1660 and through marriage aligned himself with the dutch elite.
while he achieved moderate prosperity as a merchant leisler resented the success of the anglo dutch.
when news of the glorious revolution reached new york city in may 1689 leisler raised a group of militiamen and seized the local fort in the name of william and mary.
as leader of leislers rebellion he apparently expected an outpouring of popular support but it was not forthcoming.
his rivals waited watching while leisler desperately attempted to legitimize his actions.
through bluff and badgering leisler managed to hold the colony together especially after french forces burned schenectady february 1690 but he never established a secure political base.
in march 1691 a new royal governor henry sloughter reached new york.
he ordered leisler to surrender his authority but when sloughter refused to prove he had been sent by william read the document cotton mather memorable providences relating to witchcraft rather than by the deposed james leisler hesitated.
the pause cost leisler his life.
sloughter declared leisler a rebel and in a hasty trial a court sentenced him and his chief lieutenant jacob milbourne to be hanged by the neck and being alive their bodyes be cutt downe to earth and their bowells to be taken out and they being alive burnt before their faces.
in 1695 parliament officially pardoned leisler but he not being alive the decision arrived a bit late.
long after his death political factions calling themselves leislerians and anti leislerians struggled to dominate new york government.
indeed in no other eighteenth century colony was the level of bitter political rivalry so high.
during the last third of the seventeenth century the colony of maryland stumbled from one political crisis to another.
protestants in the colonys lower house resisted lord baltimores catholic friends in the upper house or council.
when news of jamess overthrow reached maryland early in 1689 pent up antiproprietary and anti catholic sentiment exploded.
john coode a member of the assembly and an outspoken protestant formed a group called the protestant association which in august forced baltimore governor william joseph to resign.
coode avoided leislers fatal mistakes.
the protestant association citing many wrongs suffered at the hands of local catholics petitioned the crown to transform maryland into a royal colony.
after reviewing the case william accepted coodes explanation and in 1691 the king dispatched a royal governor to maryland.
a new assembly dominated by protestants declared anglicanism the established religion.
catholics were excluded from public office on the grounds that they might be in league with french catholics in canada.
lord baltimore lost control of the colonys government but he and his family did retain title to marylands undistributed lands.
in 1715 the crown restored to full proprietorship the fourth lord baltimore who had been raised a member of the church of england and maryland remained in the hands of the calvert family until 1776 conclusion local aspirations within an atlantic empire the publication of cotton mathers memorable providences relating to witchcrafts and possessions 1689 contributed to the hysteria that resulted in the salem witchcraft trials of the 1690s but he did not take part in the trials.
he is shown here surrounded by some of the forms a demon assumed in the documented case of an english family besieged by witches.
it is no little blessing of god cotton mather announced proudly in 1700 that we are part of the english nation a half century earlier john winthrop would not have spoken these words at least not with such enthusiasm.
the two men were of course products of different political cultures.
it was not so much that the character of massachusetts society had changed.
in fact the puritan families of 1700 were much like those of the founding generation.
rather the difference was in englands attitude toward the colonies.
rulers living more than three thousand miles away now made political and economic demands that mathers contemporaries could not ignore.
the creation of a new imperial system did not however erase profound sectional differences.
by 1700 for example the chesapeake colonies were more not less committed to the cultivation of tobacco and slave labor.
although the separate regions were being pulled slowly into englands commercial orbit they did not have much to do with each other.
the elements that sparked a powerful sense of nationalism among colonists dispersed over a huge territory would not be evident for a very long time.
it would be a mistake therefore to anticipate the coming of the american revolution.
complete the assignment witches and the law a problem of evidence in 1692 on myhistorylab law and society witches and the law a problem of evidence in 1692 this seventeenth century house is the former home of jonathan corwin one of the magistrates who presided over the salem witch trials.
despite having received the nickname of the witch house no accused witches actually resided here nor were trials ever held within its walls.
t he events that occurred at salem village in 1692 haunt modern memory.
in popular american culture the incident has come to represent our worst nightmare a communitysanctioned witch hunt that ferrets out deviants in the name of law.
what seems most unsettling about the incident is the failure of allegedly good men and women to bear witness against judicial terror.
the ordeal of salem village links a distant colonial past with the infamous mccarthy hearings of the 1950s as well as other more recent witch hunts.
the story of this deeply troubled town challenges us to confront the possibility that we too might allow law and authority to become instruments of injustice.
the challenge in exploring law and society is how best to interpret the salem trials.
it would be easy to insist that puritan magistrates were gross hypocrites figures who consciously manipulated the law for their own hateful purposes.
but such conclusions are simplistic they fail to place the salem nightmare in proper historical context.
the participants in this intense social drama acted on a complex set of seventeenth century assumptions legal religious and scientific and if judges and jurors wronged innocent people they did so by the standards of a society very different from our own.
few new englanders doubted the existence of witches.
for centuries european communities had identified certain persons as agents of the devil and when the puritans migrated to america they carried these beliefs with them.
they recognized no conflict between rational religion and the possible existence of a satanic world populated by witches.
ordinary farmers regarded unusual events the strange death of a farm animal for example as evidence of witchcraft.
new englands intellectual leaders sustained popular superstition in impressive scientific publications.
in his memorable providences relating to witchcrafts and possessions 1689 the reverend cotton mather declared i am resolvd.
never to use.
one grain of patience with any man that shall.
impose upon me a denial of devils or of witches.
count him down right impudent if he assert the non existence of things which we have had such palpable convictions of colonial new englanders did more than talk and write about witches as early as 1647 they executed several.
before the salem outbreak ninety one people had been tried for witchcraft in massachusetts and connecticut and sixteen of them were hanged not burned as some historians have claimed.
in addition hundreds of people had accused neighbors of witchcraft but for many reasons usually lack of convincing evidence they stopped short of taking such disputes before the court.
these were isolated incidents.
before 1692 fear of witches had not sparked mass hysteria.
salem village was different.
in this instance charges of witchcraft shattered a community already deeply divided against itself.
the predominantly agricultural salem village lay a few miles up the ipswich road from the bustling commercial port of salem town.
the farmers of the village envied their neighbors prosperity.
even more they resented the control that town authorities exerted over the village church and government.
this tension found expression in numerous personal and family rivalries.
in 1689 the congregation at salem village ordained the reverend samuel parris a troubled figure who provoked disquietness and restlessness and who fanned the factionalism that had long plagued the community.
the witchcraft crisis began suddenly in mid january 1692 when two girls in the parris household experienced violent convulsions and frightening visions.
a local physician examined the afflicted children but found no natural cause for their condition.
soon anxious families raised the possibility of witchcraft a move which set off a storm of accusations that did not abate until october.
by that time 20 people had died and more than 150 prisoners still awaited trial.
although the witch hysteria affected everyone men and women rich and poor farmers and merchants the accusers and their targets were not evenly distributed among the population of salem village.
twenty of the thirty four persons who claimed to have been bewitched were girls between the ages of 11 and 20 women a full generation older than the accusers were most likely to be identified as witches more than 40 percent of the accused fell into this category.
although men and women from many different backgrounds were accused one widely shared characteristic was a history of socially unacceptable behavior.
sarah good for example smoked a pipe and was known for cursing her enemies.
john aldins accusers described him as a bold fellow.
who lies with indian squaws.
and stands with his hat on before the judges bridget bishop ran a scandalous tavern and dressed in a particularly flashy immodest manner.
those who testified against the supposed witches came from all classes both genders and every age group.
indeed virtually the entire community was drawn into the ugly business of charge and countercharge fear and betrayal.
new englands intellectual leaders most of them harvard educated clergymen tried to make sense out of reports coming out of salem.
since the colonies did not yet have a newspaper the reflections of these prominent figures significantly shaped how the entire society interpreted the frightening events of 1692 during the spring of that year accusations of witchcraft mounted while magistrates interrogated everyone touched by the contagion.
arriving from england in mid may at the height of the witch hunt the new royal governor of massachusetts bay william phips appointed a special court of law a court of oyer and terminer to try the cases at salem village.
the seven judges he appointed all had previous experience in the colonys law courts.
phips wanted the trials to be as fair as possible and procedurally correct.
a proper jury was impaneled.
despite precautions however the court itself soon succumbed to the frenzy.
chief judge and deputy governor william stoughton for example staunchly believed the girls had been bewitched and he had little doubt that real witches were responsible for the trouble at salem village.
by contrast nathaniel saltonstall was highly skeptical of the witchcraft charges.
after witnessing the first round of executions saltonstall resigned from the court and turned to alcohol to persuade himself the court had not made a terrible mistake.
although the judges and jury may have felt ambivalent about what was happening the law stated that persons convicted as witches must die.
everything turned on evidence.
confession offered the most reliable proof of witchcraft and it occurred surprisingly often.
we will never know what compelled people to confess.
some may have actually believed they had cast spells on their neighbors or had foretold the future.
many women though believing themselves innocent may have confessed because of guilt for impure thoughts that they had privately entertained.
perhaps the psychological strain of imprisonment coupled with intense social scrutiny convinced them they might have unwittingly entered into a contract with the devil.
regardless the stories they told undoubtedly mortified those who heard them and fueled the growing frenzy.
imagine the reaction to ann fosters july 18 confession ann foster.
confessed that the devill in the shape of a black man appeared to her with martha carrier about six yeare since when they made her a witch and that she promised to serve the devill two years upon which the devill promised her prosperity and many things but never performed it that she and martha carrier did both ride on a stick or pole when they went to the witch meeting at salem village and that the stick broak as they were carried in the air above the tops of the trees and they fell but she did hang fast about the neck of martha carrier and were presently at the village.
she further saith that she heard some of the witches say that there was three hundred and five in the whole country and that they would ruin that place the village.
most of the accused did not confess however forcing the judges to produce tangible evidence of witchcraft.
the charge was difficult because the crime of bewitchment was by nature an invisible act.
earthly laws and magistrates had difficulty dealing with crimes that occurred in the spiritual world.
in this situation the beleaguered judges used a few customary tests.
all witches supposedly had a witchs teat usually a flap of skin located anywhere on the body from which they gave suck to the devil.
the judges subjected almost every defendant to a humiliating physical examination in order to find such biological abnormalities.
witches could also be discovered by having them touch a girl in the midst of her torments.
if the girls fits ceased then the person who touched her was assumed responsible for her agony.
since this form of evidence was immediately observable judges relied on it heavily oftentimes parading accused witches before the possessed girls waiting to see whose touch would calm them.
had the terrible ordeal turned solely on unsightly warts the trials might have ended without further note.
but that did not happen.
the judges allowed the jury to entertain a different sort of evidence spectral evidence and it was this material that hanged people at salem village.
new englanders believed that witches worked by dispatching a specter a phantom spirit to torment their victims.
this meant that witches had power over great distances they were invisible.
they entered peoples dreams and dozens of good new englanders complained of having been bitten pinched or even choked by specters that looked a lot like their neighbors.
the judges regularly accepted spectral testimony of the sort offered by 18 year old john cook.
one morning about sun rising as i was in bed.
i saw bridget bishop.
standing in the chamber by the window and she looked on me.
presently struck me on the side of the head wch did very much hurt me then i saw her goe out under the end window at a little creviss about so bigg as i could thrust my hand into.
i saw her again the same day.
walke cross the roome having at the time an apple in my hand it flew out of my hand into my mothers lapp who stood six or eight foot distance from me then she disappeared though my mother severall others were in the same room yet they affirmed they saw her not.
as far as the witch hunters were concerned bridget bishop had been caught in the act.
to the modern observer however the problems with this kind of evidence seem obvious.
first how could one tell whether cook was lying.
the power of his story lay in its inability to be corroborated for one could never check the authenticity of an intensely private dream or vision.
the second problem was that persons accused of being witches had no defense against spectral testimony.
when captain john aldin stood before his accusers for example they immediately fell to the ground writhing in pain.
when asked why he tormented the girls aldin firmly denied any wrongdoing inquiring why the judges suppose d he had no better things to do than to come to salem to afflict these persons that i never knew or saw before aldins defense did not carry much weight when set against the testimony of the suffering girls and rather than conclude the accusers manifested a lying spirit the judges admitted all spectral evidence as incontestable proof of witchcraft.
very early in the trials a few people expressed doubts about the reliability of this particular form of evidence.
cotton mather and other ministers for example issued a statement urging the judges to use spectral evidence with a very critical and exquisite caution some feared the devil could assume the shape of innocent people.
if this was the case then the visions of the afflicted proved nothing but the devils ability to deceive humans.
in the absence of spectral evidence the cases against most of the witches boiled down to little more than longstanding complaints against obnoxious neighbors.
the fury of prosecution silenced the skeptical voices however and chief judge william stoughton continued to accept dreams and visions as proof of witchcraft.
fantastic testimony about flying witches and pinching specters lent an almost circuslike air to the proceedings at salem.
before the judges and the members of the jury the afflicted girls would fall to the ground convulsing and screaming claiming to see witches that remained invisible to the court.
hundreds of spectators sat horrified as satan caused suffering before their own eyes.
for seventeenth century new englanders who felt the presence of the spiritual world in their everyday lives the courtroom at salem offered the opportunity to witness the struggle between the forces of darkness and light.
because of the gravity of the situation no one expected the judges to deal lightly with those who had sworn allegiance to the devil.
indeed in the interest of obtaining a confession the judges conducted harsh interrogations usually assuming the guilt of the defendant.
the intense psychological pressure inflicted on the defendants is revealed in the questioning of sarah good a woman subsequently hanged as a witch judge sarah good what evil spirit have you familiarity with.
judge why do you hurt these children.
good i do not hurt them.
i scorn it.
judge who do you employ then to do it.
good i employ nobody.
judge have you made a contract with the devil.
judge sarah good.
why do you not tell us the truth.
why do you thus torment these poor children.
good i do not torment them.
even the ministers who advised caution applauded the judges assiduous endeavors and encouraged the vigorous prosecution of the witches.
as the witch hysteria gained momentum few people dared to defend the witches for fear of being accused themselves.
the humble pleas of those who genuinely thought themselves innocent fell on the deaf ears of a community convinced of its own righteousness.
by late september with twenty people already executed the emotional intensity that had sustained the witch hunt in its early stages began to ebb.
for one thing the accusations spun wildly out of control as the afflicted girls began naming unlikely candidates as witches prominent ministers a judges mother in law and even the governors wife.
such accusations discredited the entire procedure by which the witches had been discovered.
also although the jails could barely hold the 150 people still awaiting trial the accusations kept coming.
the terror was feeding on itself.
in mid october governor phips dismissed the original court and appointed a new one this time barring spectral evidence.
all remaining defendants were quickly acquitted although curiously enough three women still confessed to having practiced witchcraft.
in a letter to the king phips explained his decision to end the trials claiming that the people had become dissatisfied and disturbed men and women who had been so eager to purify the community of evil to murder neighbors in the name of a higher good now spoke of their fear of divine retribution.
perhaps the dying words of sarah good uttered in response to the assistant minister of salem town echoed in their ears i am no more a witch than you are a wizard and if you take away my life god will give you blood to drink soon after the trials ended the witch hunters quickly turned confessors.
in 1706 ann putnam one of the most prolific accusers publicly asked for forgiveness i desire to be humbled before god.
it was a great delusion of satan that deceived me in that time nine years earlier the salem jurors had issued a similar statement asking the community to understand the particular pressures that compelled them to convict so many people we confess that we.
were not capable to understand nor able to withstand the mysterious delusions of the powers of darkness.
but were for want of knowledge in our selves and better information from others prevailed with to take up with such evidence against the accused as on further consideration and better information we justly fear was insufficient for the touching the lives of any.
whereby we fear we have been instrumental with others tho ignorantly and unwittingly to bring upon our selves and this people of the lord the guilt of innocent blood.
the state never again executed citizens for witchcraft.
the experience at salem had taught new englanders that although witches may have existed no human court could identify a witch beyond a reasonable doubt.
the reverend increase mather summed up the attitude of a post salem new england it were better that ten suspected witches should escape than that one innocent person should be condemned what triggered the tragic events of 1692 remains a mystery.
some historians view the witch hunt as a manifestation of salem villages socioeconomic troubles.
this interpretation helps explain why the primary accusers came from the agrarian village while the alleged witches either resided in or were somehow connected to the market oriented town.
perhaps the charge of witchcraft masked a deep resentment for their neighbors monetary success and the new set of values that accompanied the market economy.
other historians believe the witch hunt reflected a deep ambivalence about gender roles in new england society.
young girls lashed out at older nonconforming women because they symbolized a freedom that was achievable within new england society yet vehemently criticized.
facing the choice between becoming their husbands servants or being free the accusers may have expressed this cultural frustration in lethal ways.
terror of indian attack may have exacerbated community fear.
some accusers described the devil as a tawney man a clear reference to native americans.
these and many other factors contributed to the witch phenomenon.
regardless of which interpretation one favors one must acknowledge that salem village had indeed been possessed.
the blame rests on the community as a whole not just on a few vindictive judges.
in 1697 another repentant witch hunter the reverend john hale tried to explain how well meaning people had caused such harm i am abundantly satisfyed that those who were most concerned to act and judge in those matters did not willingly depart from the rules of righteousness.
but such was the darkness of that day.
that we walked in the clouds and could not see our way.
hales words ring hollow.
they came too late to do much good.
as other communities have learned throughout the long history of this nation it is easier to apologize after the fact than to stand up courageously against the first injustice.
questions for discussion 1 do historians interpretations of the salem witch hunt seem adequate to explain the events of 1692.
why or why not.
2 how does your judgment of the ministers and magistrates in charge change if you judge them by modern standards versus the scientific and theological standards of their own time.
3 should the magistrates who sat in judgment at salem have been tried later for incompetence or malfeasance.
4 what can modern americans learn from the events of 1692.
chapt er 3 chapter 3 putting down roots on myhistorylab time line 1619 first blacks arrive in virginia 1660 charles ii is restored to the english throne first navigation act passed by parliament second navigation staple act passed plantation duty imposed to close loopholes in commercial regulations king philips metacomets war devastates new england bacons rebellion threatens governor berkeleys government in virginia william penn receives charter for pennsylvania charter of the massachusetts bay company revoked duke of york becomes james ii dominion of new england established james ii driven into exile during glorious revolution rebellions break out in massachusetts new york and maryland jacob leisler executed salem village wracked by witch trials parliament establishes board of trade stono uprising of south carolina slaves terrifies white planters chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 with the current members they were nevertheless virtually represented by that august body.
the members of parliament he declared represented the political interests of everyone who lived in the british empire.
it did not really matter whether everyone had cast a vote.
the colonists ridiculed this notion of virtual representation.
the only representatives the americans recognized as legitimate were those actually chosen by the people for whom they spoke.
on this crucial point they would not compromise.
as john adams insisted a representative assembly should actually mirror its constituents it should think feel reason and act like them since the members of parliament could not possibly think like americans it followed logically they could not represent them.
and if they were not genuine representatives the members of parliament pretensions to sovereignty notwithstanding had no business taxing the american people.
thus in 1764 the connecticut assembly declared in bold letters no law can be made or abrogated without the consent of the people by their representatives ideas about power and virtue americans expressed their political beliefs in a language they had borrowed from english writers.
the person most frequently cited was john locke the influential seventeenth century philosopher whose two treatises of government first published in 1690 seemed to colonial readers at least a brilliant description of what was in fact american political practice.
locke claimed that all people possessed natural and inalienable rights.
to preserve these god given rights of life liberty and property for example free men the status of women in lockes work was less clear formed contracts.
these agreements were the foundation of human society as well as civil government and they required the consent of the people who were actually governed.
there could be no coercion.
locke justified rebellion against arbitrary forms of government that were by their very nature unreasonable.
americans delighted in lockes ability to unite traditional religious values with a spirited defense of popular government and even when they did not fully understand his technical writings they seldom missed a chance to quote from the works of the great mr locke colonial americans also enthusiastically subscribed to the so called commonwealthman tradition a body of political assumptions generally identified with two eighteenth century english publicists john trenchard and thomas gordon see chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 the act generated no violence.
in fact ordinary men and women were only marginally involved in the drafting of formal petitions.
the protest was still confined to the members of the colonial assemblies to the merchants and to the well to do americans who had personal interests in commerce.
word of the stamp act reached america in may and it was soon clear that barr had gauged the colonists response correctly.
the most dramatic incident occurred in virginias house of burgesses.
patrick henry young and eloquent whom contemporaries compared in fervor to evangelical preachers introduced five resolutions protesting the stamp act on the floor of the assembly.
he timed his move carefully.
it was late in the session many of the more conservative burgesses had already departed for their plantations.
even then henrys resolves declaring that virginians had the right to tax themselves as they alone saw fit passed by narrow margins.
the fifth resolution stricken almost immediately from the legislative records announced that any attempt to collect stamp revenues in america was illegal unconstitutional and unjust and has a manifest tendency to destroy british as well as american liberty henry was carried away by the force of his own rhetoric.
he reminded his fellow virginians that caesar had had his brutus charles i his cromwell and he hoped that some good american would stand up for his country but an astonished speaker of the house cut henry off in mid sentence accusing him of treason.
the virginia resolves might have remained a local matter had it not been for the colonial press.
newspapers throughout america printed henrys resolutions but perhaps because editors did not really know what had happened in williamsburg they reported that all five resolutions had received the burgesses full support.
several journals even carried two resolves that henry had not dared to introduce.
a result of this misunderstanding of course was that the virginians appeared to have taken an extremely radical popular protest passage of the stamp act of 1765 transformed a debate among gentlemen into a mass political movement.
the imperial crisis might have been avoided.
colonial agents had presented grenville with alternative schemes for raising money in america.
but grenville was a stubborn man and he had little fear of parliamentary opposition.
the majority of the house of commons assumed that parliament possessed the right to tax the colonists and when the chancellor of the exchequer announced a plan to squeeze 60 000 annually out of the americans by requiring them to purchase special seals or stamps to validate legal documents the members responded with enthusiasm.
the stamp act was scheduled to go into effect on november 1 1765 and in anticipation of brisk sales grenville appointed stamp distributors for every colony.
during discussion in parliament several members warned that the act would raise a storm of protest in the colonies.
colonel isaac barr a veteran of the seven years war reminded his colleagues that the americans were sons of liberty and would not surrender their rights without a fight.
but barrs appeal fell on deaf ears.
maine part of mass.
great britain lake huron lumber france skins lake o n h ntario beef cattle n y sheep hogs skins line of l am ati on va hemp corn cuba hogs wheat norfolk beef cattle naval stores beef cattle lumber hogs caribbean sea slav es rice and indigo fishing gol d pep per tobacco ironworks ru m hispaniola jamaica west indies wheat and corn charles town savannah corn spain portugal at l a n t i c ocean n c naval lumber stores beef cattle naval s c stores beef cattle ga atlantic ocean a ol m r ar ha g su ruit f eat lumber ur m wheat charles town europe in um gra rice meat r manufactures wine flo skins philadelphia sugar molasses slaves oc pr lumber del.
skins cod res sto res actu manuf pa md.
boston l ava o n dig n i kins ctures co s ufa tobac man boston mass.
newport whales new york conn newport beef cattle philadelphia r i norfolk n j new york rie ee lak beef cattle north america s dw ses oo d 200 miles 200 kilometers south america shipbuilding rum distilleries colonial products and trade although the american colonists produced many agricultural staples that were valuable to britain they were dependent on british manufactures such as cloth metal goods and ceramics.
africa eroding the bonds of empire by november 1 1765 stamp distributors in almost every american port had publicly read the document benjamin franklin testimony against resigned and without distributors the hated revthe stamp act 1766 enue stamps could not be sold.
the courts soon reopened most newspapers were published.
daily life in the colonies was undisturbed with one exception the sons of liberty persuaded some said coerced colonial merchants to boycott british goods until parliament repealed the stamp act.
the merchants showed little enthusiasm for such tactics but the threat of tar and feathers stimulated cooperation.
the boycott movement was in itself a masterful political innovation.
never before had a resistance movement organized itself so centrally around the market decisions of ordinary consumers.
the colonists depended on british imports the stamp act placed a tax on documents and printed matter newspapers marriage licenses wills cloth metal goods and ceramics and each year deeds even playing cards and dice.
the stamps like those shown here varied in denomination.
a tax they imported more consumer goods than they stamp affixed to a legal document or bill of sale signified that the required tax had been paid.
could possibly afford.
in this highly charged moral atmosphere one in which ordinary people position on the issue of the supremacy of parliament one that other talked constantly of conspiracy and corruption it is not surprising americans now trumpeted before their own assemblies.
no wonthat americans of different classes and backgrounds advocated a der francis bernard royal governor of massachusetts called the radical change in buying habits.
private acts suddenly became part virginia resolves an alarm bell of the public sphere.
personal excess threatened to contaminate not to be outdone by virginia massachusetts called a general the entire political community.
this logic explains the power of an meeting to protest grenvilles policy.
nine colonies sent representaappeal made in a boston newspaper save your money and you can tives to the stamp act congress that convened in new york city save your country in october 1765 it was the first intercolonial gathering held since the boycotts mobilized colonial women.
they were excluded the abortive albany congress of 1754 if nothing else the new confrom voting and civil office but such legal discrimination did not gress provided leaders from different regions with an opportunity mean that women were not part of the broader political culture.
to discuss common problems.
the delegates drafted petitions to the since wives and mothers spent their days involved with household king and parliament that restated the colonists belief that no taxes chores they assumed special responsibility to reform consumption should be imposed on them but with their own consent given perto root out luxury and to promote frugality.
indeed in this realm sonally or by their representatives the tone of the meeting was they possessed real power they monitored the ideological commitrestrained even conciliatory.
the congress studiously avoided any ment of the entire family.
throughout the colonies women altered mention of independence or disloyalty to the crown.
styles of dress made homespun cloth and shunned imported items resistance to the stamp act soon spread from the assemblies to on which parliament had placed a tax.
the streets.
by taxing deeds marriage licenses and playing cards the stamp act touched the lives of ordinary women and men.
anonymous failed attempts to save the empire artisans and seamen angered by parliaments apparent insensitivity and fearful that the statute would increase unemployment and povwhat most americans did not yet know after all communicaerty organized mass protests in the major colonial ports.
tion with britain required months was that in july grenville imperial politics played out on the streets of american cities had fallen from power.
this unexpected shift came about not as traditional rivalries between neighborhood youths and antibecause the king thought grenvilles policies inept but rather catholic sentiment suddenly was redirected against alleged parbecause george did not like the man.
his replacement as first lord liamentary oppression.
in boston the sons of liberty burned of the treasury lord rockingham was young inexperienced in effigy the local stamp distributor andrew oliver and when and terrified of public speaking a serious handicap to launchthat action failed to bring about his resignation they tore down ing a brilliant parliamentary career.
the rockinghamites as his one of his office buildings.
even after he resigned the mob nearly followers were called envisioned a prosperous empire founded demolished the elegant home of olivers close associate lieutenant on an expanding commerce and local government under the governor thomas hutchinson.
the violence frightened colonial gentle guidance of parliament.
rockingham wanted to repeal leaders yet evidence suggests that they encouraged the lower the stamp act but because of the shakiness of his own politiclasses to intimidate royal officials.
popular participation in these cal coalition he could not announce such a decision until it protests was an exciting experience for people who had traditionenjoyed broad national support.
he therefore urged merchants ally deferred to their social betters.
after 1765 it was impossible and manufacturers throughout england to petition parliament for either royal governors or patriot leaders to take for granted the for repeal of the act claiming that the american boycott support of ordinary men and women.
would soon drive them into bankruptcy and spark urban riots.
chapter 5 on myhistorylab eroding the bonds of empire steps toward independence read the document james otis the rights of the british colonies asserted and proved p 109 read the document benjamin franklin testimony against the stamp act 1766 p 111 listen to the audio file read the document thomas paine a freelance writer urges his readers to use common sense p 118 watch the video the american revolution as different americans saw it p 119 the liberty song p 112 fighting for independence read the document read the document boston gazette description of the boston massacre p 113 george r t hewes a retrospect on the boston tea party p 115 view the map the american revolution p 121 complete the assignment spains contribution to american independence p 122 indicates study plan media assignment the republican experiment contents and learning objectives defining republican culture pg.
131 strengthening federal authority pg.
141 what were the limits of equality in the republican society of the new united states.
what did the nationalists call for and how did they aim to achieve their initiatives.
living in the shadow of revolution pg.
132 we fought for this pg.
143 during the 1780s why were americans so sensitive to the dangers of aristocratic display.
why did constitutional delegates compromise on representation and slavery.
the states experiments in republicanism pg.
136 whose constitution.
struggle for ratification pg.
150 following independence why did the states insist on drafting written constitutions.
what issues separated federalists from antifederalists during debates over ratification.
stumbling toward a new national government pg.
137 feature essay the elusive constitution search for original intent why did many americans regard the articles of confederation as inadequate.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab chapter 6 the republican experiment as the meeting was concluding some delegates expressed concern about the absence in the constitution of a bill of rights.
such declarations had been included in most state constitutions and virginians such as george mason insisted that the states and their citizens needed explicit protection from possible excesses by the federal government.
while many delegates sympathized with masons appeal they noted that the hour was late and in any case that the proposed constitution provided sufficient security for individual rights.
during the hard battles over ratification the delegates to the convention may have regretted passing over the issue so lightly.
we the people the delegates adopted an ingenious procedure for ratification.
instead of submitting the constitution to the various state legislatures all of which had a vested interest in maintaining the status quo and most of which had two houses either of which could block approval they called for the election of thirteen state conventions especially chosen to review the new federal government.
the delegates may have picked up this idea from the massachusetts experiment of 1780 moreover the constitution would take effect after the assent of only nine states.
there was no danger therefore that the proposed system would fail simply because a single state like rhode island withheld approval.
the convention asked gouverneur morris of pennsylvania a delegate noted for his urbanity to make final stylistic changes in the wording of the constitution.
when morris examined the working draft he discovered that it spoke of the collection of states forming a new government.
this wording presented problems.
ratification required only nine states.
no one knew whether all the states would accept the constitution and if not which nine would.
a strong possibility existed that several new england states would reject the document.
morriss brilliant phrase we the people of the united states eliminated this difficulty.
the new nation was a republic of the people not of the states.
on september 17 thirty nine men signed the constitution.
a few members of the convention like mason could not support the document.
others had already gone home.
for more than three months madison had served as the conventions driving intellectual force.
he now generously summarized the experience there never was an assembly of men charged with a great and arduous trust who were more pure in their motives or more exclusively or anxiously devoted to the object committed to them whose constitution.
struggle for ratification what issues separated federalists from antifederalists during debates over ratification.
supporters of the constitution recognized that ratification would not be easy.
after all the convention had been authorized only to revise the articles but instead it produced a new plan that fundamentally altered relations between the states and the central government.
the delegates dutifully dispatched copies of the constitution to the congress of confederation then meeting in new york city and that powerless body referred the document to the separate states without any specific recommendation.
the fight for ratification had begun.
federalists and antifederalists proponents of the constitution enjoyed great advantages over the unorganized opposition.
in the contest for ratification they took no chances.
their most astute move was the adoption of the label federalist.
the term cleverly suggested that they stood for a confederation of states rather than for the creation of a supreme national authority.
in fact they envisioned the creation of a strong centralized national government capable of fielding a formidable army.
critics of the constitution who tended to be somewhat poorer less urban and less well educated than their opponents cried foul but there was little they could do.
they were stuck with the name antifederalist a misleading term that made their cause seem a rejection of the very notion of a federation of the states.
the federalists recruited the most prominent public figures of the day.
in every state convention speakers favoring the constitution were more polished and more fully prepared than were their opponents.
in new york the campaign to win ratification sparked publication of the federalist a brilliant series of essays written by madison hamilton and jay during the fall and winter of 1787 and 1788 the nations newspapers threw themselves overwhelmingly behind the new government.
in fact few journals even bothered to carry antifederalist writings.
in some states the federalists adopted tactics of questionable propriety in order to gain ratification.
in pennsylvania for example they achieved a legal quorum for a crucial vote by dragging several opposition delegates into the meeting from the streets.
in new york hamilton intimidated upstate antifederalists with threats that new york city would secede from the state unless the state ratified the constitution.
in these battles the antifederalists articulated a political philosophy that had broad popular appeal.
they spoke the language of the commonwealthmen see chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 read the document proclamation of neutrality 1793 the execution of louis xvi by french revolutionaries served to deepen the growing political division in america.
although they deplored the excesses of the reign of terror jeffersonian republicans continued to support the french people.
federalists feared that the violence and lawlessness would spread to the united states.
such actions clearly violated u s neutrality and invited british retaliation.
when u s government officials warned gent to desist he threatened to take his appeal directly to the american people who presumably loved france more than did members of washingtons administration.
this confrontation particularly embarrassed jefferson the most outspoken pro french member of the cabinet.
he described gent as hot headed all imagination no judgment passionate disrespectful and even indecent towards the president washington did not wait to discover whether the treaties of 1778 were still in force.
before he had formally received the impudent french minister the president issued a proclamation of neutrality april 22.
ironically after gent learned that the jacobins intended to cut off his head if he returned to france he requested asylum married into an extremely wealthy family and spent the remainder of his life in new york.
jays treaty sparks domestic unrest great britain failed to take advantage of gents insolence.
instead it pushed the united states to the brink of war.
british forts in the northwest territory remained a constant source of tension.
in june 1793 a new element was added.
the london government blockaded french ports to neutral shipping and in november its navy captured several hundred american vessels trading in the french west indies.
the british had not even bothered to give the united states advance warning of a change in policy.
outraged members of congress especially those who identified with jefferson and madison demanded retaliation an embargo a stoppage of debt payment even war.
before this rhetoric produced armed struggle washington made one final effort to preserve peace.
in may 1794 he sent chief justice john jay to london to negotiate a formidable list of grievances.
the effort resulted in a political humiliation known simply as jays treaty.
jays main objectives were removal of the british forts on u s territory payment for ships taken in the west indies improved commercial relations and acceptance of the american definition of neutral rights.
jeffersons supporters by now openly called the republican interest anticipated a treaty favorable to the united states.
after all they explained the war with france had not gone well for great britain and the british people were surely desperate for american foodstuffs.
even before jay departed however his mission stood charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs little chance of success.
hamilton anxious as ever to placate the british had already secretly informed british officials that the united states would compromise on most issues.
not surprisingly when jay reached london he encountered polite but firm resistance.
the chief justice did persuade the british to abandon their frontier posts and to allow small american ships to trade in the british west indies but they rejected out of hand the u s position on neutral rights.
the royal navy would continue to search american vessels on the high seas for contraband and to impress sailors suspected of being british citizens.
moreover there would be no compensation for the ships seized in 1793 until the americans paid british merchants for debts contracted before the revolution.
and to the particular annoyance of southerners not a word was said about the slaves the british army had carried off at the conclusion of the war.
while jay salvaged the peace he appeared to have betrayed the national interest.
news of jays treaty perhaps more correctly called hamiltons treaty produced an angry outcry in the nations capital.
even washington was apprehensive.
he submitted the document to the senate without recommending ratification a sign that the president was not entirely happy with the results of jays mission.
after an extremely bitter debate the upper house controlled by federalists accepted a revised version of the treaty june 1795.
the vote was 20 to 10 a bare two thirds majority.
the details of the jay agreement soon leaked to the press.
this was an important moment in american political history.
the popular journals sparked a firestorm of objection.
throughout the country people who had generally been apathetic about national politics were swept up in a wave of protest.
urban mobs condemned jays alleged sellout rural settlers burned him in effigy.
jay jokingly told friends he could find his way across the country simply by following the light of those fires.
southerners announced they would not pay prerevolutionary debts to british merchants.
the virginia legislature proposed a constitutional amendment reducing the senates role in the treaty making process.
as fisher ames a federalist congressman noted darkly these little whirlwinds of dry leaves and dirt portend a hurricane his prediction proved accurate.
the storm broke in the house of representatives.
republican congressmen led by madison thought they could stop jays treaty by refusing to appropriate funds for its implementation.
as part of their plan they demanded that washington show the house state papers relating to jays mission.
the challenge raised complex issues of constitutional law.
the house for example was claiming a voice in treaty ratification a power explicitly reserved to the senate.
second there was the question of executive secrecy in the interest of national security.
could the president withhold information from the public.
according to washington as well as all subsequent presidents the answer was yes.
he took the occasion to lecture the rebellious representatives that the nature of foreign negotiations requires caution and their success must often depend on secrecy the president still had a trump card to play.
he raised the possibility that the house was really contemplating his impeachment.
such an action was of course unthinkable.
even criticizing washington in public was politically dangerous and as soon as he redefined the issue before congress petitions supporting the president flooded into the nations capital.
the maryland read the document the jay treaty 1794 john jay 1745 1829 was a successful lawyer and politician from new york.
he served in the continental congress during the revolution co authored the federalist papers with james madison and alexander hamilton and later became the first chief justice of the u s supreme court.
legislature for example declared its unabated reliance on the integrity judgment and patriotism of the president of the united states a statement that clearly called into question the patriotism of certain republican congressmen.
the federalists won a stunning tactical victory over the opposition.
had a less popular man than washington occupied the presidency however they would not have fared so well.
the division between the two parties was beyond repair.
the republicans labeled the federalists the british party the federalists believed that the republicans were in league with the french.
by the time jays treaty became law june 14 1795 the two giants of washingtons first cabinet had retired.
late in 1793 jefferson returned to his virginia plantation monticello where despite his separation from day to day political affairs he remained the chief spokesman for the republican party.
his rival hamilton left the treasury in january 1795 to practice law in new york city.
he maintained close ties with important federalist officials and even more than jefferson hamilton concerned himself with the details of party organization.
complete the assignment defense of superiority the impact of nationalism on perceptions of the environment on myhistorylab feature essay n ationalism promotes patriotism.
however these expressions of pride can turn malicious.
the physical environment of a country can be seen as giving the people who live there special attributes.
when claims of superiority seem to have this sort of seemingly scientific justification the rhetoric of nationalism can become dangerous often outright racist.
such a situation developed during the earliest years of the american republic.
even before the revolution respected scientists such as benjamin franklin resented disparaging remarks about american inferiority.
europeans accepted as fact the notion that new world animals and humans were smaller slower and less clever than those found in the old world.
franklin dismissed the theory as nonsense and at a dinner party in paris he took the opportunity to demonstrate that if size really mattered then the americans were bigger.
when the abbe raynal a french naturalist announced that everything american was substandard compared to european experience franklin challenged his host to a test.
all the americans at the table stood so did the french.
franklin noted with satisfaction that the americans had the finest stature and form raynal he observed was a mere shrimp although franklin may have won the battle of the dinner table other americans still worried that new world creatures fell short of european standards.
the seeds of doubt could be traced to a widely read scientific treatise entitled histoire naturelle the first volumes of which appeared in 1749 defense of superiority the impact of nationalism on perceptions of the environment the author french philosopher comte de buffon argued that the climate of north america produced animals of smaller size than those encountered in the old world.
as evidence buffon cited the absence of elephants lions and other large beasts in the new world.
the only new world creatures that exceeded their old world counterparts in size he declared were the toads and snakes that thrived in north americas abundant swamps.
worse yet buffon asserted that americas climate caused animals found in europe to shrink and diminish when transported to the new world.
for buffon native americans were a case in point.
on the basis of superficial reports of indian weakness buffon announced that conditions in the new world were pernicious to men who are degenerated debilitated and vitiated in a surprising manner in all parts of their organization the implications of this idea were not lost on people such as franklin.
if the american environment sapped the indians of vitality it was only a matter a comparative view of the quadrupeds of europe and america bear red deer beaver otter cow europe lb.
153 7 288 8 18 5 8 9 763 0 america lb.
410 0 273 0 45 0 12 0 2500 0 source adapted from thomas jefferson notes on the state of virginia 1787.
illustration of frogs from comte de buffons histoire naturelle 1749 buffon declared that in the damp american climate only cold blooded animals such as snakes and frogs flourished and grew larger than their european counterparts.
of time until european settlers who breathed the same air drank the same water and cultivated the same land succumbed to sloth.
one of buffons followers counseled those colonists condemned to live in such an unpromising environment to know how to make themselves happy.
with mediocrity leaving intellectual greatness to those who had wisely remained in the old world.
american anger over buffons theory came to a boil following the american revolution.
the new nation had its honor to defend.
if as the french scientist had maintained the north american climate caused the physical mental and moral abilities of humans to decline then the republican experiment of the young united states seemed destined to fail.
having already asserted that all men are created equal in the declaration of independence thomas jefferson set out to prove american equality through science.
an uncompromising patriot he devoted himself almost entirely to the defense of the fledgling republic spending much of the 1780s poring over accounts of american animals in search of holes in buffons theory.
jefferson published his results in 1785 in notes on the state of virginia he countered buffon with a lengthy series of tables comparing the weight of european and american animals.
not surprisingly jefferson always tipped the scale in favor of the new world.
while europes puny flying squirrels weighed only 2 2 pounds america could boast of impressive 4 pound squirrels.
american bears were three times fatter than old world bears.
and most telling america had once been the home of huge ice age animals called woolly mammoths.
they looked a lot like elephants and one recently unearthed in kentucky matched the best old world elephants in terms of size.
jefferson did not stop there.
determined to use science to improve the international reputation of the united states jefferson commissioned the governor of new hampshire to kill a giant moose which was then shipped to paris as a present for buffon.
the plan miscarried.
while hunters managed to shoot the moose and drag it from the forest the unrefrigerated voyage to france made for an extremely foul smelling gift.
for jefferson the unlucky mooses decay was a minor problem since by his own reasoning he had put to rest misguided european ideas about animal deficiency in the new american republic.
turning from moose to men jefferson took a step that transformed a harmless squabble over the weight of squirrels into something much more alarming.
using the latest scientific research jefferson claimed that climate had almost no effect on human beings.
instead a persons race determined his or her size vitality and intelligence.
in this scheme european americans and native americans were equal.
and according to jefferson both were vastly superior to africans.
a celebration of national pride had now become a defense of racism.
to make his case jefferson first defended native americans against buffons assertions of climate induced inferiority.
buffon had suggested that indians beardless faces and lack of ardour for their female demonstrated their physical inadequacy in comparison to manly europeans.
in response jefferson outlined the practice of face plucking.
with them it is disgraceful to be hairy he claimed of native americans because many believed it likens them to hogs moreover the indians did not value french style womanizing.
jefferson explained that their soul is wholly bent upon war a trait that procures them glory among men and makes them the admiration of women differences between whites and indians could be attributed not to the environment but to culture.
indeed he saw the two groups as a single race so closely related that he recommended letting them intermix and become one people jefferson rejected completely any notion that africans in america could be part of this one people an unbridgeable biological gulf separated whites and indians groups that jefferson lumped together as homo sapiens europaeus from blacks.
jefferson argued that while europeans and native americans produced fine arts and engaged in brilliant oratory african slaves exhibited no skill in painting or sculpture and never uttered a thought above the level of plain narration with only anecdotal evidence to support his claims jefferson concluded that blacks were inferior to the whites in the endowments of both body and mind according to jefferson the harsh truth was that whether found in africa on carolina rice plantations or on the streets of boston africans were a different species of the same genus they were a separate race unworthy of genuine political and social equality.
during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries american nationalists seized upon jeffersons ideas seeing notes on the state of virginia as a blueprint for a republican society grounded in rational science and dedicated to racial inequality.
in a world still dominated by powerful monarchies and old world cultures americans of all european backgrounds took comfort in being equal to each other and superior to african americans.
in an atmosphere of strident nationalism few were willing to explain differences between whites and blacks as culturally conditioned.
there existed in jeffersons words a real distinction which nature has made white americans were destined by nature to be free while enslaved blacks whose labor formed the backbone of the whites economy must accept their lesser place in the nations future.
jeffersons scientific thinking about race inspired by national insecurity and a frenchmans musing on new world toads promoted a divisiveness in american society that continues to trouble the nation.
questions for discussion 1 why were americans such as thomas jefferson so defensive about the size of american animals.
2 what was the relationship between science and racism in jeffersons thinking.
chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 hamiltons wing of the party were called counseled the president to prepare for all out war hoping that war would purge the united states of french influence.
adams was not persuaded to escalate the conflict.
he dispatched a special commission in a final attempt to remove the sources of antagonism.
this famous negotiating team consisted of charles pinckney john marshall and elbridge gerry.
they were instructed to obtain compensation for the ships seized by french privateers as well as release from the treaties of 1778 the commission was shocked by the outrageous treatment it received in france.
instead of dealing directly with talleyrand the minister of foreign relations they met with obscure intermediaries who demanded a huge bribe.
the commission reported that talleyrand would not open negotiations unless he was given 250 000.
in addition the french government expected a loan of millions of dollars.
the americans refused to play this insulting game.
pinckney angrily sputtered no no not a sixpence and with marshall he returned to the united states.
when they arrived home marshall offered his much quoted toast millions for defense but not one cent for tribute diplomatic humiliation set off a domestic political explosion.
when adams presented the commissions official correspondence before congress the names of talleyrands lackeys were labeled x y and z the federalists burst out with a war cry.
at last they would be able to even old scores with the republicans.
in april 1798 a federalist newspaper in new york city announced ominously that any american who refused to censure france must have a soul black enough to be fit for treasons strategems and spoils rumors of conspiracy referred to as the xyz affair spread throughout the country.
personal friendships between republicans and federalists were shattered.
jefferson described the tense political atmosphere in a letter to an old colleague you and i have formerly seen warm debates and high political passions.
but gentlemen of different politics would then speak to each other and separate the business of the senate from that of society.
it is not so now.
men who have been intimate all their lives cross the streets to avoid meeting and turn their heads another way lest they should be obliged to touch their hats he would do so only on condition that adams appoint hamilton as second in command.
this demand placed the president in a terrible dilemma.
several revolutionary veterans henry knox for example outranked hamilton.
moreover the former secretary of the treasury had consistently undermined adamss authority and to give hamilton a position of real power in the government seemed awkward at best.
when washington insisted however adams was forced to support hamilton.
the chief of the high federalists threw himself into the task of recruiting and supplying the troops.
no detail escaped his attention.
he and secretary of war mchenry made certain that in this political army only loyal federalists received commissions.
they even denied adamss son in law a post.
the entire enterprise took on an air of unreality.
hamilton longed for military glory and he may have contemplated attacking spains latin american colonies.
his driving obsession however was the restoration of political order.
no doubt he agreed with a federalist senator from connecticut who predicted that the republicans never will yield till violence is introduced we must have a partial civil war.
and the bayonet must convince some who are beyond the reach of other arguments hamilton should not have treated adams with such open contempt.
after all the massachusetts statesman was still the president and without presidential cooperation hamilton could not fulfill his grand military ambitions.
yet whenever pressing questions concerning the army arose adams was nowhere to be found.
he let commissions lie on his desk unsigned he took overlong vacations to new england.
he made it quite clear his first love was the navy.
in may 1798 the president persuaded congress to establish the navy department.
for this new cabinet position he selected benjamin stoddert a person who did not take orders from hamilton.
moreover adams further infuriated the high federalists by refusing to ask congress for a formal declaration of war.
when they pressed him adams threatened to resign making jefferson president.
as the weeks passed the american people increasingly regarded the idle army as an expensive extravagance.
crushing political dissent silencing political opposition the alien and sedition acts in the spring of 1798 high federalists assumed that it was just a matter of time until adams asked congress for a formal declaration of war.
in the meantime they pushed for a general rearmament new fighting ships additional harbor fortifications and most important a greatly expanded u s army.
about the need for land forces adams remained understandably skeptical.
he saw no likelihood of french invasion.
the president missed the political point.
the army the federalists wanted was intended not to thwart french aggression but to stifle internal opposition.
indeed militant federalists used the xyz affair as the occasion to institute what jefferson termed the reign of witches the threat to the republicans was not simply a figment of the vice presidents overwrought imagination.
when theodore sedgwick now a federalist senator from massachusetts first learned of the commissions failure he observed in words that capture the high federalists vindictiveness it will afford a glorious opportunity to destroy faction.
improve it during the summer of 1798 a provisional army gradually came into existence.
george washington agreed to lead the troops but the federalists did not rely solely on the army to crush political dissent.
during the summer of 1798 the partys majority in congress passed a group of bills known collectively as the alien and sedition acts.
this legislation authorized the use of federal courts and the powers of the presidency to silence the republicans.
the acts were born of fear and vindictiveness and in their efforts to punish the followers of jefferson the federalists created the nations first major crisis over civil liberties.
congress drew up three separate alien acts.
the first the alien enemies law vested the president with extraordinary wartime powers.
on his own authority he could detain or deport citizens of nations with which the united states was at war and who behaved in a manner he thought suspicious.
since adams refused to ask for a declaration of war this legislation never went into effect.
a second act the alien law empowered the president to expel any foreigner from the united states simply by executive decree.
congress limited the acts to two years and while adams did not attempt to enforce them the mere threat of arrest caused some frenchmen to flee the country.
the third act the naturalization law was the most flagrantly political of the adams presidency read the document the alien and sedition acts 1798 created martyrs the actions of the administration persuaded republicans that the survival of free government was at stake.
time was running out.
there is no event jefferson warned.
however atrocious which may not be expected kentucky and virginia resolutions in the early years of the republic political dissent sometimes escalated to physical violence.
this fistfight took place on the floor of congress february 15 1798 the combatants are republican matthew lyon and federalist roger griswold.
the act established a fourteen year probationary period before foreigners could apply for full u s citizenship.
federalists recognized that recent immigrants especially the irish tended to vote republican.
the naturalization law therefore was designed to keep hordes of wild irishmen away from the polls for as long as possible.
the sedition law struck at the heart of free political exchange.
it defined criticism of the u s government as criminal libel citizens found guilty by a jury were subject to fines and imprisonment.
congress entrusted enforcement of the act to the federal courts.
republicans were justly worried that the sedition law undermined rights guaranteed by the first amendment.
when they protested however the high federalists dismissed their complaints.
the constitution they declared did not condone the most groundless and malignant lies striking at the safety and existence of the nation they were determined to shut down the opposition press and were willing to give the government what seemed almost dictatorial powers to achieve that end.
the jeffersonians also expressed concern over the federal judiciarys expanded role in punishing sedition.
they believed such matters were best left to state officials.
americans living in widely scattered regions of the country soon witnessed political repression firsthand.
district courts staffed by federalist appointees indicted seventeen people for criticizing the government.
several cases were absurd.
in newark new jersey for example a drunkard staggered out of a tavern to watch a sixteen gun salute fired in honor of president adams.
when the man expressed the hope a cannonball might lodge in adamss ample posterior he was arrested.
no wonder a new york city journal declared that joking may be very dangerous even to a free country the federal courts had become political tools.
while the fumbling efforts at enforcement of the sedition law did not silence opposition indeed they sparked even greater criticism and by the fall of 1798 jefferson and madison were convinced that the federalists envisioned the creation of a police state.
according to madison the sedition law ought to produce universal alarm it threatened the free communication of ideas that he deemed the only effectual guardian of every other right some extreme republicans such as john taylor of virginia recommended secession from the union others advocated armed resistance.
but jefferson wisely counseled against such extreme strategies.
this is not the kind of opposition the american people will permit he reminded his desperate supporters.
the last best hope for american freedom lay in the state legislatures.
as the crisis deepened jefferson and madison drafted separate protests known as the kentucky and virginia resolutions.
both statements vigorously defended the right of individual state assemblies to interpret the constitutionality of federal law.
jefferson wrote the kentucky resolutions in november 1798 and in an outburst of partisan anger he flirted with a doctrine of nullification as dangerous to the survival of the united states as anything advanced by hamilton and his high federalist friends.
in the kentucky resolutions jefferson described the federal union as a compact.
the states transferred certain explicit powers to the national government but in his opinion they retained full authority over all matters not specifically mentioned in the constitution.
jefferson rejected hamiltons broad interpretation of the general welfare clause.
every state jefferson argued has a natural right in cases not within the compact.
to nullify of their own authority all assumptions of power by others within their limits carried to an extreme this logic could have led to the breakup of the federal government and in 1798 kentucky legislators were not prepared to take such a radical stance.
while they diluted jeffersons prose they fully accepted his belief that the alien and sedition acts were unconstitutional and ought to be repealed.
when madison drafted the virginia resolutions in december he took a stand more temperate than jeffersons.
madison urged the states to defend the rights of the american people but he resisted the notion that a single state legislature could or should have the authority to overthrow federal law.
adamss finest hour in february 1799 president adams belatedly declared his independence from the hamiltonian wing of the federalist party.
throughout the confrontation with france adams had shown little enthusiasm for war.
following the xyz debacle he began to receive informal reports that talleyrand had changed his tune.
the french foreign minister told elbridge gerry and other americans that the bribery episode had been an unfortunate misunderstanding and that if the united states sent new representatives he was prepared to negotiate in good faith.
the high federalists ridiculed this report.
chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision farmers followed a backbreaking work routine that did not differ substantially from that of their parents and grandparents.
except for the cotton gin important chemical and mechanical inventions did not appear in the fields for another generation.
the merchant marine represented an equally important element in americas preindustrial economy.
at the turn of the century ships flying the stars and stripes transported a large share of the worlds trade.
merchants in boston new york and philadelphia received handsome profits from such commerce.
their vessels provided essential links between european countries and their caribbean colonies.
france for example relied heavily on american transport for its sugar.
these lucrative transactions coupled with the export of domestic staples especially cotton generated impressive fortunes.
between 1793 and 1807 the year jefferson imposed the embargo against britain and france american commerce enjoyed a more than 300 percent increase in the value of exports and in net earnings.
unfortunately the boom did not last.
the success of the carrying trade depended in large measure on friendly relations between the united states and the major european powers.
when england and france began seizing american ships as they both did after 1805 national prosperity suffered.
the cities of jeffersonian america functioned chiefly as depots for international trade.
only about 7 percent of the nations population lived in urban centers and most of these people owed their livelihoods either directly or indirectly to the carrying trade.
recent studies revealed that several major port cities of the early republic new york philadelphia and baltimore for example had some of the highest population densities ever recorded in this countrys history.
in 1800 more than forty thousand new yorkers crowded into an area of only 1 5 square miles in philadelphia some forty six thousand people were packed into less than one square mile.
as one historian explained the cities contained disproportionate numbers of young white males free black men and women and white widows.
these people had below average incomes and also an increasing propensity to live on their own rather than as dependents as is common today many city dwellers rented living space and since the demand for housing exceeded the supply the rents were high.
the booming carrying trade may actually have retarded the industrialization of the united states.
the lure of large profits drew investment capital a scarce resource in a developing society into commerce.
by contrast manufacturing seemed too risky.
one contemporary complained the brilliant prospects held out by commerce caused our citizens to neglect the mechanical and manufacturing branches of industry this man may have exaggerated slightly to make his point.
samuel slater an english born designer of textile machinery did establish several cotton spinning mills in new england but until the 1820s these plants employed only a small number of workers.
in fact during this period far more cloth was produced in individual households than in factories.
another farsighted inventor robert fulton sailed the first american steamship up the hudson river in 1807 in time this marvelous innovation opened new markets for before the industrial revolution national prosperity depended on commercial capitalism.
jonathan budingtons painting of cannon house and wharf 1792 the busy dock area of lower manhattan reflects the robust maritime trade of the new republic.
jefferson as president domestic manufacturers especially in the west.
at the end of the war of 1812 however few people anticipated how greatly power generated by fossil fuel would eventually transform the character of the american economy.
ordinary workers often felt threatened by the new machines.
skilled artisans who had spent years mastering a trade and who took pride in producing an object that expressed their own personalities found the industrial workplace alienating.
moreover they rightly feared that innovative technology designed to achieve greater efficiency might throw traditional craftspeople out of work or if not that transform independent entrepreneurs into dependent wage laborers.
one new yorker for example writing in the gazette and general advertiser in 1801 warned tradespeople to be on guard against those who will screw down the wages to the last thread.
and destroy the independent spirit so distinguished at present in our mechanics and so useful in republics read the document margaret bayard smith reflections upon meeting jefferson jefferson as president how did practical politics challenge jeffersons political principles.
the district of columbia seemed an appropriate capital for a republican president.
at the time of jeffersons first inauguration washington was still an isolated rural village a far cry from the crowded centers of philadelphia and new york.
jefferson fit comfortably into washington society.
he despised formal ceremony and sometimes shocked foreign dignitaries by meeting them in his slippers or a threadbare jacket.
he spent as much time as his official duties allowed in reading and reflection.
isaac one of jeffersons slaves recounted old master had abundance of books sometimes would have twenty of em down on the floor at once read fust one then tother the president was a poor public speaker.
he wisely refused to deliver annual addresses before congress.
in personal conversation however jefferson exuded considerable charm.
his dinner parties were major intellectual as well as social events and in this forum the president regaled politicians with his knowledge of literature philosophy and science.
according to margaret bayard smith the wife of a congressman the president has more ease than grace all the winning softness of politeness without the artificial polish of courts notwithstanding his commitment to the life of the mind jefferson was a politician to the core.
he ran for the presidency in order to achieve specific goals the reduction of the size and cost of federal government the repeal of obnoxious federalist legislation such as the alien and sedition acts and the maintenance of international peace.
to accomplish his program jefferson realized he needed the full cooperation of congressional republicans some of whom were fiercely independent men.
over such figures jefferson exercised political mastery.
he established close ties with the leaders of both houses of congress and while he seldom announced his plans in public he made certain his legislative lieutenants knew exactly what he desired.
contemporaries who described jefferson as a weak president and some federalists did just that did not read the scores of memoranda he sent to political friends or witness the margaret bayard smith wrote about life in washington d c during its early years as the nations capital.
she was a friend of thomas jefferson through her husband samuel harrison smith.
informal meetings he held at the executive mansion with important republicans.
in two terms as president jefferson never had to veto a single act of congress.
jefferson carefully selected the members of his cabinet.
during washingtons administration he had witnessed even provoked severe infighting as president he nominated only those who enthusiastically supported his programs.
james madison the leading figure at the constitutional convention became secretary of state.
for the treasury jefferson chose albert gallatin a swiss born financier who understood the complexities of the federal budget.
if i had the universe to choose from the president announced i could not change one of my associates to my better satisfaction jeffersonian reforms a top priority of the new government was cutting the national debt.
throughout american history presidents have advocated such reductions but such rhetoric has seldom yielded tangible chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision results.
jefferson succeeded.
he and gallatin regarded a large federal deficit as dangerous to the health of republican institutions.
in fact both men associated debt with alexander hamiltons federalist financial programs measures they considered harmful to republicanism.
jefferson claimed that legislators elected by the current generation did not have the right to mortgage the future of unborn americans.
jefferson also wanted to diminish the activities of the federal government.
he urged congress to repeal all direct taxes including the tax that had sparked the whiskey rebellion in 1794 secretary gallatin linked federal income to the carrying trade.
he calculated that the entire cost of national government could be borne by customs receipts.
as long as commerce flourished revenues provided sufficient sums.
when international war closed foreign markets however the flow of funds dried up.
to help pay the debt inherited from the adams administration jefferson ordered substantial cuts in the national budget.
the president closed several american embassies in europe.
he also slashed military spending.
in his first term jefferson reduced the size of the u s army by 50 percent.
this decision left only three thousand soldiers to guard the entire frontier.
in addition he retired a majority of the navys warships.
when new englanders claimed the cuts left the country defenseless jefferson countered with a glib argument.
as ships of the u s navy sailed the worlds oceans he claimed they were liable to provoke hostilities perhaps even war hence by reducing the size of the fleet he promoted peace.
more than budgetary considerations prompted jeffersons military reductions.
he was deeply suspicious of standing armies.
in the event of foreign attack he reasoned the militia would rise in defense of the republic.
no doubt his experiences during the revolution influenced his thinking on military affairs for in 1776 an aroused populace had taken up arms against the british.
to ensure that the citizen soldiers would receive professional leadership in battle jefferson created the army corps of engineers and the military academy at west point in 1802 political patronage was a great burden to the new president.
loyal republicans throughout the united states had worked hard for jeffersons victory and as soon as he took office they stormed the executive mansion seeking federal employment.
while the president controlled several hundred jobs he refused to dismiss all the federalists.
to be sure he acted quickly to remove the socalled midnight appointees highly partisan selections that adams had made after learning of jeffersons election.
but to transform federal hiring into an undisciplined spoils system especially at the highest levels of the federal bureaucracy seemed to jefferson to be shortsighted.
moderate federalists might be converted to the republican party and in any case there was a good chance they possessed the expertise needed to run the government.
at the end of his first term half of the people holding office were appointees of washington and adams.
jeffersons political moderation helped hasten the demise of the federalist party.
this loose organization had nearly destroyed itself during the election of 1800 and following adamss defeat prominent federalist spokesmen such as fisher ames and john jay withdrew from national affairs.
they refused to adopt the popular forms of campaigning that the republicans had developed so successfully during the late 1790s.
the mere prospect of flattering the common people was odious enough to drive some federalists into political retirement.
many of them also sensed that national expansion worked against their interests.
the creation of new states and congressional reapportionment inevitably seemed to increase the number of republican representatives in washington.
by 1805 the federalists retained only a few seats in new england and delaware.
the power of the jefferson administration confessed john quincy adams in 1802 rests upon the support of a much stronger majority of the people throughout the union than the former administrations ever possessed since the first establishment of the constitution the louisiana purchase when jefferson first took office he was confident that louisiana as well as florida would eventually become part of the united states.
after all spain owned the territory and jefferson assumed he could persuade the rulers of that notoriously weak nation to sell their colonies.
if that peaceful strategy failed the president was prepared to threaten forcible occupation.
in may 1801 however prospects for the easy or inevitable acquisition of louisiana suddenly darkened.
jefferson learned that spain had secretly transferred title to the entire region to france its powerful northern neighbor.
to make matters worse the french leader napoleon seemed intent on reestablishing an empire in north america.
even as jefferson sought additional information concerning the details of the transfer napoleon was dispatching a large army to put down a rebellion in frances sugar rich caribbean colony haiti.
from that island stronghold in the west indies french troops could occupy new orleans and close the mississippi river to american trade.
a sense of crisis enveloped washington.
some congressmen urged jefferson to prepare for war against france.
tensions increased when the spanish officials who still governed new orleans announced the closing of that port to american commerce october 1802.
jefferson and his advisers assumed that the spanish had acted on orders from france but despite this serious provocation the president preferred negotiations to war.
in january 1803 he asked james monroe a loyal republican from virginia to join the american minister robert livingston in paris.
the president instructed the two men to explore the possibility of purchasing the city of new orleans.
lest they underestimate the importance of their diplomatic mission jefferson reminded them there is on the globe one single spot the possessor of which is our natural and habitual enemy.
it is new orleans if livingston and monroe failed jefferson realized he would be forced to turn to great britain for military assistance.
dependence on that country seemed repellent but he recognized that as soon as french troops moved into louisiana we must marry ourselves to the british fleet and nation by the time monroe joined livingston in france napoleon had lost interest in establishing an american empire.
the army he sent to haiti succumbed to tropical diseases.
by the end of 1802 more than thirty thousand veteran troops had died.
in a fit of disgust napoleon announced damn sugar damn coffee damn colonies.
i renounce louisiana the diplomats from the united states knew nothing of these developments.
they were taken by complete jefferson as president view the closer look co lumbia r map of louisiana purchase 1803 ft mandan winter quarters 1804 1805 lewiss return ea t la ke pa na indiana terr.
ohio md m d d md.
ohio r siian ana louisiana h hase purchase mass.
r i conn n j n j del.
d c va st s t louis ky n c s p a mis siss ippi r r ad o o mis in natural bo und ary tenn s c mississippi terr.
ga new ne n ew orlea e orleans orleanss o ri atlantic ocean spa sp s pa p an nis ni iis sh spanish fl lori rid da florida gulf of mexico d an gr e louisiana purchase vt n h.
u ri r so w ns ntai mou e r part of mass.
n y y ck ro n l co maine s rn retu clark s oregon country pacific ocean gr st l aw re n ft clatsop winter quarters 1805 1806 ce r.
british north america canada clark route of lewis and clar rk 500 miles 500 kilometers the louisiana purchase and the route of lewis and clark not until lewis and clark had explored the far west did citizens of the united states realize just how much territory jefferson had acquired through the louisiana purchase.
surprise therefore when they learned that talleyrand the french minister for foreign relations had offered to sell the entire louisiana territory in april 1803 for only 15 million the americans doubled the size of the united states with the louisiana purchase.
in fact livingston and monroe were not certain how much land they had actually purchased.
when they asked talleyrand whether the deal included florida he responded ambiguously you have made a noble bargain for yourselves and i suppose you will make the most of it even at that moment livingston realized that the transaction would alter the course of american history.
from this day he wrote the united states take their place among the powers of first rank the american people responded enthusiastically to news of the louisiana purchase.
the only criticism came from a few disgruntled federalists in new england who thought the united states was already too large.
jefferson of course was immensely relieved.
the nation had avoided war with france.
nevertheless he worried that the purchase might be unconstitutional.
the president pointed out that the constitution did not specifically authorize the acquisition of vast new territories and the incorporation of thousands of foreign citizens.
to escape this apparent legal dilemma jefferson proposed an amendment to the constitution.
few persons even his closest advisers shared the presidents scruples.
events in france soon forced jefferson to adopt a more pragmatic course.
when he heard that napoleon had become impatient for his money jefferson rushed the papers to a senate eager to ratify the agreement and nothing more was said about amending the constitution.
jeffersons fears about the incorporation of this new territory were not unwarranted.
the area that eventually became the state of louisiana 1812 contained many people of french and spanish background who possessed no familiarity with representative institutions.
their laws had been autocratic their local government corrupt.
to allow such persons to elect a representative assembly struck the president as dangerous.
he did not even know whether the population of louisiana would remain loyal to the united states.
chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision attack on the judges jeffersons controversy with the federal bench commenced the moment he became president.
the federalists realizing they would soon lose control over the executive branch had passed the judiciary act of 1801 this bill created several circuit courts and sixteen new judgeships.
through his midnight appointments adams had quickly filled these positions with stalwarts of the federalist party.
such blatantly partisan behavior angered jefferson.
in the courts he explained the federalists hoped to preserve their political influence and from that battery all the works of republicanism are to be beaten down and erased even more infuriating was adamss appointment of john marshall as the new chief justice.
this shrewd largely self educated virginian of federalist background whose training in the law consisted of a series of lectures he attended at the college of william and mary in 1780 was clearly a man who could hold his own against the new president.
in january 1802 jeffersons congressional allies called for repeal of the judiciary act.
in public debate they studiously avoided the obvious political issue.
the new circuit courts should be closed not only because they were staffed by federalists but also as they argued because they were needlessly expensive.
the judges did not hear enough cases to warrant continuance.
the federalists mounted an able defense.
the constitution they observed provided for the removal of federal judges only when they were found guilty of high crimes and misdemeanors.
by repealing the judiciary act the legislative branch would in effect be dismissing judges without a trial a clear violation of their constitutional rights.
this argument made little impression on the republican party.
in march the house following the senate voted for repeal.
while congress debated the judiciary act another battle erupted.
one of adamss midnight appointees william marbury complained that the new administration would not give him his commission for the office of justice of the peace for the district of columbia.
he sought redress before the supreme court demanding that the federal justices compel james madison the secretary of state to deliver the necessary papers.
when they learned that marshall had agreed to hear this case the republicans were furious.
apparently the chief justice wanted to provoke a confrontation with the executive branch.
marshall was too clever to jeopardize the independence of the supreme court over such a relatively minor issue.
in his celebrated marbury v madison decision february 1803 marshall berated the secretary of state for withholding marburys commission.
nevertheless he concluded that the supreme court did not possess jurisdiction over such matters.
poor marbury was out of luck.
the republicans proclaimed victory.
in fact they were so pleased with the outcome that they failed to examine the logic of marshalls decision.
he had ruled that part of the earlier act of congress the one on which marbury based his appeal was unconstitutional.
this was the first time the supreme court asserted its right to judge the constitutionality of congressional acts and while contemporaries did not fully appreciate the significance of marshalls doctrine marbury v madison later served as an important precedent for judicial review of federal statutes.
neither marburys defeat nor repeal of the judiciary act placated extreme republicans.
they insisted that federal judges should be made more responsive to the will of the people.
one solution short of electing federal judges was impeachment.
this clumsy device provided the legislature with a way of removing particularly offensive individuals.
early in 1803 john pickering an incompetent judge from new hampshire presented the republicans with a curious test case.
this federalist appointee suffered from alcoholism as well as insanity.
while his outrageous behavior on the bench embarrassed everyone pickering had not committed any high crimes against the u s government.
ignoring such legal niceties jeffersons congressional allies pushed for impeachment.
although the senate convicted pickering march 1804 many senators refused to compromise the letter of the constitution and were conspicuously absent on the day of the final vote.
jefferson was apparently so eager to purge the courts of federalists that he failed to heed these warnings.
by the spring of 1803 he had set his sights on a target far more important than john pickering.
in a baltimore newspaper the president stumbled on the transcript of a speech allegedly delivered before a federal grand jury.
the words seemed almost treasonous.
the person responsible read the document opinion for the supreme court for marbury v madison william marbury 1760 1835 was an american lawyer politician and banker.
in marbury v madision marbury sued the jefferson administration to follow through on a judges commission promised him by former president john adams.
marbury lost but his case established the doctrine of judicial review the supreme courts authority to declare laws unconstitutional.
jeffersons critics was samuel chase a justice of the supreme court who had frequently attacked republican policies.
jefferson leapt at the chance to remove chase from office.
in a matter of weeks the republicancontrolled house of representatives indicted chase.
chases trial before the u s senate was one of the most dramatic events in american legal history.
aaron burr the vice president organized the proceedings.
for reasons known only to himself burr redecorated the senate chamber so that it looked more like the british house of lords than the meeting place of a republican legislature.
in this luxurious setting chase and his lawyers conducted a masterful defense.
by contrast john randolph the congressman who served as chief prosecutor behaved in an erratic manner betraying repeatedly his ignorance of relevant points of law.
while most republican senators personally disliked the arrogant chase they refused to expand the constitutional definition of impeachable offenses to suit randolphs argument and on march 1 1805 the senate acquitted the justice of all charges.
the experience apparently convinced chase of the need for greater moderation.
after returning to the federal bench he refrained from attacking republican policies.
his jeffersonian opponents also learned something important.
american politicians did not like tampering with the constitution in order to get rid of specific judges even an imprudent one like chase.
politics of desperation the collapse of the federalists on the national level encouraged dissension within the republican party.
extremists in congress insisted on monopolizing the presidents ear and when he listened to political moderates they rebelled.
the members of the most vociferous faction called themselves the good old republicans the newspapers labeled them the tertium quids loosely translated as nothings or no accounts during jeffersons second term the quids argued that the presidents policies foreign and domestic sacrificed virtue for pragmatism.
their chief spokesmen were two members from virginia john randolph and john taylor of caroline the name of his plantation both of whom were convinced that jefferson had betrayed the republican purity of the founders.
they both despised commercial capitalism.
taylor urged americans to return to a simple agrarian way of life.
randolphs attacks were particularly shrill.
he saved his sharpest barbs for gallatin and madison republican moderates who failed to appreciate the congressmans self righteous posturing.
the yazoo controversy raised the quids from political obscurity.
this complex legal battle began in 1795 when a thoroughly corrupt georgia assembly sold 35 million acres of western land known as the yazoo claims to private companies at bargain prices.
it soon became apparent that every member of the legislature had been bribed and in 1796 state lawmakers rescinded the entire agreement.
unfortunately some land had already changed hands.
when jefferson became president a specially appointed federal commission attempted to clean up the mess.
it recommended that congress set aside 5 million acres for buyers who had unwittingly purchased land from the discredited companies.
randolph immediately cried foul.
such a compromise however well meaning condoned fraud.
republican virtue hung in the balance.
for months the quids harangued congress about the yazoo business but in the end their impassioned oratory accomplished nothing.
the marshall supreme court upheld the rights of the original purchasers in fletcher v peck 1810.
the justices unanimously declared that legislative fraud did not impair private contracts and that the georgia assembly of 1796 did not have authority to take away lands already sold to innocent buyers.
this important case upheld the supreme courts authority to rule on the constitutionality of state laws.
murder and conspiracy the curious career of aaron burr vice president aaron burr created far more serious difficulties for the president.
the two men had never been close.
burrs strange behavior during the election of 1800 raised suspicions that he had conspired to deprive jefferson of the presidency.
whatever the truth may have been the vice president entered the new administration under a cloud.
he played only a marginal role in shaping policy a situation extremely frustrating for a person as ambitious as burr.
in the spring of 1804 burr decided to run for the governorship of new york.
although he was a republican he entered into political negotiations with high federalists who were plotting the secession of new england and new york from the union.
in a particularly scurrilous contest and new york politics were always abusive alexander hamilton described burr as.
a dangerous man.
who ought not to be trusted with the reins of government and urged federalists in the state to vote for another candidate.
whether hamiltons appeals influenced the voters is not clear.
burr however blamed hamilton for his subsequent defeat and challenged him to a duel.
even though hamilton condemned this form of violence his own son had recently been killed in a duel he accepted burrs invitation describing the foolishness as a matter of personal honor.
on july 11 1804 at weehawken new jersey the vice president shot and killed the former secretary of the treasury.
both new york and new jersey indicted burr for murder.
if he returned to either state he would immediately be arrested.
his political career lay in shambles.
in his final weeks as vice president burr hatched an audacious scheme.
on a trip down the ohio river in april 1805 after his term as vice president was over he hinted broadly that he was planning a private military adventure against a spanish colony perhaps mexico.
burr also suggested that he envisioned separating the western states and territories from the union.
the region certainly seemed ripe for secession.
the citizens of new orleans acted as if they wanted no part of the united states.
general james wilkinson commander of the u s army in the mississippi valley accepted an important role in this vaguely defined conspiracy.
the general was a thoroughly corrupt opportunist.
randolph described him as the only man that i ever saw who was from bark to the very core a villain in the late summer of 1806 burr put his ill defined plan into action.
a small group of volunteers constructed riverboats on a small island in the ohio river.
by the time this armed band set out to join wilkinsons forces however the general had experienced a change of heart.
he frantically dispatched letters to jefferson denouncing burr.
wilkinsons betrayal destroyed any chance of success.
facing certain defeat burr tried to escape to spanish florida.
it was already too late.
federal authorities arrested burr in february 1807 and took him to richmond to stand trial for treason.
complete the assignment barbary pirates and american captives on myhistorylab feature essay barbary pirates and american captives the nations first hostage crisis print depicting the bombardment of tripoli by u s naval vessels in 1804 f or more than a quartercentury after independence terror haunted american sailors and challenged the new republics influence throughout the world.
pirates from north africa preyed on commercial vessels in the mediterranean sea and along the european coast.
those unlucky enough to be captured faced enslavement or death.
although such piracy had been going on for a very long time american entrepreneurs were always willing to risk the dangers to make a profit.
the crew of one ship the polly left a record of the horrors awaiting those who encountered the barbary pirates north african muslims based in algiers morocco tunis and tripoli.
sailing out of baltimore in autumn 1793 the polly was on its way to a spanish port when a sailor on watch reported a strange sail no one seems to have anticipated trouble.
they were in for a dreadful surprise.
when the strange vessel drew alongside the polly someone dressed in the christian habit hailed the americans from the deck.
then without warning a great number of men dressed in the turkish habit poured over the railings brandishing scimitars and pistols.
pikes spears lances and knives the americans had no defense.
the pirates plundered the ship then stripped the americans of all clothing except a shirt and a pair of drawers and chained them in preparation for the voyage to algiers reputed to be the cruelest of any state in all barbary the pollys crew had become casualties of the young republics first prolonged hostage crisis involving muslim states.
by the end of the year barbary pirates had seized the crews of at least ten other vessels.
the captives were thrown into prisons where they labored in terrible conditions alongside sailors who had been in algiers for as long as a decade.
algerian guards beat their captives.
the enslaved americans were driven in chains each day to a quarry outside the city of algiers.
their masters forced them to drag twenty ton rocks to construction sites.
anyone who attempted escape faced execution.
news of the captives ordeal offended american pride.
outraged american citizens organized charitable societies pledged to oppose the pirates send relief to the captives and lobby congress to take effective action for their release.
some americans advocated paying ransom to liberate the prisoners but others pointed out that such a policy would only encourage more attacks on the nations merchant marine.
the outpouring of private action and nationalist sentiment forced the u s government which had championed a policy of free trade throughout the world to adjust to the changing realities of international relations.
if the united states allowed itself to be humiliated by the barbary states places where bribery treachery rapine murder and all the hideous offspring of accursed tyranny have often drenched the streets with blood then it could not expect other more powerful states to respect its hard won independence.
u s military power frightened no one especially not the rulers of barbary states.
neither the french nor the british showed interest in helping the americans.
after all they viewed them as commercial competitors in the region.
in 1795 the federal government finally recognized the seriousness of the problem.
president washington ordered u s envoy joseph donaldson jr to negotiate release of the captives and to sign treaties ensuring that algiers would no longer molest american shipping.
for these alleged favors the united states had to promise a humiliating sum totaling nearly 1 million.
the combination of debt payments and annual tribute represented about one sixth of each years federal budget.
treaties with tripoli and tunis also included yearly payments for peace raising the total even higher.
a policy that essentially condoned blackmail continued until thomas jefferson won election as president in 1800 hoping to extort a larger share of the annual ransom monies the pasha of tripoli forced jeffersons hand by declaring war on the united states.
this preemptive move confirmed belief that attempts to buy off extortionists only generated further greed.
it also compelled the united states to back up its world commerce with military might a decision congressional budget cutters had tried to avoid.
vowing not to pay one penny in tribute jefferson dispatched u s naval vessels to blockade tripolis harbor.
despite brave talk american intervention proved a failure at least initially.
one battleship went aground and had to be destroyed by marines.
eventually commodore edward preble and captain stephen decatur showed fighting spirit sufficient to turn defeat into a draw.
the american consul at tunis william eaton even attempted an early form of regime change leading a company of mediterranean mercenaries in an unauthorized effort to depose the pasha and install his brother.
eatons mission to the shores of tripoli failed.
in 1805 the pasha whose power was unshaken decided that war was becoming too expensive and he negotiated a peace with the united states that included a payment of 60 000 to ransom the last prisoners.
during the long ordeal with the barbary pirates american nationalists portrayed north african states as the opposite of their free republic.
survivors of captivity published narratives containing lurid descriptions of the despotism and cruelty they had endured under their muslim masters.
the popular press castigated muslims as enemies of civilized society and devoid of human compassion.
propaganda against muslim pirates generated its own embarrassing backlash.
shrill nationalist rhetoric reminded many americans of the uncomfortable similarities between the white slavery of the barbary states and the african slavery that flourished throughout the southern united states.
the african american abolitionist absalom jones could discern no real difference between the unconstitutional bondage in which multitudes of our fellows in complexion are held and the deplorable.
situation of citizens of the united states captured and enslaved.
in algiers americas first hostage crisis produced a complex legacy.
it forced ordinary citizens of the new republic to take stock of themselves within a larger international framework.
the war in tripoli encouraged jefferson who had always disfavored a permanent military establishment to accept a professional navy.
preparedness he concluded was the price of maintaining free trade throughout the world.
war provided a stark contrast between liberty and tyranny and stimulated the loud celebration of american freedom.
in doing so it also intensified debate over the republics most glaring domestic contradiction the persistence of slavery within a nation that was prepared to fight in distant places in the name of liberty.
questions for discussion 1 why did the european powers not eliminate the barbary pirates.
2 could u s leaders have ignored the challenge of the pirates.
3 how did american nationalists condemnation of white slavery in north africa affect the debate over the enslavement of africanamericans in the u s.
if delegates from the northern states had refused to compromise on this issue southerners would not have supported the new government.
the slave states demanded a great deal in return for cooperation.
according to an agreement that determined the size of a states congressional delegation a slave counted as three fifths of a free white male.
this political formula meant that while blacks did not vote they helped increase the number of southern representatives.
the south in turn gave up very little agreeing only that after 1808 congress might consider banning the importation of slaves into the united states.
slaves even influenced the outcome of national elections.
had the threefifths rule not been in effect in 1800 for example adams would surely have had the votes to defeat jefferson in the electoral college.
in an annual message sent to congress in december 1806 jefferson urged the representatives to prepare legislation outlawing the slave trade.
during the early months of 1807 congressmen debated various ways of ending the embarrassing commerce.
it was clear that the issue cut across party lines.
northern representatives congress prohibits importation of slaves 1807 although the external slave trade was officially outlawed in 1808 the commerce in humans persisted.
an estimated two hundred fifty thousand african slaves were brought illicitly to the united states between 1808 and 1860 the internal slave trade continued as well.
folk artist lewis miller sketched this slave coffle marching from virginia to new owners in tennessee under the watchful eyes of mounted white overseers.
embarrassments overseas generally favored a strong bill some even wanted to make smuggling slaves into the country a capital offense.
but there was a serious problem.
the northern congressmen could not figure out what to do with black people captured by the customs agents who would enforce the legislation.
to sell these africans would involve the federal government in slavery which many northerners found morally repugnant.
nor was there much sympathy for freeing them.
ignorant of the english language and lacking personal possessions these blacks seemed unlikely to long survive free in the american south.
southern congressmen responded with threats and ridicule.
they explained to their northern colleagues that no one in the south regarded slavery as evil.
it appeared naive therefore to expect local planters to enforce a ban on the slave trade or to inform federal agents when they spotted a smuggler.
the notion that these culprits deserved capital punishment seemed viciously inappropriate.
at one point in the debate peter early a congressman from georgia announced that the south wanted no civil wars no rebellions no insurrections no resistance to the authority of government all he demanded in fact was to let the states regulate slavery.
to this a republican congressman from western pennsylvania retorted that americans who hated slavery would not be terrified by the threat of civil war the bill that jefferson finally signed in march 1807 probably pleased no one.
the law prohibited the importation of slaves into the united states after the new year.
whenever customs officials captured a smuggler the slaves were to be turned over to state authorities and disposed of according to local custom.
southerners did not cooperate and for many years african slaves continued to pour into southern ports.
even more blacks would have been imported had great britain not outlawed the slave trade in 1807 as part of their ban of the slave trade ships of the royal navy captured american slave smugglers off the coast of africa and when anyone complained the british explained that they were merely enforcing the laws of the united states.
slavery was both a political and a personal issue for jefferson.
as a political leader during the revolution he criticized the institution.
but jefferson also believed that african americans were inherently inferior to whites.
in notes on the state of virginia 1785 jefferson insisted as a matter of science that african americans were not equal to white people in the endowments both of body and mind and he worried that the mixture of whites and blacks would stain the blood of the master it came as a surprise to his admirers when in 1802 a newspaper editor accused jefferson of having an affair with one of his own slaves.
most historians now agree that jefferson did indeed have a long term relationship with sally hemings a slave living at monticello.
hemings bore jefferson six children four of whom survived to adulthood.
jeffersons own life and writings illustrate dramatically the moral contradictions that lay at the heart of slavery in america.
embarrassments overseas why did the united states find it difficult to avoid military conflict during this period.
during jeffersons second term 1805 1809 the united states found itself in the midst of a world at war.
a brief peace in europe ended abruptly in 1803 and the two military giants of the age france and great britain fought for supremacy on land and sea.
during the early stages of the war the united states profited from european adversity.
as neutral carriers american ships transported goods to any port in the world where they could find a buyer and american merchants grew wealthy serving britain and france.
since the royal navy did not allow direct trade between france and its colonies american captains conducted broken voyages american vessels sailing out of french ports in the caribbean would put in briefly in the united states pay nominal customs and then leave for france.
for several years the british did little to halt this obvious subterfuge.
napoleons successes on the battlefield however quickly strained britains economic resources.
in july 1805 a british admiralty court announced in the essex decision that henceforth broken voyages were illegal.
the royal navy began seizing american ships in record number.
moreover as the war continued the british stepped up the impressment of sailors on ships flying the u s flag.
estimates of the number of men impressed ranged as high as nine thousand.
beginning in 1806 the british government issued a series of trade regulations known as the orders in council.
these proclamations forbade neutral commerce with the continent and threatened seizure of any ship that violated these orders.
the declarations created what were in effect paper blockades for even the powerful british navy could not monitor the activities of every continental port.
napoleon responded to britains commercial regulations with his own paper blockade called the continental system.
in the berlin decree of november 1806 and the milan decree of december 1807 he announced the closing of all continental ports to british trade.
since french armies occupied most of the territory between spain and germany the decrees obviously cut the british out of a large market.
the french emperor also declared that neutral vessels carrying british goods were liable to seizure.
for the americans there was no escape.
they were caught between two conflicting systems.
the british ordered american ships to stop off to pay duties and secure clearances in england on the way to the continent napoleon was determined to seize any vessel that obeyed the british.
this unhappy turn of international events baffled jefferson.
he had assumed that civilized countries would respect neutral rights justice obliged them to do so.
appeals to reason however made little impression on states at war.
as for france and england the president growled.
the one is a den of robbers the other of pirates in a desperate attempt to avoid hostilities for which the united states was ill prepared jefferson ordered james monroe and william pinckney to negotiate a commercial treaty with great britain.
the document they signed on december 31 1806 said nothing about impressment and an angry president refused to submit the treaty to the senate for ratification.
the united states soon suffered an even greater humiliation.
a ship of the royal navy the leopard sailing off the coast of virginia commanded an american warship to submit to a search for deserters june 22 1807.
when the captain of the chesapeake refused to cooperate the leopard opened fire killing three men and wounding eighteen.
the attack clearly violated the sovereignty of the united states.
official protests received only a perfunctory apology from the british government and the american people demanded revenge.
despite the pressure of public opinion however jefferson played for time.
he recognized that the united states was unprepared for war against a powerful nation such as great britain.
the president chapter 9 nation building and nationalism in less than two years 75 miles were already finished and the first tolls were being collected.
in 1825 the entire canal was opened with great public acclaim and celebration.
at 364 miles long 40 feet wide and 4 feet deep and containing 84 locks the erie canal was the most spectacular engineering achievement of the young republic.
furthermore it was a great economic success.
it reduced the cost of moving goods from buffalo to albany to one twelfth the previous rate.
it not only lowered the cost of western products in the east but caused an even sharper decline in the price of goods imported from the east by westerners and helped to make new york city the commercial capital of the nation.
the great success of the erie canal inspired other states to extend public credit for canal building.
during the 1830s and 1840s pennsylvania ohio and illinois embarked on ambitious canal construction projects from philadelphia to pittsburgh from the ohio river to cleveland and from chicago to the illinois river and the mississippi.
the canal boom ended when it became apparent in the 1830s and 1840s that most of the waterways were unprofitable.
state credit had been overextended and the panic and depression of the late 1830s and early 1840s forced retrenchment.
while some canals continued to be important arteries up to the time of the civil war and well beyond railroads were already beginning to compete successfully for the same traffic and a new phase in the transportation revolution was beginning.
emergence of a market economy how did developments in transportation support the growth of agriculture banking and industry.
the desire to reduce the costs and increase the speed of shipping heavy freight over great distances laid the groundwork for a new economic system.
canals made it less expensive and more profitable for western farmers to ship wheat and flour to new york and philadelphia and also gave manufacturers in the east ready access to an interior market.
steamboats reduced shipping costs on the ohio and mississippi and put farmers in the enviable position of receiving more for their crops and paying less for the goods they needed to import.
hence improved transport increased farm income and stimulated commercial agriculture.
the beginning of commercial agriculture at the beginning of the nineteenth century the typical farming household consumed most of what it produced and sold only a small surplus in nearby markets.
most manufactured articles were produced at home.
easier and cheaper access to distant markets caused a decisive change in this pattern.
between 1800 and 1840 agricultural output increased at an annual rate of approximately 3 percent and a rapidly growing portion of this production consisted of commodities grown for sale rather than consumed at home.
the rise in productivity was partly due to technological advances.
iron or steel plows proved better than wooden ones the grain cradle displaced the scythe for harvesting and better varieties or strains of crops grasses and livestock were introduced.
but the availability of good land and the revolution in marketing were the most important spurs to profitable commercial farming.
the existence or extension of transportation facilities made distant markets available and plugged farmers into a commercial network that provided credit and relieved them of the need to do their own selling.
the emerging exchange network encouraged movement away from diversified farming and toward regional concentration on staple crops.
wheat was the main cash crop of the north and the center of its cultivation moved westward as soil depletion pests and plant diseases lowered yields in older regions.
in 1815 the heart of the wheat belt was new york and pennsylvania.
by 1839 ohio was the leading producer and indiana and illinois were beginning to come into their own.
on the rocky hillsides of new england sheep raising was displacing the mixed farming of an earlier era.
but the prime examples of successful staple production in this era were in the south.
tobacco continued to be a major cash crop of the upper south despite declining fertility and a shift to wheat in some areas rice was important in coastal south carolina and sugar was a staple of southern louisiana.
cotton however was the king crop in the lower south as a whole.
in the course of becoming the nations principal export commodity it brought wealth and prosperity to a belt of states running from south carolina to louisiana.
for more on the rise of king cotton see chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy democracy in theory and practice how did the relationship between the government and the people change during this time.
during the 1820s and 1830s the term democracy first became a generally accepted term to describe how american institutions were supposed to work.
the founders had defined democracy as direct rule by the people most of them rejected this concept of a democratic approach to government because it was at odds with their conception of a well balanced republic led by a natural aristocracy for champions of popular government in the jacksonian period however the people were truly sovereign and could do no wrong.
the voice of the people is the voice of god was their clearest expression of this principle.
conservatives were less certain of the wisdom of the common folk.
but even they were coming to recognize that public opinion had to be won over before major policy decisions could be made.
besides evoking a heightened sense of popular sovereignty the democratic impulse seemed to stimulate a process of social leveling.
earlier americans had usually assumed that the rich and wellborn should be treated with special respect and recognized as natural leaders of the community and guardians of its culture and values.
by the 1830s as the hotel culture revealed such habits of deference were in decline.
the decline of deference meant that self made men of lowly origins could now rise more readily to positions of power and influence.
but economic equality the equitable sharing of wealth was not part of the mainstream agenda.
this was after all a competitive capitalist society.
the watchword was equality of opportunity not equality of reward.
life was a race and so long as white males appeared to have an equal start there could be no reason for complaint if some were winners and some were losers.
historians now generally agree that economic inequality the gap between rich and poor americans was actually increasing during this period of political and social democratization.
democracy and society although some types of inequality persisted or even grew during the age of democracy they did so in the face of a growing belief that equality was the governing principle of american society.
the plain folk were now likely to greet claims for special treatment with indifference or scorn and to demand equal treatment whatever their place in society.
white domestic workers refused to be called servants and instead called themselves hired help household workers often refused to wear livery agreed to work for only short periods of time and sometimes insisted on eating at the same table as their employers.
as noted in the maids comments quoted at the beginning of chapter 9.
the nullification crisis during the 1820s southerners became increasingly fearful of federal encroachment on the rights of the states.
behind this concern in south carolina at least was a strengthened commitment to the preservation of slavery and a resulting anxiety about possible uses of federal power to strike at the peculiar institution hoping to keep the explosive slavery issue out of the political limelight south carolinians seized on another genuine grievance the protective tariff as the issue on which to take their stand in favor of a state veto power over federal actions they viewed as contrary to their interests.
as a staple producing and exporting region the jackson and the politics of democracy view the closer look the trail of tears robert lindneux the trail of tears 1942.
cherokee indians carrying their few possessions are prodded along by u s soldiers on the trail of tears.
several thousand native americans died on the ruthless forced march from their homelands in the east to the newly established indian territory in oklahoma.
south had sound economic reasons for favoring free trade.
tariffs increased the prices that southern agriculturists paid for manufactured goods and threatened to undermine their foreign markets by inciting counterprotection.
an economic crisis in the south carolina upcountry during the 1820s made that state particularly receptive to extreme positions on the tariff and states rights.
vice president john c calhoun emerged as the leader of the states rights insurgency in south carolina abandoning his earlier support of nationalism and the american system.
after the passage of the tariff of abominations in 1828 the state legislature declared the new duties unconstitutional and endorsed a lengthy statement written anonymously by calhoun that affirmed nullification or the right of an individual state to set aside federal law.
calhoun supported jackson in 1828 and planned to serve amicably as his vice president expecting jackson to support his native region on questions involving the tariff and states rights.
he also entertained hopes of succeeding jackson as president.
early in his administration jackson appeared well attuned to the southern slaveholding position on state versus federal authority.
besides acquiescing in georgias de facto nullification of federal treaties upholding indian tribal rights he vetoed a major internal improvements bill in 1830 invoking a strict construction of the constitution to deny federal funds for the building of the maysville road in kentucky.
meanwhile a bitter personal feud developed between jackson and calhoun.
jackson viewed the vice president and his wife as prime movers in the ostracism of peggy eaton.
furthermore evidence came to light that calhoun as secretary of war in monroes cabinet in 1818 had privately advocated punishing jackson for his incursion into florida.
as calhoun lost favor with jackson it became clear that van buren rather than the vice president would be jacksons designated successor.
the personal breach between jackson and calhoun colored and intensified their confrontation over nullification and the tariff.
the two men differed on matters of principle as well.
although generally a defender of states rights and strict construction of the constitution jackson opposed the theory of nullification as a threat to the survival of the union.
in his view federal power should be held in check but this did not mean the states were truly sovereign.
his nationalism was that of a military man who had fought for the country against foreign enemies and he was not about to permit the nations disintegration at the hands of domestic dissidents.
the differences between jackson and calhoun came into the open at the jefferson day dinner in 1830 when jackson offered the toast chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy the bank veto and the election of 1832 jackson came into office with strong reservations about banking and paper money in general in part as a result of his own brushes with bankruptcy after accepting promissory notes that depreciated in value.
he also harbored suspicions that branches of the bank of the united states had illicitly used their influence on behalf of his opponent in the presidential election.
in his annual messages in 1829 and 1830 jackson called on congress to begin discussing possible modification of a system which cannot continue to exist in its present form without.
perpetual apprehensions and discontent on the part of the states and the people biddle began to worry about the fate of the banks charter when it came up for renewal in 1836 at the same time jackson was listening to the advice of close friends and unofficial advisers members of his kitchen cabinet especially amos kendall and francis p blair who thought an attack on the bank would provide a good party issue for the election of 1832 biddle then made a fateful blunder.
panicked by the presidential messages and the anti bank oratory of congressional jacksonians such as senator thomas hart benton of missouri he determined to seek recharter by congress in 1832 four years early.
senator henry clay leader of the antiadministration forces on capitol hill encouraged this move because he was convinced that jackson had chosen the unpopular side of the issue and would be embarrassed or even discredited by a congressional endorsement of the bank.
the bill to recharter introduced in the house and senate in early 1832 aroused jackson and unified his administration and party against renewal.
the bill found many supporters in congress however.
a number of legislators had received loans from the bank and the economy seemed to be prospering under the banks guidance.
as a result the bill to recharter passed congress with ease.
the election of 1832 candidate jackson clay wirt floyd party democratic national republican anti masonic independent democratic popular vote 688 242 473 462 101 051 electoral vote delegates chosen by south carolina legislature the next move was jacksons and he made the most of the opportunity by vetoing the bill.
after repeating his opinion that the bank was unconstitutional notwithstanding the supreme courts ruling on the issue he went on to argue that it violated the fundamental rights of the people in a democratic society in the full enjoyment of the gifts of heaven and the fruits of superior industry economy and virtue every man is equally entitled to protection by law but when the laws undertake to add to those natural and just advantages artificial distinctions to grant.
exclusive privileges the humble members of society the farmers mechanics and laborers who have neither the time nor the means of securing like favors to themselves have a right to complain of the injustice of their government government he added should confine itself to equal protection jackson thus called on the common people to join him in fighting the monster corporation.
his veto message was the first ever to use more than strictly constitutional arguments and to deal directly with social and economic issues.
congressional attempts to override the veto failed and jackson resolved to take the entire issue to the people in the upcoming presidential election.
the 1832 election the first in which candidates were chosen by national nominating conventions pitted jackson against henry clay standard bearer of the national republicans.
although the democrats did not adopt a formal platform the party stood firmly behind jackson in his opposition to rechartering the bank.
clay and the national republicans attempted to marshal the pro bank sentiment that was strong in many parts of the country.
but jackson won a great personal triumph garnering 219 electoral votes to 49 for clay.
his share of the popular vote was not quite as high as it had been in 1828 but it was substantial enough to be interpreted as a mandate for continuing the war against the bank.
killing the bank not content with preventing the bank from getting a new charter the victorious jackson now resolved to attack it directly by removing federal deposits from biddles vaults.
jackson told van buren the bank.
is trying to kill me but i will kill it the bank had indeed used all the political influence it could muster in an attempt to prevent jacksons reelection in an act of self defense.
old hickory regarded biddles actions as a personal attack part of a devious plot to destroy the presidents reputation and deny him the popular approval he deserved.
although he presided over the first modern american political party jackson did not really share van burens belief in the legitimacy of a competitive party system.
in his view his opponents were not merely wrong they were evil and deserved to be destroyed.
furthermore the election results convinced him that he was the peoples chosen instrument in the struggle against corruption and privilege the only man who could save the pure republicanism of jefferson and the founders from the monster bank to remove the deposits from the bank jackson had to overcome strong resistance in his own cabinet.
when one secretary of the treasury refused to support the policy he was shifted to another cabinet post.
when a second balked at carrying out removal he was replaced by roger b taney a jackson loyalist and dedicated opponent of the bank.
beginning in late september 1833 taney ceased depositing government money in the bank of the united states and began to withdraw the funds already there.
although jackson had earlier suggested that the government keep its money in some kind of public bank he had never worked out the details or made a specific proposal to congress.
the problem of how to dispose of the funds was therefore resolved by an ill advised decision to place them in selected state banks.
by the end of 1833 twenty three state banks had been chosen as depositories.
opponents charged that the banks had been selected for political rather than fiscal reasons and dubbed them jacksons the bank war and the second party system pet banks since congress refused to approve administration proposals to regulate the credit policies of these banks jacksons effort to shift to a hard money economy was quickly nullified by the use the state banks made of the new deposits.
they extended credit more recklessly than before and increased the amount of paper money in circulation.
the bank of the united states counterattacked by calling in outstanding loans and instituting a policy of credit contraction that helped bring on an economic recession.
biddle hoped to win support for recharter by demonstrating that weakening the banks position would be disastrous for the economy.
with some justification the presidents supporters accused biddle of deliberately and unnecessarily causing economic distress out of personal resentment and a desire to maintain his unchecked powers and privileges.
the bank never regained its charter.
strong opposition to jacksons fiscal policies developed in congress.
henry clay and his supporters contended that the president had violated the banks charter and exceeded his constitutional authority when he removed the deposits.
they eventually persuaded the senate to approve a motion of censure.
jacksonians in the house were able to block such action but the president was further humiliated when the senate refused to confirm taney as secretary of the treasury.
not all of the criticism and obstructionism can be attributed to bitterness on the part of pro bank politicians.
some congressmen who originally defended jacksons veto became disenchanted with the president because they thought he had gone too far in asserting the powers of his office.
the emergence of the whigs the coalition that passed the censure resolution in the senate provided the nucleus for a new national party the whigs.
the leadership of the new party and a majority of its support came from national republicans associated with clay and new england ex federalists led by senator daniel webster of massachusetts.
the whigs also picked up critical support from southern proponents of states rights who had been upset by jacksons stand on nullification and then saw an unconstitutional abuse of power in his withdrawal of federal deposits from the bank of the united states.
even calhoun and his nullifiers occasionally cooperated with the whig camp.
the initial rallying cry for this diverse antijackson coalition was executive usurpation the whig label was chosen because of its associations with both english and american revolutionary opposition to royal power and prerogatives.
in their propaganda the whigs portrayed the tyrannical designs of king andrew and his court.
the whigs also gradually absorbed the anti masonic party a surprisingly strong political movement that had arisen in the northeastern states in the late 1820s read the document andrew jackson veto of the bank bill and early 1830s.
capitalizing on the hysteria aroused by the 1826 disappearance and apparent murder of a new yorker who had threatened to reveal the secrets of the masonic order the anti masons exploited traditional american fears of secret societies and conspiracies.
they also appealed successfully to the moral concerns of the northern middle class under the sway of an emerging evangelical protestantism.
anti masons detested jacksonianism mainly because it stood for a toleration of diverse lifestyles.
democrats did not think government should be concerned about people who drank gambled or found better things to do than go to church on sundays.
their opponents from the anti masonic tradition believed government should restrict such sinful behavior.
this desire for moral and religious uniformity contributed an important cultural dimension to northern whiggery.
as the election of 1836 approached the governments fiscal policies also provoked a localized rebellion among the urban working class elements of the democratic coalition.
in new york aided by van buren center jackson wields his veto rod against the bank of the united states whose city a dissident faction broke with the heads represent the directors of the state branches.
bank president nicholas biddle is wearing the top hat.
regular democratic organization mainly source collection of the new york historical society negative 42459 chapter 10 chapter 11 slaves and masters view the map slavery in the south british north america canada grea tl a s ke boston n y mass.
r i conn missouri territory pa new york philadelphia ill n j md.
d c cincinnati at l a n t i c ocean va ky n c tenn arkansas territory s c charleston miss.
ala ga more than 50 slave 10 to 50 slave new spain la.
less than 10 slave new orleans gulf of mexico no slaves or no statistics available 500 miles 500 kilometers slave concentration 1820 in 1820 most slaves lived in the eastern seaboard states of virginia and south carolina and in louisiana on the gulf of mexico.
the internal slave trade tobacco the original plantation crop of the colonial period continued to be the principal slave cultivated commodity of the upper tier of southern states during the pre civil war era.
but markets were often depressed and profitable tobacco cultivation was hard to sustain for very long in one place because the crop rapidly depleted the soil.
during the lengthy depression of the tobacco market that lasted from the 1820s to the 1850s tobacco farmers in virginia and maryland experimented with fertilizer use crop rotation and diversified farming all of which increased the need for capital but reduced the demand for labor.
as slave prices rose because of high demand in the lower south and demand for slaves in the upper south fell the internal slave trade took off.
increasingly the most profitable business for slaveholders in virginia kentucky maryland and the carolinas was selling surplus slaves from the upper south to regions of the lower south where staple crop production was more profitable.
this interstate slave trade sent an estimated six to seven hundred thousand slaves in a southwesterly direction between 1815 and 1860 historian michael tadman estimates that the chances of a slave child in the upper south in the 1820s being sold south by 1860 were as high as 30 percent.
such sales were wrenching not only splitting families but making it especially unlikely that the slaves sold would ever see friends or family again.
some economic historians have concluded that the most important crop produced in the tobacco kingdom was not the stinking weed but human beings cultivated for the auction block.
respectable planters did not like to think of themselves as raising slaves for market but few would refuse to sell some of their people if they needed money to get out of debt or make expensive improvements.
for the region as a whole the slave trade provided a crucial source of capital in a period of transition and innovation.
nevertheless the fact that slave labor was declining in importance in the upper south meant the peculiar institution had a weaker hold on public loyalty there than in the cotton states.
diversification of agriculture was accompanied by a more rapid rate of urban and industrial development than was occurring elsewhere in the south.
as a result virginians marylanders and kentuckians were seriously divided on whether their ultimate future lay with the deep souths plantation economy or with the industrializing free labor system that was flourishing just north of their borders.
the rise of the cotton kingdom the warmer climate and good soils of the lower tier of southern states made it possible to raise crops more naturally suited than tobacco or cereals to the plantation form of agriculture and the heavy use of slave labor.
since the colonial or revolutionary slavery and the southern economy british north america canada grea minn mich nebraska terr.
milwaukee iowa chicago des moines n y mass.
r i buffalo pa cleveland fort wayne harrisburg conn pittsburgh columbus new york philadelphia ohio n j del.
atlantic ocean springfield indianapolis washington d c md.
cincinnati va richmond ill ind.
louisville st louis norfolk ky mo.
evansville new bern n c tenn unorganized terr.
boston detroit cairo new mexico terr.
n h portland toronto kansas topeka terr.
vt wis minneapolis utah terr.
montreal t l ak e s d ze ni.
r un or g te a r s c ark.
atlanta miss.
ala more than 50 slave charleston ga 10 to 50 slave jackson la.
mobile texas port arthur less than 10 slave jacksonville no slaves or no statistics available new orleans fla main routes of the underground railroad gulf of mexico 500 miles 500 kilometers slave concentration 1860 in 1860 slavery had extended throughout the southern states with the greatest concentrations of slaves in the states of the deep south.
there were also sizable slave populations in the new states of missouri arkansas texas and florida.
periods rice and a special long staple variety of fine cotton had been grown profitably on vast estates along the coast of south carolina and georgia.
in lower louisiana between new orleans and baton rouge sugar was the cash crop.
as in the west indies sugar production required a large investment and a great deal of backbreaking labor in other words large well financed plantations and small armies of slave laborers.
cultivation of rice longstaple cotton and sugar was limited by natural conditions to peripheral semitropical areas.
it was the rise of short staple cotton as the souths major crop that strengthened the hold of slavery and the plantation on the southern economy.
short staple cotton differed from the long staple variety in two important ways its bolls contained seeds that were much more difficult to extract by hand and it could be grown almost anywhere south of virginia and kentucky the main requirement was a guarantee of two hundred frost free days.
before the 1790s the seed extraction problem had prevented short staple cotton from becoming a major market crop.
the invention of the cotton gin in 1793 resolved that difficulty however and the subsequent westward expansion opened vast areas for cotton cultivation.
unlike rice and sugar cotton could be grown on small farms as well as on plantations.
but large planters enjoyed certain advantages that made them the main producers.
only relatively large operators could afford their own gins or possessed the capital to acquire the fertile bottomlands that brought the highest yields.
they also had lower transportation costs because they were able to monopolize land along rivers and streams that were the souths natural arteries of transportation.
the first major cotton producing regions were inland areas of georgia and south carolina but the center of production shifted rapidly westward during the nineteenth century.
by the 1830s alabama and mississippi had surpassed georgia and south carolina as cotton growing states.
by the 1850s arkansas northwest louisiana and east texas were the most prosperous and rapidly growing plantation regions.
the rise in total production that accompanied this geographic expansion was phenomenal.
between 1792 and 1817 the souths output of cotton rose from about 13 000 bales to 461 000 by 1840 it was 1 35 million and in 1860 production peaked at the colossal figure of 4 8 million bales.
most of the cotton went to supply the booming textile industry of great britain.
lesser proportions went to the manufacturers of continental europe and the northeastern united states.
cotton is king proclaimed a southern orator in the 1850s and he was right.
by that time three quarters of the worlds supply of cotton came from the american south and this single commodity accounted for more than half the total dollar value of american exports.
cotton growing and the network of commercial and industrial enterprises that marketed and processed the crop constituted the most important economic interest in the united states on the eve of the civil war.
since slavery and cotton seemed inextricably linked it appeared obvious to many southerners that their peculiar institution was the keystone of national wealth and economic progress.
chapter 11 chapter 11 slaves and masters on myhistorylab time line 1793 eli whitney invents the cotton gin 1800 gabriel prosser leads abortive slave rebellion in 1837 panic of 1837 is followed by major depression of the virginia 1811 slaves revolt in point coupe section of louisiana 1822 denmark vesey conspiracy uncovered in charleston south carolina 1829 david walker publishes appeal calling for slave insurrection 1830 first national negro convention meets 1831 slaves under nat turner rebel in virginia killing almost sixty whites 1832 virginia legislature votes against gradual emancipation 1835 1842 blacks fight alongside indians in the second seminole war cotton market frederick douglass publishes the north star a black antislavery newspaper cotton prices rise and a sustained boom commences group of free blacks rescues escaped slave shadrack from federal authorities in boston harriet beecher stowes antislavery novel uncle toms cabin is published and becomes a best seller hinton r helper attacks slavery on economic grounds in the impending crisis of the south the book is suppressed in the southern states cotton prices and production reach all time peak chapter 11 on myhistorylab the divided society of the old south white society in the antebellum south read the document p 247 confessions of nat turner 1831 read the document p 260 the world of southern blacks overseers report from chicora read the document wood plantation p 250 read the document mother p 251 listen to the audio file yonder p 254 view the closer look virginia p 261 when the roll is called up view the map underground railroad p 255 poem the slave auction slavery and the southern economy frances e w.
harper the slave complete the assignment harriet jacobs and maria norcom women of southern households p 252 watch the video george fitzhugh read the document the blessings of slavery 1857 p 259 slave auction in richmond slavery in the south p 262 indicates study plan media assignment the pursuit of perfection contents and learning objectives the rise of evangelicalism pg.
269 reform turns radical pg.
278 how did the evangelical revivalism of the early nineteenth century spur reform movements.
what were some of the major antebellum reform movements.
feature essay the war against demon drink domesticity and changes in the american family pg.
273 law and society the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture what was the doctrine of separate spheres and how did it change family life.
institutional reform pg.
276 how did horace mann change ideas about public schooling in america.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab chapter 12 on myhistorylab the rise of evangelicalism reform turns radical view the closer look methodist camp meeting 1819 p 271 read the document speaks p 280 read the document lyman beecher six sermons on intemperance 1828 p 272 view the map p 281 watch the video drinking and the temperance movement in nineteenth century america p 273 domesticity and changes in the american family read the document catharine e beecher from a treatise on domestic economy p 274 institutional reform watch the video who was horace mann and why are so many schools named after him.
p 277 read the document william lloyd garrison first issue of the liberator 1831 p 278 david walker a black abolitionist utopian communities before the civil war complete the assignment the war against demon drink p 282 read the document 1841 p 284 ralph waldo emerson self reliance complete the assignment the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture p 286 indicates study plan media assignment an age of expansionism contents and learning objectives movement to the far west pg.
293 internal expansionism pg.
305 what were some of the reasons for which americans headed into the western territories and what were some of the consequences of expansion.
how did developments in transportation foster industrialization and encourage immigration.
feature essay hispanic america after 1848 a case study in majority rule manifest destiny and the mexicanamerican war pg.
298 why did the u s annex texas and the southwest.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab chapter 9.
the weaving and 1834 offered an enormous saving in the labor required for harprocessing of wool instead of being carried on in different locavesting grain by 1851 mccormick was producing more than tions was concentrated in single production units beginning in the a thousand reapers a year in his chicago plant.
other new farm 1830s and by 1860 some of the largest textile mills in the country implements that came into widespread use before 1860 included were producing wool cloth.
in the coal and iron regions of eastern seed drills cultivators and threshing machines.
internal expansionism a dynamic interaction between advances in transportation industry and agriculture gave great strength and resiliency to the economy of the northern states during the 1850s.
railroads offered western farmers better access to eastern markets.
after chicago and new york were linked by rail in 1853 the flow of most midwestern farm commodities shifted from the north south direction based on river borne traffic which had still predominated in the 1830s and 1840s to an east west pattern.
the mechanization of agriculture provided an additional impetus to industrialization and its laborsaving features released workers for other economic activities.
the growth of industry and the modernization of agriculture can thus be seen as mutually reinforcing aspects of a single process of economic growth.
mass immigration begins the original incentive to mechanize northern industry and agriculture came in part from a shortage of cheap labor.
compared with that of industrializing nations of europe the economy of the united states in the early nineteenth century was labor scarce.
women and children made up a large percentage of the workers in the early textile mills and commercial farmers had to rely heavily on the labor of their family members.
in the face of such limited and uncertain labor supplies producers were greatly tempted to experiment with laborsaving machinery.
by the 1840s and 1850s however even the newly industrialized operations were ready to absorb a new influx of unskilled workers.
during the 1840s what had been a substantial flow of european immigrants to the united states suddenly became a flood.
no fewer than 4 2 million people crossed the atlantic between 1840 and 1860 with 3 million arriving in the single decade between 1845 and 1855 this was the greatest influx in proportion to total population then about 20 million that the nation has ever experienced.
the largest single source of the new mass immigration was ireland but germany was not far behind.
smaller contingents came from switzerland norway sweden and the netherlands.
the massive transatlantic movement had many causes.
the great push factor that caused 1 5 million irish to forsake the emerald isle between 1845 and 1854 was the great potato blight which brought the age of practical invention year inventor john fitch eli whitney contribution steamboat cotton gin eli whitney oliver evans jig for guiding tools steam engine cast iron plow richard b chenaworth peter cooper cyrus mccormick samuel colt john deere charles goodyear vulcanization of rubber crawford w long samuel f b morse elias howe norbert rillieux first administered ether telegraph sewing machine vacuum evaporator richard m hoe william kelly rotary printing press air boiling process elisha g otis passenger elevator edwin l drake george m pullman first american oil well pullman passenger car railroad locomotive reaper revolver steel plow importance description first successful american steamboat simplified process of separating fiber from seeds helped make cotton a profitable staple of southern agriculture facilitated manufacture of interchangeable parts first american steam engine led to manufacture of high pressure engines used throughout eastern united states first iron plow to be made in three separate pieces thus making possible replacement of parts first steam locomotive built in america mechanized harvesting early model could cut six acres of grain a day first successful repeating pistol steel surface kept soil from sticking farming thus made easier on rich prairies of midwest made rubber much more useful by preventing it from sticking and melting in hot weather reduced pain and risk of shock during operations in surgery made long distance communication almost instantaneous first practical machine for automatic sewing improved method of removing water from sugar cane revolutionized sugar industry and was later applied to many other products printed an entire sheet in one motion vastly speeded up printing process improved method of converting iron into steel usually known as bessemer process because english inventor bessemer had more advantageous patent and financial arrangements improved movement in buildings when later electrified stimulated development of skyscrapers initiated oil industry in the united states first railroad sleeping car suitable for long distance travel dates refer to patent or first successful use.
source from freedom and crisis an american history 3rd ed by allen weinstein and frank otto gatell.
copyright 1974 1978 1981 by random house inc reprinted by permission of random house inc complete the assignment hispanic america after 1848 a case study in majority rule on myhistorylab feature essay w ith the discovery of gold in 1848 more than one thousand californians of mexican ancestry joined the frenetic rush to the sierras.
among them was don antonio franco coronel a los angeles schoolteacher who led a group of fellow californios into the rich goldfields.
just months before the expedition the united states and mexico had concluded the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo which transformed coronel and his companions from mexicans to americans.
at the insistence of the mexican government the treaty stipulated that mexicans living in the newly acquired territories would be granted all the rights of citizens of the united states.
according to the principles of the constitution coronels gold seeking enterprise would put that promise to the test.
upon arriving in gold country coronel and his men immediately hit pay dirt.
in the first day alone coronel pulled 45 ounces of gold from the ground within eight days one of his associates had amassed a pile of gold weighing a staggering 52 pounds.
the californios seemed to have a head start in the race for gold.
they understood the terrain cooperated among themselves and were familiar with the best mining techniques.
not surprisingly their dramatic successes stirred the envy of their anglo american competitors.
after a year of relatively peaceful competition anglo miners began to express their resentments.
lumping californios with all other foreigners they unleashed a barrage of physical and political attacks against their competitors.
lynch mobs camp riots and legal harassment were common forms hispanic america after 1848 a case study in majority rule of yankee intimidation.
despite their entitlements to the rights of citizenship the californios were badgered and bullied into retreat.
fearing for his life coronel returned to southern california where hispanics still outnumbered the newcomers.
earning prestige and prosperity in los angeles coronel went on to become mayor and state treasurer.
but to the end of his life he still painfully remembered his experiences in northern california where his rights as a u s citizen were so easily disregarded by his fellow americans.
coronels experiences exemplify two truths about the effect u s expansion had on the lives of mexicans who suddenly found themselves in american territory.
first in areas where anglo american settlement grew rapidly such as northern california the hispanic community typically faced discrimination intimidation and a denial of the very civil rights that guadalupe hidalgo had supposedly guaranteed.
second in areas where the hispanic population remained a majority such as southern california spanish speaking americans were able to exercise the rights of republican citizenship often wielding considerable political influence.
coronel had a taste of both experiences going from intimidated miner to powerful politician.
however as anglo settlers began to stream into southern california even that region ceased to be a safe haven for hispanic rights.
by the mid 1840s hispanics living in texas known as tejanos were outnumbered by anglos at a ratio of twenty to one.
true to the pattern described above this decided minority faced intense prejudice.
among the most notable victims of this prejudice was juan seguin a hero of the texas war for independence see p 296.
perhaps no tejano family fell further or faster than the posterity of don martin de leon.
the scion of an aristocratic family de leon had spearheaded spanish efforts to colonize texas and continued to organize settlements after mexican independence.
establishing extensive cattle ranches the de leons enjoyed prominence and wealth on their holdings.
as with most tejanos they fervently supported the struggle for texan independence fighting shoulder to shoulder with their anglo neighbors.
but when the war ended the de leon estate fell under siege from the surging wave of new settlers.
relying on the intricacies of anglo american law and the power of an electoral majority the newcomers quickly encroached on de leons lands.
with frightening rapidity the de leon family was reduced from its preeminent position to abject poverty.
the de leons were not alone.
a contemporary observed that many anglo settlers worked dark intrigues against the native families whose only crime was that they owned large tracts of land and desirable property even after u s annexation of the lone star republic hispanics continued to be pushed off their land.
in 1856 a texas newspaper reported that the people of matagorda county have held a meeting and ordered every mexican to leave the county.
to strangers this may seem wrong but we hold it to be perfectly right and highly necessary for many mexican americans life on u s soil taught the cruelest lesson in white mans democracy.
yet majority rule actually worked to the favor of hispanics living in new mexico where they enjoyed numerical dominance.
when u s troops entered blessing of the enrequita mine 1860 by alexander edouart.
spaniards and mexicans men and women surround the makeshift altar where the priest is saying the blessing to dedicate the enrequita mine in northern california.
the idyllic scene does not hint at the violent and rough treatment hispanic miners experienced during the california gold rush days.
santa fe in 1846 albino chacn a prominent city judge controlled his own future.
although he had been loyal to the mexican government throughout the war the u s army offered him the opportunity to retain his judgeship.
given similar offers other new mexicans who had initially opposed the u s invasion accepted positions of prominence such as donanciano vigil who served as interim governor of the territory.
but chacn lived by a strict code of honor and could not switch loyalties so easily.
opting for exile chacn moved out of santa fe left the practice of law and took up farming.
aside from such self imposed changes however american rule actually had little impact on most new mexicans lives.
hispanics still formed the demographic and political backbone of the territory and often served their new nation with distinction.
chacns own son rafael served as a union officer during the civil war winning acclaim in defending new mexico against a confederate invasion from texas and was eventually elected as territorial senator.
rafaels son studied law at notre dame and held several important positions in the department of justice.
majority status afforded new mexican hispanics opportunities in the american system that were denied their compatriots living in anglo dominated regions.
as settlement increased throughout the century such hispanic controlled communities dwindled.
the rise of the railroad acted as a funnel through which anglo americans poured into western territories and remaining pockets of hispanic dominance rapidly disappeared.
american majoritarianism and racism combined to place hispanics in positions subordinate to those of the anglo newcomers.
throughout the region the story was sadly similar as hispanic americans lost their majority status they also lost many of their basic rights.
questions for discussion 1 how did the american citizenship granted them under the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo benefit persons of mexican ancestry in california and the southwest.
2 how did anglo prejudice and discrimination deny these benefits in subsequent years.
chapter 14 for a discussion of the growth of nativism and anti catholicism.
the million or so germans who also came in the late 1840s and early 1850s were somewhat more fortunate.
most of them were also peasants but they had fled hard times rather than outright catastrophe.
changes in german landholding patterns and a fluctuating market for grain crops put pressure on small operators.
unlike the irish they often escaped with a small amount of capital with which to make a fresh start in the new world.
many german immigrants were artisans and sought to ply their trades in cities such as new york st louis cincinnati and milwaukee.
but a large portion of those with peasant backgrounds went back to the land.
the possession of diversified agricultural skills and small amounts of capital enabled many germans to become successful midwestern farmers.
in general they encountered less prejudice and discrimination than the irish.
for germans who were protestant religious affinity with their american neighbors made for relative tolerance.
but even germans who were catholic normally escaped the virulent scorn heaped on the irish perhaps because they were not so poverty stricken and did not carry the added burden of being members of an ethnic group anglo americans had learned to despise from their english ancestors and cousins.
what attracted most of the irish german and other european immigrants to america was the promise of economic opportunity.
a minority like some of the german revolutionaries of 1848 chose the united states because they admired its democratic political system.
but most immigrants were more interested in the chance to make a decent living than in voting or running for office.
the arrival of large numbers of immigrants exacerbated the already serious problems of americas rapidly growing cities.
the old walking city in which rich and poor lived in close proximity near the center of town was changing to a more segregated environment.
the advent of railroads and horsedrawn streetcars enabled the affluent to move to the first american suburbs while areas nearer commercial and industrial centers became the congested abode of newcomers from europe.
emerging slums such as the notorious five points district in new york city were characterized by overcrowding poverty disease and crime.
recognizing that these conditions created potential dangers for the entire urban population middle class reformers worked for the professionalization of police forces introduction of sanitary water and sewage disposal systems and the upgrading of housing standards.
they made some progress in these endeavors in the period before the civil war but the lot of the urban poor mainly immigrants was not dramatically improved.
except to the extent that their own communal activities especially those sponsored by churches and mutual aid societies provided a sense of security and solidarity the existence of most urban immigrants remained unsafe unhealthy and unpleasant.
despite the increasing segregation of the city into ethnic neighborhoods the urban experience also produced a unifying effect on its mixed population.
individuals of all classes occupations and ethnicities met on the crowded streets and in the public squares of cities.
often the entire population or at least wide cross sections came together in colorful parades public celebrations and political contests.
many city residents met other citizens as members of political parties religious groups and civic organizations.
a single individual may have voted as a democrat worshiped as a baptist and served as a member of a volunteer fire department.
these different affiliations created relationships that existed outside of ethnic identity.
antebellum cities showed the dark side of urbanization in their crowded slums and growing poverty but they also became cauldrons of democracy in which different elements of nineteenth century america met face to face to create a wider definition of what it meant to be an american.
the new working class a majority of immigrants ended up as wage workers in factories mines and construction camps or as casual day laborers doing the many unskilled tasks required for urban and commercial growth.
during the 1850s factory production in boston and other port cities previously devoted to commerce grew partly because thousands of recent irish immigrants worked for the kind of low wages that almost guaranteed large profits for entrepreneurs.
in established industries and older mill towns of the northeast immigrants added to or in some cases displaced the conclusion the costs of expansion read the document samuel morse foreign immigration 1835 this 1854 cartoon titled the old world and the new shows a shabbily dressed man in ireland examining posters for trips to new york left.
at right he is shown later in america wearing finer clothes and looking at posters advertising trips for emigrants returning to dublin.
as was the case for many immigrants seeking economic opportunities in the new world his situation has apparently changed for the better.
native born workers who had predominated in the 1830s and 1840s.
the changing workforce of the textile mills in lowell massachusetts provided a striking example of this process.
in 1836 only 3 7 percent of the workers in one lowell mill were foreign born most members of the labor force at that time were young unmarried women from new england farms.
by 1860 immigrants constituted 61 7 percent of the workforce.
women still formed the majority but there had been a great proportional increase in the number of men who tended machines in textile factories.
irish males employers found were willing to perform tasks that nativeborn men had generally regarded as womens work.
this trend reveals much about the changing character of the american working class.
in the 1830s most male workers were artisans and factory work was still largely the province of native born american women and children.
in the 1840s the proportion of men engaged in factory work increased and work conditions in many mills deteriorated.
workdays of twelve to fourteen hours were not new but a more impersonal and cost conscious form of management replaced paternalism and cooperation.
during the depression that followed the panic of 1837 bosses attempted to reduce expenses and increase productivity by cutting wages increasing the speed of machinery and stretching out giving each worker more machinery to operate.
the result was a new upsurge of labor militancy involving female as well as male factory workers.
mill girls in lowell for example formed a union of their own the female labor reform association and agitated for shorter working hours.
on a broader front workers organizations petitioned state legislatures to pass laws limiting the workday to ten hours.
the laws that were actually passed turned out to be ineffective because employers could still require a prospective worker to sign a special contract agreeing to longer hours.
the employment of immigrants in increasing numbers between the mid 1840s and the late 1850s made it more difficult to organize industrial workers.
impoverished fugitives from the irish potato famine tended to have lower economic expectations and more conservative social attitudes than did native born workers.
consequently the irish immigrants were initially willing to work for less and were not so prone to protest bad working conditions.
by contrast some german immigrants brought labor radicalism with them from their native land and became leaders of union organization.
conclusion the costs of expansion by 1860 industrial expansion and immigration had created a working class of men and women who seemed destined for a life of low paid wage labor.
this reality stood in contrast to americas self image as a land of opportunity and upward mobility.
wage labor was popularly viewed as a temporary condition from which workers were supposed to extricate themselves by hard work and frugality.
according to abraham lincoln speaking in 1859 of the norths free labor society there is no such thing as a freeman being fatally fixed for life in the condition of a hired laborer this ideal still had some validity in rapidly developing regions of the western states but it was mostly myth when applied to the increasingly foreign born industrial workers of the northeast.
both internal and external expansion had come at a heavy cost.
tensions associated with class and ethnic rivalries were only one part of the price of rapid economic development.
the acquisition of new territories became politically divisive and would soon lead to a catastrophic sectional controversy.
the young america wing of chapter 14.
his failure to win the presidency or even the democratic nomination before 1860 showed that the young americans dream of a patriotic consensus supporting headlong expansion and economic development could not withstand the tensions and divisions that expansionist policies created or brought to light.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction had abused the powers of his office in an effort to sabotage the congressional reconstruction policy.
obstructing the will of the legislative branch they claimed was sufficient grounds for conviction even if no crime had been committed.
the republicans who broke ranks to vote for acquittal could not endorse such a broad view of the impeachment power.
they feared that removal of a president for essentially political reasons would threaten the constitutional balance of powers and open the way to legislative supremacy over the executive.
in addition the man who would have succeeded johnson senator benjamin wade of ohio the president pro tem of the senate was unpopular with conservative republicans because of his radical position on labor and currency questions.
although johnsons acquittal by the narrowest of margins protected the american presidency from congressional domination the impeachment episode helped create an impression in the public mind that the radicals were ready to turn the constitution to their own use to gain their objectives.
conservatives were again alarmed when congress took action in 1868 to deny the supreme courts appellate jurisdiction in cases involving the military arrest and imprisonment of anti reconstruction activists in the south.
but the evidence of congressional ruthlessness and illegality is not as strong as most historians used to think.
modern legal scholars have found merit in the radicals claim that their actions did not violate the constitution although in 1926 the supreme court held the tenure of office act and a successor law to be unconstitutional.
their failure to remove johnson from office embarrassed congressional republicans but the episode did ensure that reconstruction in the south would proceed as the majority in congress intended.
during the trial johnson helped influence the verdict by pledging to enforce the reconstruction acts and he held to this promise during his remaining months in office.
unable to depose the president the radicals had at least succeeded in neutralizing his opposition to their program.
reconstructing southern society what problems did southern society face during reconstruction.
the civil war left the south devastated demoralized and destitute.
slavery was dead but what this meant for future relationships between whites and blacks was still in doubt.
the overwhelming majority of southern whites wanted to keep blacks adrift between slavery and freedom without rights in a status resembling that of the free negroes of the old south.
blacks sought independence from their former masters and viewed the acquisition of land education and the vote as the best means of achieving this goal.
the thousands of northerners who went south after the war for materialistic or humanitarian reasons hoped to extend yankee civilization to what they viewed as an unenlightened and barbarous region.
for most of them this reformation required the aid of the freedmen not enough southern whites were willing to accept the new order and embrace northern middle class values.
the struggle of these groups to achieve their conflicting goals bred chaos violence and instability.
unsettled conditions created many opportunities for corruption crime and terrorism.
this was scarcely an ideal setting for an experiment in interracial democracy but one was attempted nonetheless.
its success depended on massive and sustained support from the federal government.
to the extent that this was forthcoming progressive reform could be achieved.
when federal support faltered the forces of reaction and white supremacy were unleashed.
reorganizing land and labor the civil war scarred the southern landscape and wrecked its economy.
one devastated area central south carolina looked to an 1865 observer like a broad black streak of ruin and desolation the fences are gone lonesome smokestacks surrounded by dark heaps of ashes and cinders marking the spots where human habitations had stood the fields all along the roads widely overgrown with weeds with here and there a sickly patch of cotton or corn cultivated by negro squatters other areas through which the armies had passed were similarly ravaged.
several major cities including atlanta columbia and richmond were gutted by fire.
most factories were dismantled or destroyed and long stretches of railroad were torn up.
physical ruin would not have been so disastrous if investment capital had been available for rebuilding.
but the substantial wealth represented by confederate currency and bonds had melted away and emancipation of the slaves had divested the propertied classes of their most valuable and productive assets.
according to some estimates the souths per capita wealth in 1865 was only about half what it had been in 1860 recovery could not even begin until a new labor system replaced slavery.
it was widely assumed in both the north and the south that southern prosperity would continue to depend on cotton and that the plantation was the most efficient unit for producing the crop.
hindering efforts to rebuild the plantation economy were lack of capital the deep rooted belief of southern whites that blacks would work only under compulsion and the freedmens resistance to labor conditions that recalled slavery.
blacks strongly preferred to determine their own economic relationships and for a time they had reason to hope the federal government would support their ambitions.
the freed slaves were placed in a precarious position and were in effect fighting a twofront war.
although they were grateful for the federal aid in ending slavery freed slaves often had ideas about freedom that contradicted the plans of their northern allies.
many ex slaves wanted to hold on to the family based communal work methods that they utilized during slavery.
freed slaves in areas of south carolina for example attempted to maintain the family task system rather than adopting the individual piecework system pushed by northern capitalists.
many ex slaves opposed plans to turn them into wage laborers who produced exclusively for a market.
finally freed slaves often wanted to stay on the land their families had spent generations farming rather than move elsewhere to assume plots of land as individual farmers.
while not guaranteeing all of the freed slaves hopes for economic self determination the northern military attempted to establish a new economic base for the freed men and women.
general sherman hampered by the huge numbers of black fugitives that followed his army on its famous march issued an order in january 1865 that set aside the islands and coastal areas of georgia and south carolina for exclusive black occupancy on 40 acre plots.
furthermore the freedmens bureau as one of its many responsibilities was given control of hundreds of thousands of acres of reconstructing southern society giving them something they allegedly had not earned and the desire to restore cotton proread the document a sharecrop contract 1882 duction as quickly as possible to increase agricultural exports and stabilize the economy.
consequently most blacks in physical possession of small farms failed to acquire title and the mass of freedmen were left with little or no prospect of becoming landowners.
recalling the plight of southern blacks in 1865 an ex slave later wrote that they were set free without a dollar without a foot of land and without the wherewithal to get the next meal even despite their poverty and landlessness ex slaves were reluctant to settle down and commit themselves to wage labor for their former masters.
many took to the road hoping to find something better.
some were still expecting grants of land but others were simply trying to increase their bargaining power.
one freedman later recalled that an important part of being free was that we could move around and change bosses as the end of 1865 approached many freedmen had still not signed up for the coming season anxious planters feared that blacks were plotting to seize land by force.
within a few weeks however most holdouts signed for the best terms they could get.
one common form of agricultural employment in 1866 was a contract labor system.
under this system workers committed themselves for a year in return for fixed wages a substantial portion of which was withheld until after the harvest.
since many planters were inclined to drive hard bargains abuse their workers or cheat them at the end of the year the freedmens bureau assumed the civil war brought emancipation to slaves but the sharecropping system kept many of them the role of reviewing the contracts and enforcing economically bound to their employers.
at the end of a year the sharecropper tenants might owe them.
but bureau officials had differing notions most or all of what they had made to their landlord.
here a sharecropping family poses in front of what it meant to protect african americans of their cabin.
ex slaves often built their living quarters near woods in order to have a ready supply from exploitation.
some stood up strongly for of fuel for heating and cooking.
the cabins chimney lists away from the house so that it can be the rights of the freedmen others served as allies easily pushed away from the living quarters should it catch fire.
of the planters rounding up available workers source collection of the new york historical society negative number 50475 coercing them to sign contracts for low wages and then helping keep them in line.
abandoned or confiscated land and was authorized to make 40 acre the bureaus influence waned after 1867 it was phased out grants to black settlers for three year periods after which they completely by 1869 and the experiment with contract wage would have the option to buy at low prices.
by june 1865 forty labor was abandoned.
growing up alongside the contract systhousand black farmers were at work on 300 000 acres of what tem and eventually displacing it was an alternative capital labor they thought would be their own land.
for more on this see the relationship sharecropping.
first in small groups known as feature essay forty acres and a mule pp.
squads and later as individual families blacks worked a piece of but for most of them the dream of forty acres and a mule land independently for a fixed share of the crop usually one half.
or some other arrangement that would give them control of their the advantage of this arrangement for credit starved landlords was land and labor was not to be realized.
president johnson parthat it did not require much expenditure in advance of the harvest.
doned the owners of most of the land consigned to the ex slaves the system also forced the tenant to share the risks of crop failure by sherman and the freedmens bureau and proposals for an or a fall in cotton prices.
these considerations loomed larger after effective program of land confiscation and redistribution failed disastrous harvests in 1866 and 1867 to get through congress.
among the considerations promptafrican americans initially viewed sharecropping as a step up ing most congressmen to oppose land reform were a tenderness from wage labor in the direction of landownership.
but during the for property rights fear of sapping the freedmens initiative by 1870s this form of tenancy evolved into a new kind of servitude.
chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction president.
in 1869 the financial buccaneer jay gould enlisted the aid of a brother in law of grant to further his fantastic scheme to corner the gold market.
gould failed in the attempt but he did manage to save himself and come away with a huge profit.
grants first term vice president schuyler colfax of indiana was directly involved in the notorious crdit mobilier scandal.
crdit mobilier was a construction company that actually served as a fraudulent device for siphoning off profits that should have gone to the stockholders of the union pacific railroad which was the beneficiary of massive federal land grants.
to forestall government inquiry into this arrangement crdit mobilier stock was distributed to influential congressmen including colfax who was speaker of the house before he was elected vice president.
the whole business came to light just before the campaign of 1872 the election of 1872 candidate grant greeley party republican democratic and liberal republican popular vote electoral vote 3 597 132 286 2 834 125 greeley died before the electoral college voted.
out of a total of 366 electoral votes.
greeleys votes were divided among the four minor candidates.
republicans who could not tolerate such corruption or had other grievances against the administration broke with grant in 1872 and formed a third party committed to honest government and reconciliation between the north and the south.
led initially by high minded reformers such as senator carl schurz of missouri the liberal republicans endorsed reform of the civil service to curb the corruption breeding patronage system and advocated laissez faire economic policies which meant low tariffs an end to government subsidies for railroads and hard money.
despite their rhetoric of idealism and reform the liberal republicans were extremely conservative in their notions of what government should do to assure justice for blacks and other underprivileged americans.
the liberal republicans national convention nominated horace greeley editor of the respected new york tribune.
this was a curious and divisive choice since greeley was at odds with the founders of the movement on the tariff question and was indifferent to civil service reform.
the democrats also nominated greeley mainly because he promised to end radical reconstruction by restoring self government to the south.
but the journalist turned out to be a poor campaigner who failed to inspire enthusiasm from lifelong supporters of either party.
most republicans stuck with grant despite the corruption issue because they still could not stomach the idea of ex rebels returning to power in the south.
many democrats recalling greeleys previous record as a staunch republican simply stayed away from the polls.
the result was a decisive victory for grant whose 56 percent of the popular vote was the highest percentage won by any candidate between andrew jackson and theodore roosevelt.
grants second administration seemed to bear out the reformers worst suspicions about corruption in high places.
in 1875 the public learned that federal revenue offi cials had conspired with distillers to defraud the government of millions of dollars in liquor taxes.
grants private secretary orville e babcock was indicted as a member of the whiskey ring and was saved from conviction only by the presidents personal intercession.
the next year grants secretary of war william w belknap was impeached by the house after an investigation revealed he had taken bribes for the sale of indian trading posts.
he avoided conviction in the senate only by resigning from office before his trial.
grant fought hard to protect belknap to the point of participating in what a later generation might call a cover up.
there is no evidence that grant profited personally from any of the misdeeds of his subordinates.
yet he is not entirely without blame for the corruption in his administration.
he failed to take firm action against the malefactors and even after their guilt had been clearly established he sometimes tried to shield them from justice.
ulysses s grant was the only president between jackson and wilson to serve two full and consecutive terms.
but unlike other chief executives so favored by the electorate grant is commonly regarded as a failure.
although the problems he faced would have challenged any president the shame of grants administration was that he made loyalty to old friends a higher priority than civil rights or sound economic principles.
reunion and the new south who benefited and who suffered from the reconciliation of the north and south.
congressional reconstruction prolonged the sense of sectional division and conflict for a dozen years after the guns had fallen silent.
its final liquidation in 1877 opened the way to a reconciliation of north and south.
but the costs of reunion were high for less privileged groups in the south.
the civil and political rights of african americans left unprotected were progressively and relentlessly stripped away by white supremacist regimes.
lower class whites saw their interests sacrificed to those of capitalists and landlords.
despite the rhetoric hailing a prosperous new south the region remained poor and open to exploitation by northern business interests.
the compromise of 1877 the election of 1876 pitted rutherford b hayes of ohio a republican governor untainted by the scandals of the grant era against governor samuel j tilden of new york a democratic reformer who had battled against tammany hall and the tweed ring.
honest government was apparently the electorates highest priority.
when the returns came in tilden had clearly won the popular vote and seemed likely to win a narrow victory in the electoral college.
but the result was placed in doubt when the returns from the three southern states still controlled by the republicans south carolina florida and louisiana were contested.
if hayes were to be awarded these three states plus one contested electoral vote in oregon republican strategists realized he would triumph in the electoral college by a single vote.
the outcome of the election remained undecided for months plunging the nation into a major political crisis.
to resolve the reunion and the new south with southern democratic acquiescence the filibuster was broken and hayes took the oath of office.
he immediately ordered the army not to resist a democratic takeover of state governments in south carolina and louisiana.
thus fell the last of the radical governments and the entire south was firmly under the control of white democrats.
the trauma of the war and reconstruction had destroyed the chances for a renewal of two party competition among white southerners.
northern republicans soon reverted to denouncing the south for its suppression of black suffrage.
but this waving of the bloody shirt which also served as a reminder of the war and northern casualties quickly degenerated into a campaign ritual aimed at northern voters who could still be moved by sectional antagonism.
election of 1876 uncontested electoral vote electoral total popular vote republican rutherford b hayes 4 036 298 democratic samuel j tilden 4 300 590 greenback peter cooper 81 737 8 418 625 wash terr.
montana terr.
idaho terr.
dakota terr.
new mexico terr.
indian terr.
7 utah terr.
8 4 contested result settled by special election commission in favor of hayes.
impasse congress appointed a special electoral commission of fifteen members to determine who would receive the votes of the disputed states.
originally composed of seven democrats seven republicans and an independent the commission fell under republican control when the independent member resigned to run for the senate and a republican was appointed to take his place.
the commission split along party lines and voted eight to seven to award hayes all of the disputed votes.
but this decision still had to be ratified by both houses of congress.
the republican dominated senate readily approved it but the democrats in the house planned a filibuster to delay the final counting of the electoral votes until after inauguration day.
if the filibuster succeeded neither candidate would have a majority and as provided in the constitution the election would be decided by the house where the democrats controlled enough states to elect tilden.
to ensure hayess election republican leaders negotiated secretly with conservative southern democrats some of whom seemed willing to abandon the filibuster if the last troops were withdrawn and home rule restored to the south.
eventually an informal bargain was struck which historians have dubbed the compromise of 1877 what precisely was agreed to and by whom remains a matter of dispute but one thing at least was understood by both sides hayes would be president and southern blacks would be abandoned to their fate.
in a sense hayes did not concede anything because he had already decided to end federal support for the crumbling radical regimes.
but southern negotiators were heartened by firm assurances that this would indeed be the policy.
some also were influenced by vaguer promises involving federal support for southern railroads and internal improvements.
redeeming a new south the men who came to power after radical reconstruction fell in one southern state after another are usually referred to as the redeemers.
they had differing backgrounds and previous loyalties.
some were members of the old souths ruling planter class who had warmly supported secession and now sought to reestablish the old order with as few changes as possible.
others of middle class origin or outlook favored commercial and industrial interests over agrarian groups and called for a new south committed to diversified economic development.
a third group was professional politicians bending with the prevailing winds such as joseph e brown of georgia who had been a secessionist a wartime governor and a leading scalawag republican before becoming a democratic redeemer.
although historians have tried to assign the redeemers a single coherent ideology or view of the world and have debated whether it was old south agrarianism or new south industrialism they endorsed these leaders can perhaps best be understood as power brokers mediating among the dominant interest groups of the south in ways that served their own political advantage.
in many ways the rings that they established on the state and county level were analogous to the political machines developing at the same time in northern cities.
redeemers did however agree on and endorse two basic principles laissez faire and white supremacy.
laissez faire the notion that government should be limited and should not intervene openly and directly in the economy could unite planters frustrated at seeing direct state support going to businessmen and capitalist promoters who had come to realize that low taxes and freedom from government regulation were even more advantageous than state subsidies.
it soon became clear that the redeemers responded only to privileged and entrenched interest groups especially landlords merchants and industrialists and offered little or nothing to tenants small farmers and working people.
as industrialization began to gather steam in the 1880s democratic regimes became increasingly accommodating to manufacturing interests and hospitable to agents of northern capital who were gaining control of the souths transportation system and its extractive industries.
white supremacy was the principal rallying cry that brought the redeemers to power in the first place.
once in office they found they could stay there by charging that opponents of ruling democratic cliques were trying to divide the white mans party and open the way for a return to black domination appeals to racism could also deflect attention from the economic grievances of groups without political clout.
complete the assignment forty acres and a mule on myhistorylab feature essay forty acres and a mule serving as a kind of dress rehearsal for reconstruction the port royal experiment provides a glimpse of what might have occurred had the freed slaves actually been given forty acres and a mule f ew dreams have died harder than the desire of the freed slaves to own the land on which they labored.
the hope of forty acres and a mule for every freedman was raised by general william tecumseh shermans special field order 15 in january 1865 which decreed that 40 acre plots of abandoned and confiscated land would be set aside for ex slaves.
yet the order was in effect for less than a year and few slaves realized the dream of land ownership after emancipation.
even before shermans order however there were experiments across the south with free black labor on plantations formerly held by slaveholders.
two of these so called rehearsals for reconstruction at port royal south carolina and davis bend mississippi show how reconstruction might have developed had true land reform been implemented.
the efforts to resettle freed people on abandoned plantations began out of the armys practical concern to rid itself of the many runaways who were following it and crowding its camps.
in november 1861 general benjamin f butler in a novel interpretation of international law declared runaway slaves to be contraband of war whom the union army could rightfully seize from their rebel owners.
the port royal experiment began as a solution to the problem of what to do with the contrabands.
when the u s navy occupied the sea islands of south carolina and georgia in november 1861 the whites fled leaving behind 10 000 slaves who already organized their own labor according to the task system often with black drivers rather than white overseers.
the abandoned slaves sacked the plantation houses and cotton gins but had little inclination to return to the fields and plant cotton.
to get the black laborers back to the fields as soon as possible treasury secretary salmon chase recruited edward l pierce to administer port royal and show the world that free labor could produce as much cotton as slave labor.
a motley crew of military officers treasury agents investors and idealistic teachers and missionaries known as gideons band followed pierce south.
tension soon arose among these groups.
for example edward atkinson agent for six boston cotton manufacturers was motivated by both anti slavery sentiments and profit.
he wrote the pamphlet cheap cotton by free labor to prove that free labor would be more profitable than slavery.
by contrast gideons band were young men fresh from harvard yale and brown and twelve women and included clerks doctors divinitystudents professors and teachers underground railway agents and socialist.
unitarians free thinkers methodists straitlaced and the other evangelical sects all were motivated by abolitionism and idealism about free labor none knew anything about cotton production which led to conflicts with plantation superintendents like atkinson and edward philbrick.
the freed slaves believed they had a right to the land on which they had lived and worked for so long without compensation.
they celebrated freedom from white overseers and sang no more peck o corn for me no more no more.
no more drivers lash for me.
no more pint o salt for me.
no more hundred lash for me.
no more mistress call for me no more no more.
many thousands go.
despite the conflicts between the idealists and the capitalists and the ex slaves preference for raising food crops rather than cotton the port royal experiment was a qualified success even for the cotton agents.
although cotton yields were lower than in the 1850s because of the wartime loss of fine seed and competition from cotton in egypt profits were high and free labor was nearly as productive as slave labor.
philbrick made an 80 000 profit on a 40 000 investment.
even the philanthropic gideonities earned 6 000 7 000 each.
another site of black self sufficiency was davis bend the mississippi plantation belonging to confederate president jefferson daviss brother joseph.
joseph davis had administered it as a model plantation with limited self government by slaves including a slave jury for criminal offenses and unusual material comforts.
by 1850 one slave benjamin montgomery was running the plantation store managing its cotton gin and keeping the profits.
after whites fled southern mississippi in 1863 general ulysses s grant decided that davis bend should become a negro paradise and the land was leased directly to former slaves who paid only for tools mules and rations.
they set up an even more comprehensive self government that included an elected sheriff and judges.
davis bend was an impressive success.
by 1865 laborers there had produced nearly 2 000 bales of cotton and earned a profit of 160 000.
during reconstruction davis bend also produced several elected black officials.
on january 12 1865 secretary of war edwin stanton and general sherman met with twenty black leaders to hear the concerns of the freed people.
the next day sherman issued special field order 15 designating the whole sea island region for exclusive negro settlement yet the experiment on sherman land ended almost before it began.
president andrew johnson rescinded shermans order in the summer of 1865 and restored the land to its former owners.
while the port royal experiment did lead to limited black land ownership education and strong communities it was not a rehearsal for reconstruction for the south as a whole.
instead the reconstruction south followed the model of the occupied deep south during the war which had maintained large white owned plantations with the freed people working in gangs under coercive oneyear contracts.
when general oliver o howard told the freed people on the sea islands that the land was to be restored to its white owners they were bitter we want homesteads we were promised homesteads.
if the government.
now takes away from them all right to the soil they stand upon save such as they can get by again working for your late and their all time enemies.
we are left in a more unpleasant condition than our former one.
this is not the condition of really freemen some did not leave without a struggle.
black squatters told edisto island owners who returned in february 1866 you have better go back to charleston and go to work there and if you can do nothing else you can pick oysters and earn your living as the loyal people have done by the sweat of their brows even davis bend was restored to joseph davis although he sold it on long term credit to ben montgomery and his two sons.
davis was a lenient creditor and montgomery had a measure of prosperity through the mid1870s until economic reversals led him to bankruptcy in 1879 by then joseph davis had died and his heirs were less generous the plantation was sold at foreclosure auction and the dream of large scale black self sufficiency in mississippi ended for generations.
questions for discussion 1 how were the attempts to give land to the freed slaves in the south related to the union war effort.
2 why did land reform under the port royal experiment and at davis bend ultimately fail.
chapter 16 on myhistorylab retreat from reconstruction the president vs congress read the document smalls p 367 pearson profiles robert read the document thirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth amendment 1865 1868 1870 p 369 read the document code 1865 p 370 view the map the mississippi black reconstruction p 373 reconstructing southern society read the document 1882 p 375 a sharecrop contract watch the video the schools that the civil war and reconstruction created p 378 view the closer look the first vote p 380 read the document hannah irwin describes ku klux klan ride p 381 reunion and the new south complete the assignment mule p 384 forty acres and a watch the video the promise and failure of reconstruction p 387 indicates study plan media assignment the west exploiting an empire contents and learning objectives beyond the frontier pg.
391 the bonanza west pg.
403 what were the challenges of settling the country west of the mississippi.
why was the west a bonanza of dreams and get rich quick schemes.
crushing the native americans pg.
392 how did white americans crush the culture of the native americans as they moved west.
feature essay blacks in blue the buffalo soldiers in the west settlement of the west pg.
400 why did americans and others move to the west.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab chapter 18 the industrial society some of the inventions transformed communications.
in 1866 cyrus w field improved the transatlantic cable linking the telegraph networks of europe and the united states.
by the early 1870s land and submarine cables ran to brazil japan and the china coast in the next two decades they reached africa and spread across south america.
diplomats and business leaders could now talk to their counterparts in berlin or hong kong.
even before the telephone the cables quickened the pace of foreign affairs revolutionized journalism and allowed businesses to expand and centralize.
the typewriter 1867 stock ticker 1867 cash register 1879 calculating machine 1887 and adding machine 1888 helped business transactions.
high speed spindles automatic looms and electric sewing machines transformed the clothing industry which for the first time in history turned out ready made clothes for the masses.
in 1890 the census bureau first used machines to sort and tabulate data on punched cards a portent of a new era of informathe business of invention tion storage and processing.
in 1879 george eastman patented a process for coating gelatin america has become known the world around as the home of on photographic dry plates which led to celluloid film and motion invention boasted the commissioner of patents in 1892 it had pictures.
by 1888 he was marketing the kodak camera which not always been so until the last third of the nineteenth cenweighed 35 ounces took 100 exposures and cost 25.
even though tury the country had imported most of its technology.
then an early kodaks had to be returned to the factory camera and all for extraordinary group of inventors and tinkerers specialists in film developing they revolutionized photography.
now almost anyinvention thomas a edison called them began to study the one could snap a picture.
world around them.
some of their inventions gave rise to new other innovations changed the diet.
there were new processes industries a few actually changed the quality of life.
for flour canned meat vegetables condensed milk and even beer in the very act of inventing edison and others drew on a from an offshoot of louis pasteurs discoveries about bacteria.
deeper invention a realization that people could mold nature packaged cereals appeared on breakfast tables.
refrigerated railroad to their own ends.
they could create out of first nature as one cars ice cooled brought fresh fruit from florida and california to environmental historian has noted a second nature shaped as they wished.
all parts of the country.
in the 1870s gustavus f swift a chicago the number of patents issued to inventors reflected the trend.
meat packer hit on the idea of using the cars to distribute meat during the 1850s fewer than 2 000 patents were issued each year.
nationwide.
setting up disassembly factories to butcher meat by the 1880s and 1890s the figure reached more than 20 000 a henry ford later copied them for his famous assembly lines he year.
between 1790 and 1860 the u s patent office issued just started an era of cheap beef as a newspaper said.
36 000 patents in the decade of the 1890s alone it issued more no innovation however rivaled the importance of the telethan 200 000 phone and the use of electricity for light and power.
the telephone was the work of alexander graham bell a shrewd patents issued by decade 1850 1899 and genial scot who settled in boston in 1871.
221 277 interested in the problems of the deaf bell experimented with ways to transmit speech electrically 195 104 and after several years he had developed electrified metal disks that much like the human ear converted sound waves to electrical impulses and back again.
on march 10 1876 he transmitted the first sentence over a telephone mr.
watson come here i want 124 672 you later that year he exhibited the new device to excited crowds at the centennial exposition in philadelphia.
64 302 in 1878 the year a telephone was installed in the white house the first telephone exchange opened in new haven connecticut.
fighting off 19 591 competitors who challenged the patent the young bell telephone company dominated the growing industry.
by 1895 there were about 310 000 phones 1850 1859 1860 1869 1870 1879 1880 1889 1890 1899 a decade later there were ten million about one for every ten people.
american telephone and source u s bureau of the census historical statistics of the united states colonial times to telegraph company formed by the bell interests in 1970 bicentennial edition washington dc 1975 other companies followed suit including american sugar refining the northern securities company and the national biscuit company.
merger followed merger.
by 1900 1 percent of the nations companies controlled more than one third of its industrial production.
a decade later a congressional investigation showed that two individuals rockefeller and morgan between them controlled businesses worth more than 22 billion.
in 1897 rockefeller retired with a fortune of nearly 900 million but for standard oil and petroleum in general the most expansive period was yet to come.
the great oil pools of texas and oklahoma had not yet been discovered.
plastics and other oil based synthetics were several decades in the future.
there were only four usable automobiles in the country and the day of the gasoline engine automobile and airplane lay just ahead.
an industrial empire in 1896 records made of hard rubber and shellac appeared on the market the following year a phonograph sold for 20.
in 1904 someone had the idea of recording on both sides of the disk and the phonograph record in its modern form was born.
for the first time in history people could listen again and again to a favorite symphony or piano solo.
the phonograph made human experience repeatable in a way never before possible.
in 1879 came an even larger triumph the incandescent lamp.
sir joseph william swan an english inventor had already experimented with the carbon filament but edisons task involved more than finding a durable filament.
he set out to do nothing less than change light.
a trial and error inventor edison tested sixteen hundred materials before producing late in 1879 the carbon filament he wanted.
then he had to devise a complex system of conductors meters and generators by which electricity could be divided and distributed to homes and businesses.
with the financial backing of j p morgan he organized the edison illuminating company and built the pearl street power station in new york city the testing ground of the new apparatus.
on in the late 1870s the electric light and power transfer were only at inventive stages having been september 4 1882 as morgan and others explored unsuccessfully by a number of inventors.
at that time thomas edison with his ideas and watched edison threw a switch and lit proven analytical abilities undertook the problem.
it was edisons interest in technological systems that the house of morgan the stock exchange led him to a general system of incandescent lighting in the fall of 1878 the new york times and a number of other buildings.
amazed a times reporter marveled that writ1885 became another of the vast holding companies consolidating ing stories in the office at night seemed almost like writing in more than a hundred local systems.
daylight power stations soon opened in boston philadelphia if the telephone dissolved communication barriers as old as and chicago.
by 1900 there were 2 774 stations lighting some the human race thomas alva edison the wizard of menlo park two million electric lights around the country.
in a nation alive invented processes and products of comparable significance.
born with light the habits of centuries changed.
a flick of the switch lit in 1847 edison had little formal education although he was an homes and factories at any hour of the day or night.
avid reader.
like carnegie he went into the new field of telegraphy.
in a rare blunder edison based his system on low voltage direct tinkering in his spare time he made several important improvecurrent which could be transmitted only about two miles.
george ments including a telegraph capable of sending four messages over a westinghouse the inventor of the railroad air brake demonstrated single wire.
gathering teams of specialists to work on specific probthe advantages of high voltage alternating current for transmission lems edison built the first modern research laboratory at menlo over great distances.
in 1886 he formed the westinghouse electric park new jersey.
it may have been his most important invention.
company and with the inventor nikola tesla a hungarian immithe laboratory edison promised would turn out a minor grant developed an alternating current motor that could convert invention every ten days and a big thing every six months or so electricity into mechanical power.
electricity could light a lamp in 1877 it turned out a big thing.
worried about a telephones high or illuminate a skyscraper pull a streetcar or drive an entire railcost edison set out to invent a telephone repeater which became road run a sewing machine or power a mammoth assembly line.
the phonograph.
those unable to afford a phone he thought could transmitted easily over long distances it freed factories and citrecord their voices for replay from a central telephone station.
using ies from location near water or coal.
electricity in short brought tin foil wrapped around a grooved rotating cylinder he shouted the a revolution.
verses of mary had a little lamb and then listened in awe as the buried under pavement or strung from pole to pole wires machine played them back.
i was never so taken aback in all my of every description trolley telephone and power marked the life he later said.
everybody was astonished.
i was always afraid of birth of the modern city.
things that worked the first time read the document thomas edison the success of the electric light complete the assignment shopping in a new society on myhistorylab feature essay shopping in a new society macys was founded by rowland hussey macy who between 1843 and 1855 opened four retail dry goods stores including the original macys store in downtown haverhill massachusetts established in 1851 to serve the mill industry employees of the area.
o f all the innovations that changed the way people lived between the 1870s and 1920s one of the most important was the rise and development of the department store those sprawling urban empires of goods and services that fueled the mass consumption of the new society.
a significant invention in itself the department store took advantage of myriad other changes in american and european society especially the industrial transformation that led to the mass production of consumer goods in varieties and amounts never seen before.
that industrial revolution in turn drew on breakthroughs in transportation including a vast railroad network that linked cities and villages and ended the relative isolation and selfsufficiency of the nations island communities the railroads tied people together brought in products from outside fostered greater interdependence and encouraged economic specialization.
in the cities new streetcar systems another revolution in transportation carried shoppers directly to stores workplaces and other destinations regardless of the weather.
as a new york city department store suggested one winter ladies if walking is too bad just take the cars the advice took hold.
the word commuter first entered the language in the 1870s.
as machines turned out a plethora of new products it became vital to sell them and a new science of marketing spread.
printers ink the first major advertising journal began publishing in 1881 the rotary press invented in 1875 initiated a new era in newspaper advertising.
woodcuts halftones and photoengraving added illustrations to catch the consumers eye.
liking the results businesses spent more on advertising every year.
in 1870 they spent about 50 million in 1900 about 95 million in 1920 over 500 million.
by the 1970s it was 22 4 billion.
ads and billboards sprouted up everywhere touting cigarettes cars perfumes and cosmetics.
advertising agents using new statistical sampling techniques developed modern concepts of market testing and research.
when people see your name constantly in the paper printers ink argued they begin to believe they know you and it is but a short step from advertising to patronage reflecting common values department stores flourished in europe as well as in america particularly in paris.
emile zola the famed french novelist said the department store democratized luxury offering the public for the first time in history free admission to displays of material goods.
shop he and others pointed out had become a verb.
in the united states r h macy in new york city john wanamaker in philadelphia and marshall field in chicago turned the department store into a national institution.
there people learned to browse a relatively new concept and to buy.
innovations in pricing display and advertising helped customers develop wants they had not known they had.
in 1870 wanamaker took out the first full page newspaper ad and by 1891 macy too had turned to fullpage advertisements often placed on pages next to an article of special interest to women.
the ads were hard to resist follow the crowd an 1885 ad in a new york newspaper said and it will always take you to r h macy co what better evidence do you wish that ours is the all around store of new york city.
ride our bicycles read our books cook in our saucepans dine off our china wear our silks get under our blankets smoke our cigars drink our wines shop at macys and life will cost you less and yield you more than you dreamed possible.
even the surroundings often evoked a dream.
cash registers a new invention rang up every sale and by the 1880s electric lights highlighted the goods.
electric elevators and escalators carried shoppers to new heights.
plate glass windows a product of discoveries in the technology of glassmaking flooded the stores with daylight.
windows on the street levels became show windows a term developed in the united states.
window shopping another new word became popular.
looking through those windows store owners soon noted were women hundreds of them and it was around women that they built their businesses.
woman is a shopper as an industry journal noted.
out of that fact has come the modern department store in these years growing numbers of women worked in factories telephone exchanges and business offices and they could spend their wages on items they desired.
by 1880 2 6 million women were in the work force in 1890 4 million.
in 1900 more than 5 million women one fifth of all adult women worked outside the home.
within limits of course that meant money in womens pockets and the new department stores tailored their advertising and wares to appeal to women.
they also did everything they could to make their stores safe clean and appealing.
in 1892 macys built a new ladies waiting room calling it the most luxurious and beautiful department devoted to the comfort of ladies to be found in a mercantile establishment in the city soon there were ladies lunch rooms dressing rooms specially lit to show off evening gowns in broad daylight and shelves of hats glass and china with monograms and other special designs.
it was not unusual for a department store to stock 1 300 types of womens shoes.
the department store along with advertising brand names and other innovations brought americans of all backgrounds into a national market.
even as the country itself grew a homogeneity of goods bound it together touching cities and farms east and west rich and poor.
a common language of consumption turned americans into a community of consumers who were surrounded by goods unavailable just decades before and able to purchase them.
they had learned to make want and buy.
these are lessons not forgotten.
the department store even today accounts for more than one tenth of all annual commercial sales in the united states.
the spread of the world wide web has added like transportation and communication innovations in an earlier era another route for consumers to buy the alluring products of the department stores.
the so called cyber monday of the 2011 christmas season enticed those who preferred to shop and spend their money buying goods online.
according to the new york times on cyber monday shoppers bought 1 25 billion worth of goods over the internet.
somehow one suspects this would not have surprised macy wanamaker and their nineteenth century colleagues.
questions for discussion 1 what conditions between the 1870s and 1920s led to the rise of the department store.
2 what changes did department stores bring in peoples lives.
chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 in the old days said a woman in 1907 a married woman was supposed to be a frump and a bore and a physical wreck.
now you are supposed to keep up intellectually to look young and well and be fresh and bright and entertaining magazines such as the ladies home journal which started in 1889 glorified motherhood and the home but its articles and ads featured women as homebound child oriented consumers.
while societys leaders spoke fondly of the value of homemaking the status of housewives declined under the factory system which emphasized money rewards and devalued household labor.
underlying all these changes was one of the modern worlds most important trends a major decline in fertility rates that lasted from 1800 to 1939 though blacks immigrants and rural dwellers continued to have more children than white native born city dwellers the trend affected all classes and races among white women the birthrate fell from seven in 1800 to just over four in 1880 to about three in 1900 people everywhere tended to marry later and have fewer children.
since contraceptive devices were not yet widely used the decline reflected abstinence and a conscious decision to postpone or limit families.
some women decided to devote greater attention to a smaller number of children others to pursue their own careers.
there was a marked increase in the number of young unmarried women working for wages or attending school an increase in the number of women delaying marriage or not marrying at all and a gradual decline in rates of illegitimacy and premarital pregnancy.
in large part the decline in fertility stemmed from peoples responses to the social and economic forces around them the rise of cities and industry.
in a host of individual decisions they decided to have fewer children and the result reshaped some of the fundamental attitudes and institutions of american society.
changing views a growing assertiveness among women in and out of the family there was growing recognition of selfsufficient working women employed in factory telephone exchange or business office who were entering the workforce in increasing numbers.
in 1880 2 6 million women were gainfully employed in 1890 4 million.
in 1882 the census bureau took the first census of working women most were single and worked out of necessity rather than choice.
many regarded this new woman as a corruption of the ideal vision of the american woman in which man worshiped a diviner self than his own innocent helpless and good.
women were to be better than the world around them.
they were brought up said ida tarbell a leading political reformer as if wrongdoing were impossible to them views changed albeit slowly.
one important change occurred in the legal codes pertaining to women particularly in the common law doctrine of femme couverte.
under that doctrine wives were chattel of their husbands they could not legally control their own earnings property or children unless they had drawn up a specific contract before marriage.
by 1890 many states had substantially revised the doctrine to allow wives control of their earnings and inherited property.
see the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture pp.
in cases of divorce the new laws also recognized womens rights to custody or joint custody of their children.
although divorce was still far from being socially acceptable divorce rates more than doubled during the last third of the century.
by 1905 one in twelve marriages was ending in divorce.
in the 1870s and 1880s a growing number of women were asserting their own humanness.
they fought for the vote lobbied for equal pay and sought self fulfillment.
the new interest in psychology and medicine strengthened their causes.
charlotte perkins gilman author of women and economics 1898 joined other women in questioning the ideal of womanly innocence which she argued actually meant ignorance.
in medical and popular literature menstruation sexual intercourse and childbirth were becoming viewed as natural functions instead of taboo topics.
edward bliss footes plain home talk of love marriage and parentage a best seller that went through many editions between the 1880s and 1900 challenged victorian notions that sexual intercourse was unhealthy and intended solely to produce children.
in plain facts for old and young 1881 dr john h kellogg urged parents to recognize the early awakening of sexual feelings in their children.
still such matters were avoided in many american homes.
rheta childe dorr a journalist remembered that when a girl reached the age of fourteen new rules were introduced and when you asked for an explanation you met only embarrassed silence women espoused causes with new fervor.
susan b anthony a veteran of many reform campaigns tried to vote in the 1872 presidential election and was fined 100 which she refused to pay.
in 1890 she helped form the national american woman suffrage association to work for the enfranchisement of women.
on new yorks lower east side the ladies anti beef trust association which formed to protest increases in the price of meat established a boycott of butcher shops.
when their demands were ignored the women invaded the shops poured kerosene on the meat and set fire to it.
we dont riot rebecca ablowitz told the judge.
but if all we did was to weep at home nobody would notice it so we have to do something to help ourselves educating the masses continuing a trend that stretched back a hundred years childhood was becoming an even more distinct time of life.
there was still only a vague concept of adolescence the special nature of the teenage years but the role of children was changing.
less and less were children perceived as little adults valued for the additional financial gain they might bring into the family.
now children were to grow and learn and be nurtured rather than rushed into adulthood.
as a result schooling became more important and american children came closer than ever before to universal education.
by 1900 thirty one states and territories out of fifty one had enacted laws making school attendance compulsory though most required attendance only until the age of fourteen.
in 1870 there were only 160 public high schools in 1900 there were 6 000 in the same years public school budgets rose from 63 million to 253 million illiteracy declined from 20 percent to just over 10 percent of the population.
still even as late as 1900 the average adult had only five years of schooling.
educators saw the school as the primary means to train people for life and work in an industrializing society.
hence social and cultural change 1877 1900 teachers focused on basic skills reading and mathematics and on values obedience and attentiveness to the clock.
most schools had a highly structured curriculum built around discipline and routine.
in 1892 joseph rice a pediatrician toured twelve hundred classrooms in thirty six cities.
in a typical classroom he reported the atmosphere was damp and chilly the teacher strict.
the unkindly spirit of the teacher is strikingly apparent the pupils being completely subjugated to her will are silent and motionless one teacher asked her pupils how can you learn anything with your knees and toes out of order many children dropped out of school early and not just to earn money.
helen todd a factory inspector in chicago found a group of young girls working in a hot stuffy attic.
when she asked why they were not in school tillie isakowsky who was 14 said school.
school is de fiercest ting youse kin come up against.
factories aint no cinch but schools is worst a few blocks away todd stumbled on a 13 year old boy hiding in a basement.
he cried when she said he would have to go to school blurting that they hits ye if yer dont learn and they hits ye if ye whisper and they hits ye if ye have string in yer pocket and they hits ye if yer seat squeaks and they hits ye if ye dont stan up in time and they hits ye if yer late and they hits ye if ye ferget the page curious todd asked 500 children whether they would go to school or work in a factory if their families did not need the money 412 preferred the factory.
school began early boys attended all day but girls often stayed home after lunch since it was thought they needed less in the way of learning.
on the teachers command students stood and recited from websters spellers and mcguffeys eclectic readers the periods most popular textbooks.
the work of william holmes mcguffey a professor of languages at miami university in ohio mcguffeys eclectic readers had been in use since 1836 100 million copies were sold in the last half of the nineteenth century.
nearly every child read them they taught not only reading but also ethics values and religion.
in the readers boys grew up to be heroes girls to be mothers and hard work always meant success shall birds and bees and ants be wise while i my moments waste.
o let me with the morning rise and to my duty haste.
the south lagged far behind in education.
the average family size there was about twice as large as in the north and a greater proportion of the population lived in isolated rural areas.
state and local authorities mandated fewer weeks in the average school year and many southern states refused to adopt compulsory education laws.
even more important was the effect of southern jim crow laws passed in the 1890s and after to keep african americans from voting serving on juries and participating in other aspects of southern life.
southerners used these laws to maintain separate school systems to segregate the races.
supported by the u s supreme court decision of 1896 in plessy v ferguson see plessy v ferguson the shaping of jim crow pp.
460 463 segregated schooling added a devastating financial burden to education in the south.
north carolina and alabama mandated segregated schools in 1876 south carolina and louisiana in 1877 mississippi in 1878 and virginia in 1882 a series of supreme court decisions in the 1880s and 1890s upheld the concept of segregation.
in the civil rights cases 1883 the court ruled that the fourteenth amendment barred state governments from discriminating on account of race but did not prevent private individuals or organizations from doing so.
plessy v ferguson 1896 established the doctrine of separate but equal and upheld a louisiana law requiring different railroad cars for whites and blacks.
the court applied the doctrine directly to schools in cumming v county board of education 1899 which approved the creation of separate schools for whites even if there were no comparable schools for blacks.
southern school laws often implied that the schools would be separate but equal and they were often separate but rarely equal.
black schools were usually dilapidated and black teachers were paid considerably less than white teachers.
in 1890 only 35 percent of black children attended school in the south 55 percent of white children did.
that year nearly two thirds of the countrys black population was illiterate.
educational techniques changed after the 1870s.
educators paid more attention to early elementary education a trend that placed young children in school and helped the growing number of mothers who worked outside the home.
the kindergarten movement started in st louis in 1873 spread across the country.
in kindergartens four to six year old children learned by playing not by keeping their knees and toes in order.
for older children social reformers advocated practical courses in manual training and homemaking.
we are impatient with the schools which lay all stress on reading and writing jane addams said for they fail to give the child any clew to the life about him for the first time education became a field of university study.
european theorists such as johann friedrich herbart a german educator argued that learning occurred best in an atmosphere of freedom and confidence between teachers and pupils.
teacher training became increasingly professional.
only ten normal schools or teacher training institutions existed in the united states before the civil war.
by 1900 there were 345 and one in every five elementary teachers had graduated from a professional school.
higher education nearly one hundred fifty new colleges and universities opened in the twenty years between 1880 and 1900 the morrill land grant act of 1862 gave large grants of land to the states for the establishment of colleges to teach agriculture and the mechanic arts the act fostered sixty nine land grant institutions including the great state universities of wisconsin california minnesota and illinois.
private philanthropy born of the large fortunes of the industrial age also spurred growth in higher education.
leland stanford gave 24 million to endow stanford university on his california ranch and john d rockefeller founder of the standard oil company gave 34 million to found the university of chicago.
other industrialists established cornell 1865 vanderbilt 1873 and tulane 1884.
as colleges expanded their function changed and their curriculum broadened.
no longer did they exist primarily to train young men for the ministry.
they moved away from the classical curriculum of rhetoric mathematics latin and greek toward reality and practicality as president david starr jordan of stanford university said.
the massachusetts institute of technology mit founded in 1861 focused on science and engineering.
chapter 22 the progressive era read the document samuel gompers the american labor movement 1914 samuel gompers second from bottom left co founded the american federation of labor in 1886 and served as its president in 1914 when its membership approached two million skilled workers.
gomperss trade union philosophy focused on the economic ends of skilled workers including achieving higher wages the eight hour day and safe working conditions through collective bargaining with employers.
public on the problems and needs of working women.
it took in all working women who would join regardless of skill although not at first african american women and it won crucial financial support from well to do women such as anne morgan daughter of the feared financier j p morgan.
robinss close friend jane addams belonged as did mary mcdowell the angel of the stockyards who worked with slaughterhouse workers in chicago julia lathrop who tried to improve the lot of wage earning children and dr alice hamilton a pioneer in american research on the causes of industrial disease.
the wtul never had many members a few thousand at most but its influence extended far beyond its membership.
in 1909 it supported the uprising of the 20 000 a strike of shirtwaist workers in new york city.
when female employees of the triangle shirtwaist company tried to form a union the company fired them and they walked out twenty thousand men and women in five hundred other shops followed.
strike meetings were conducted in three languages english yiddish and italian and before being forced to go back to work the strikers won a shorter workweek and a few other gains.
sadly the triangle women lost out on another important demand for unlocked shop doors and safe fire escapes.
their loss proved lethal in the famous triangle shirtwaist company fire of 1911 see the feature essay the triangle fire pp.
the wtul also backed a strike in 1910 against hart schaff ner and marx chicagos largest manufacturer of mens clothing.
one day annie shapiro the 18 year old daughter of russian immigrants was told her wages were being cut from conflict in the workplace 7 a week to 6 20.
that was a large cut and along with sixteen other young women shapiro refused to accept it and walked out.
we had to be recognized as people she said later.
soon other women walked out and the revolt spread.
managers quickly promised to restore the cuts but as one woman said just then there was big noise outside and we all rushed to the windows and there we saw the police beating the strikers on our account and when we saw that we went out in a matter of days some forty thousand garment workers were on strike about half of them women.
manufacturers hurried to negotiate and the result was the important hart schaffner agreement which created an arbitration committee composed of management and labor to handle grievances and settle disputes.
the first successful experiment in collective bargaining the hart schaffner agreement became the model for the kind of agreements that govern industrial relations today.
another union the industrial workers of the world iww attracted by far the greatest attention and the most fears in these years.
unlike the wtul it welcomed everyone regardless of gender or race.
unlike the afl it tried to organize the unskilled and foreign born laborers who worked in the mass production industries.
founded in chicago in 1905 it aimed to unite the american working class into a mammoth union to promote labors interests.
its motto an injury to one is an injury to all emphasized labor solidarity as had the earlier knights of labor.
but unlike the knights the iww or wobblies as they were often known urged social revolution.
it is our purpose to overthrow the capitalist system by forcible means if necessary william d big bill haywood one of its founders said and he went on in his speeches to say he knew of nothing a worker could do that will bring as much anguish to labor union membership 1897 1920 millions the boss as a little sabotage in the right place joe hill the iwws legendary folk poet reminded labor of its potential strength if the workers took a notion they could stop all speeding trains every ship upon the ocean they can tie with mighty chains.
every wheel in the creation every mine and every mill fleets and armies of the nation will at their command stand still.
iww leaders included mary harris mother jones a famous veteran of battles in the illinois coalfields elizabeth gurley flynn a fiery young radical who joined as a teenager and big bill haywood himself the strapping one eyed founder of the western federation of miners.
the iww led a number of major strikes.
strikes in lawrence massachusetts 1912 and paterson new jersey 1912 attracted national attention in lawrence when the strikers sent their children ill clad and hungry out of the city to stay with sympathetic families in paterson when they rented new yorks madison square garden for a massive labor pageant.
iww leaders welcomed the revolutionary tumult sweeping russia and other countries.
in the united states they thought a series of local strikes would bring about capitalist repression then a general strike and eventually a workers commonwealth.
the iww fell short of these objectives but during its lifetime from 1905 to the mid 1920s it made major gains among immigrant workers in the northeast migrant farm laborers on the plains and loggers and miners in the south and far west.
in factories like fords it recruited workers resentful of the speedups on the assembly lines.
although iww membership probably amounted to no more than one hundred thousand at any one time workers came and left so often that its total membership may have reached as high as one million.
working with workers 1897 1900 source u s bureau of the census statistical abstract of the united states 1982 1983 103rd ed washington dc 1982 concerned about labor unrest some business leaders used violence and police action to keep workers in line but others turned to the new fields of applied psychology and personnel management.
a school of industrial psychology emerged.
as had taylor industrial psychologists studied workers routines and further they showed that output was also affected by job satisfaction.
while most businesses pushed ahead with efficiency campaigns a few did establish industrial relations departments hire public relations firms to improve their corporate image and link productivity to job safety and worker happiness.
ivy l lee a pioneer in the field of corporate public relations advised clients such as the pennsylvania railroad and standard oil on how to improve relations with labor and the public.
calling himself a physician to corporate bodies lee urged complete openness on the companys part.
to please employees companies printed newsletters and organized softball teams they awarded prizes and celebrated retirements.
ford created a sociology department staffed by 150 experts who showed workers how to budget their incomes and care for their health.
they even taught them how to shop for meat.
complete the assignment the triangle fire on myhistorylab feature essay w omens fashion changed rather dramatically in the 1890s and early 1900s reflecting in part the desires of women for greater freedom in many parts of their lives.
confining corsets began to disappear as women turned to looser more casual designs.
the shirtwaist or blouse became especially popular flattering to the figure and tapered to a fitted waistline usually worn with a tailored skirt.
that trend brought business a great deal of it to the triangle waist company of new york city which employed more than 500 people and was the largest maker of blouses in the city.
it produced 2 000 of them a day a million dollars worth a year.
at triangle as at similar companies immigrants from eastern europe provided much of the labor.
the triangle company did not pay well none of the companies did but to many immigrants it was a good place to work because unlike many competitors it offered jobs all year round.
triangle also reflected an important factory movement characteristic of these years in which the garment industry changed from the traditional piece work system to large efficient and mass production factories.
under the old system each worker had pushed a treadle usually in her own apartment to power her machine now electricity powered long drive shafts that connected machine after machine.
triangle company employees worked hard five nine hour days a week plus a shorter seven hour day on saturdays.
saturday was also payday.
that was why people were at work on saturday march 25 1911 the triangle fire at 4 45 p m that day floor leader annah gullo rang the closing bell and shut off the power to the drive shafts the machines fell silent.
chairs pushed back on the wooden floors as workers made their way to the exits to pick up their pay and get their coats for home.
then suddenly a worker came running across the floor shouting fire workers grabbed the fire pails from a ledge above the tables and poured water on the fire but to no avail.
other workers were already lined up at wooden partitions near the exits which channeled them through one at a time so that watchmen could look in their handbags for stolen lace or blouses.
smoke pouring from the eighth floor windows soon attracted a crowd of bystanders outside.
when a large dark bundle fell from one of the windows an onlooker said hes trying to save his best cloth when another bundle hit the ground people realized that this was not cloth it was a human being.
i learned a new sound a reporter said that day a more horrible sound than description can picture.
it was the thud of a speeding living body on a stone sidewalk the first person jumped at about 4 50 p m deciding not to die in the raging fire.
but it was hard to survive the jump too the street was nearly 100 feet below and in march 1911 ladders on fire trucks could reach no higher than the sixth floor.
inside people screamed as they searched for the exits eyes blinded by the shifting smoke.
as they crowded onto the flimsy fire escape it twisted and fell the victim of its own poor design.
adding to the tragedy workers at triangle had gone on strike in 1909 two years before in the famous uprising of the 20 000 the largest strike ever organized by working women anywhere in the world as one journalist has noted.
some garment workers had won but the triangle women had not.
they had asked for adequate fire escapes and unblocked exits they got neither.
i remembered their great strike.
in which these girls demanded more sanitary workrooms and more safety precautions in the shops a reporter wrote after the fire.
these dead bodies told the result in the days following the fire protest meetings were held across the city.
i would be a traitor to those poor burned bodies if i were to come here to talk good fellowship rose schneiderman a dynamic 29 year old organizer for the womens trade union league told one rally.
we have tried you good people of the public and we have found you wanting.
this is not the first time girls have been burned alive in this city.
every week i must learn of the untimely death of one of my sister workers.
every year thousands of us are maimed.
the life of men and women is so cheap and property is so sacred one hundred forty six people nearly all young women died in the fire.
the fire galvanized reformers interested in factory safety and there were many of them in this progressive era.
frances perkins later secretary of labor under franklin d roosevelt the first female cabinet member in the countrys history was visiting friends near the triangle factory on the day of the fire.
they heard the fire engines and rushed out to see what was happening.
we got there just as they started to jump perkins recalled.
i shall never forget the frozen horror which came over us as we stood with our hands on our throats watching that horrible sight knowing that there was no help view the closer look triangle fire march 25 1911 crowds of young women who made it out onto the fire escape perished when it gave way under their weight.
on april 5 signaling public protest eighty thousand people marched silently in the rain in a funeral procession up fifth avenue.
a quarter million people lined the route.
in response to the outcry new york state authorities created a factory investigating commission that sent examiners into factories across the state.
in all the tragedy spurred passage of thirty six new labor laws a new industrial code for the state of new york and higher national standards for factory safety.
new laws required automatic fire sprinklers in high rise buildings mandatory fire drills and unlocked doors at factory exits.
frances perkins who had advised the commission thought the events at triangle had lasting consequences.
the triangle fire she later said was the first day of the new deal questions for discussion 1 what changes in american society and industry lay behind the circumstances of the triangle fire.
2 why were so many women killed in the triangle fire.
3 why did frances perkins say that the triangle fire was the first day of the new deal.
chapter review the changing face of industrialism how did industrialism change after 1900.
conflict in the workplace why were there so many strikes in this period.
as prosperity returned after the late 1890s the american industrial system underwent important changes.
mass production spurred by the spread of the moving assembly line turned out more and more products for american and foreign consumers.
new management methods organized workers on the factory floor.
jobs became both routine and more dangerous.
trusts grew.
p 515 low wages speeded up assembly lines and dangerous conditions in the workplace brought about numerous attempts to organize workers for their own defense.
the womens trade union league had many successes.
the international workers of the world a radical union wanted to place workers in control.
in the end samuel gompers and the american federation of labor won the allegiance of most workers.
p 524 societys masses a new urban culture how did mass production affect women children immigrants and african americans.
what happened to art and culture in these years so filled with change.
while life improved for many people in the post 1900 industrial society many others faced challenges women and children in the workforce and laborers in their efforts to organize.
between 1901 and 1920 some 14 8 million immigrants entered the country and began the difficult process of adjusting to life in their new home.
all of these people faced difficult challenges due to low wages dangerous working conditions and the steady demands of the factory system.
p 519 in the dozen years after 1900 american culture changed in important ways.
cities took on their modern form.
suburbs flourished.
sports became increasingly popular reflecting peoples increased leisure time.
experimentation occurred in literature poetry painting and the arts.
p 530 study resources key terms and definitions muckrakers writers who made a practice between 1903 and 1909 of exposing the wrongdoings of public figures and corporations and highlighting social and political problems.
p 514 birds of passage immigrants who came to the united states to work and save money and then returned to their native countries during the slack season.
p 523 progressivism movement for social change between the late 1890s and world war i its orgins lay in a fear of big business and corrupt government and a desire to improve living conditions.
progressives set out to cure the social ills brought about by industrialization and urbanization social disorder and corruption.
p 515 womens trade union league wtul founded in 1903 this group worked to organize women into trade unions.
it also lobbied for laws to safeguard female workers and backed strikes especially in the garment industry.
while it never attracted many members its leaders were influential enough to give the union considerable power.
p 523 niagara movement a movement led by w e b dubois that focused on equal rights for and the education of african american youth.
rejecting the gradualist approach of booker t washington it favored militant action and claimed for african americans all the rights afforded to other americans.
p 522 industrial workers of the world iww founded in 1905 this radical union also known as the wobblies aimed to unite the american working class into one union.
it organized unskilled and foreign born laborers advocated social revolution and led strikes.
p 527 national association for the advancement of colored people naacp created in 1909 this organization became the most important civil rights organization in the country.
p 522 ashcan school early twentieth century realist painters who portrayed the slums and streets of the nations cities and the lives of ordinary urban dwellers.
they often advocated political and social reform.
p 533 critical thinking questions 1 how did the changing nature of industrialism after the 1890s influence the beginnings of a progressive era.
2 in what specific ways did workers african americans and immigrants respond to the changing nature of industrial society and in the process help bring about the progressive era.
3 how did workers organize to try to improve their lot in the cities and factories of the advancing industrial society.
4 how did changes in popular culture mold attitudes in the new progressive era.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 23 chapter 24 the nation at war the treaty of versailles divide up germanys colonies.
to try to place the war on a higher plane he appeared before congress on january 8 1918 and outlined terms for a far reaching nonpunitive settlement.
wilsons fourteen points were generous and farsighted but they failed to satisfy wartime emotions that sought vindication.
england and france distrusted wilsonian idealism as the basis for peace.
they wanted germany disarmed and crippled they wanted its colonies and they were skeptical of the principle of selfdetermination.
as the end of the war neared the allies who had in fact made secret commitments with one another balked at making the fourteen points the basis of peace.
when wilson threatened to negotiate a separate treaty with germany however they accepted.
wilson had won an important victory but difficulties lay ahead.
as georges clemenceau the 78 year old french premier said god gave us the ten commandments and we broke them.
wilson gives us the fourteen points.
we shall see what mistakes did wilson make in negotiating the treaty of versailles.
a peace at paris long before the fighting ended wilson began to formulate plans for the peace.
like many others he was disconcerted when the new bolshevik government in russia began revealing the terms of secret agreements among britain france and czarist russia to unfortunately wilson made a grave error just before the peace conference began.
he appealed to voters to elect a democratic congress in the november 1918 elections saying that any other result would be interpreted on the other side of the water as a repudiation turned out huge amounts of war goods.
government authority swelled and people came to expect different things of their government.
labor made some gains as did women and blacks.
society assimilated some of the shifts but social and economic tensions grew and when the war ended they spilled over in the strikes and violence of the red scare that followed.
the united states emerged from the war the strongest economic power in the world.
in 1914 it was a debtor nation and american citizens owed foreign investors about 3 billion.
five years later the united states had become a creditor nation.
foreign governments owed more than 10 billion and foreign citizens owed american investors nearly 3 billion.
the war marked a shift in economic power rarely equaled in history.
read the document president wilsons fourteen points on january 8 1918 u s president woodrow wilson speaking before a joint session of congress put forth his fourteen points proposal for ending the war.
in this speech he established the basis of a peace treaty and the foundation of a league of nations.
the treaty of versailles of my leadership many republicans were furious especially those who had supported the fourteen points wilsons problems deepened when the democrats went on to lose both the house and senate.
wilsons opponents immediately announced that voters had rejected his policies as he had suggested they could.
in fact the democratic losses stemmed largely from domestic problems such as the price of wheat and cotton.
but they hurt wilson who had alienated some important republican party leaders.
soon he would be negotiating with european leaders buoyed by rousing victories at their own polls.
two weeks after the elections wilson announced he would attend the peace conference.
this was a dramatic break from tradition and his personal involvement drew attacks from republicans.
they renewed criticism when he named the rest of the delegation secretary of state lansing colonel house general tasker h bliss a military expert and henry white a career diplomat.
wilson named no member of the senate and the only republican in the group was white.
in selecting the delegation wilson passed over henry cabot lodge the powerful republican senator from massachusetts who opposed the fourteen points and who would soon head the senate foreign relations committee.
he also decided not to appoint elihu root or ex president taft both of them enthusiastic internationalists.
never good at accepting criticism or delegating authority wilson wanted a delegation he could control an advantage at the peace table but not in any battle over the treaty at home.
upon his arrival wilson received a tumultuous welcome in england france and italy.
never before had such crowds acclaimed a democratic political figure.
in paris two million people lined the champs elyses threw flowers at him and shouted wilson le juste the just as his carriage drove by.
overwhelmed wilson was sure that the people of europe shared his goals and would force their leaders to accept his peace.
he was wrong.
like their leaders many people on the allied side hated germany and wanted victory unmistakably reflected in the peace.
opening in january 1919 the peace conference at paris continued until may.
although twenty seven nations were represented the big four dominated it wilson clemenceau of france tired and stubborn determined to end the german threat forever david lloyd george the crafty british prime minister who had pledged to squeeze germany until the pips squeak and the italian prime minister vittorio orlando.
a clever negotiator wilson traded various small concessions for his major goals national self determination a reduction in tensions and a league of nations to enforce the peace.
wilson had to surrender some important principles.
departing from the fourteen points by violating the principle of self determination the treaty created two new independent nations poland and czechoslovakia with large german speaking populations.
it divided up the german colonies in asia and africa.
instead of a peace without victory it made germany accept responsibility for the war and demanded enormous reparations which eventually totaled 33 billion.
it made no mention of disarmament free trade or freedom of the seas.
instead of an open covenant openly arrived at the treaty was drafted behind closed doors.
but wilson deflected some of the most extreme allied demands and he won his coveted point 14 a league of nations designed to achieve international peace and security the league included a general assembly a smaller council composed of the united states great britain france italy japan and four nations to be elected by the assembly and a court of international justice.
league members pledged to submit to arbitration every dispute threatening peace and to enjoin military and economic sanctions against nations resorting to war.
article x for wilson the heart of the league obliged members to look out for one anothers independence and territorial integrity.
woodrow wilsons fourteen points 1918 success and failure in implementation 1.
14 open covenants of peace openly arrived at absolute freedom of navigation on the seas in peace and war removal of all economic barriers to the equality of trade among nations reduction of armaments to the level needed only for domestic safety impartial adjustments of colonial claims evacuation of all russian territory russia to be welcomed into the society of free nations evacuation and restoration of belgium evacuation and restoration of all french lands return of alsace lorraine to france readjustment of italys frontiers along lines of italian nationality self determination for the former subjects of the austro hungarian empire evacuation of romania serbia and montenegro free access to the sea for serbia self determination for the former subjects of the ottoman empire secure sovereignty for turkish portion establishment of an independent poland with free and secure access to the sea establishment of a league of nations affording mutual guarantees of independence and territorial integrity not fulfilled not fulfilled not fulfilled not fulfilled not fulfilled not fulfilled fulfilled fulfilled compromised compromised compromised compromised fulfilled not fulfilled sources data from g m gathorne hardy the fourteen points and the treaty of versailles oxford pamphlets on world affairs no.
8 34 thomas g paterson et al american foreign policy a history since 1900 2nd ed vol.
chapter 24 the nation at war new and reconstituted nations finland norway sweden north sea estonia latvia denmark danzig free city great britain lithuania soviet union ger.
germany belg.
france poland cz ec ho s lux.
lovaki a austria switz.
hungary romania yugoslavia spain corsica fr.
mallorca sp.
italy bulgaria albania sardinia it.
greece mediterranean sea algeria fr.
tunisia fr.
sicily crete europe after the treaty of versailles 1919 the treaty changed the map of europe creating a number of new and reconstituted nations.
note the boundary changes from the map on p.
the draft treaty in hand wilson returned home in february 1919 to discuss it with congress and the people.
most americans the polls showed favored the league thirty three governors endorsed it.
but over dinner with the senate and house foreign relations committees wilson learned of the strength of congressional opposition to it.
on march 3 senator lodge produced a round robin signed by thirty seven senators declaring they would not vote for the treaty without amendment.
should the numbers hold lodge had enough votes to defeat it.
returning to paris wilson attacked his critics while he worked privately for changes to improve the chances of senate approval.
in return for major concessions the allies amended the league draft treaty agreeing that domestic affairs remained outside league jurisdiction exempting the monroe doctrine and allowing nations to withdraw after two years notice.
on june 28 1919 they signed the treaty in the hall of mirrors at versailles and wilson started home for his most difficult fight.
rejection in the senate there were ninety six senators in 1919 forty nine of them republicans.
fourteen republicans led by william e borah of idaho were the irreconcilables who opposed the league on any grounds.
if the savior of man borah said would revisit the earth and declare for a league of nations i would be opposed to it frank b kellogg of minnesota led a group of twelve mild reservationists who accepted the treaty but wanted to insert several reservations that would not greatly weaken it.
finally there were the lodge led strong reservationists twenty three of them in all who wanted major changes that the allies would have to approve.
with only four democratic senators opposed to the treaty the democrats and republicans willing to compromise had enough votes to ratify it once a few reservations were inserted.
bidding for time to allow public opposition to grow lodge scheduled lengthy hearings and spent two weeks reading the 268 page treaty aloud.
democratic leaders urged wilson to appeal to the republican mild reservationists but he refused anyone who opposes me in that ill crush fed up with lodges tactics wilson set out in early september to take the case directly to the people.
crossing the midwest his speeches aroused little emotion but on the pacific coast he won ovations which heartened him.
on his way back to washington he stopped in pueblo colorado where he delivered one of the most eloquent speeches of his career.
people wept as he talked of americans who died in battle and the hope that they would never fight again in foreign lands.
that night wilson felt ill returned to washington and on october 2 mrs wilson found him lying unconscious on the floor of the white house the victim of a stroke that paralyzed his left side.
after the stroke wilson could not work more than an hour or two at a time.
no one was allowed to see him except family members his secretary and his physician.
for more than seven months he did not meet with the cabinet.
secretary of state lansing convened cabinet meetings but when wilson learned of them he ordered lansing to stop and then cruelly forced lansing to resign.
focusing his remaining energy on the fight over the treaty wilson lost touch with other issues and critics charged that his wife edith bolling wilson ran the government.
on november 6 1919 while wilson convalesced lodge finally reported the treaty out of committee along with fourteen reservations one for each of wilsons points.
the most important reservation stipulated that implementation of article x wilsons key article required the action of congress before any american intervention abroad.
the next day the presidents floor leader in the senate told him that the democrats could not pass the treaty without reservations.
is it possible wilson asked sadly.
it might be wise to compromise the senator said.
let lodge compromise wilson replied.
when mrs wilson urged her husband to accept the lodge reservations he said better a thousand times to go down fighting than to dip your colors to dishonorable compromise on november 19 the treaty with the lodge reservations failed 39 to 55 following wilsons instructions the democrats voted against it.
a motion to approve without the reservations lost 38 to 53 with only one republican voting in favor.
the defeat brought pleas for compromise but neither wilson nor lodge would back down.
when the treaty with reservations again came up for vote on march 19 1920 wilson ordered the democrats to hold firm against it.
although twenty one of them defied him enough obeyed his orders to defeat it 49 to 35 seven votes short of the necessary two thirds majority.
study resources to wilson walking now with the help of a cane one chance remained the presidential election of 1920 for a time he thought of running for a third term himself but his party shunted him aside.
the democrats nominated governor james m cox of ohio along with the young and popular franklin d roosevelt assistant secretary of the navy for vice president.
wilson called for a great and solemn referendum on the treaty.
the democratic platform endorsed the treaty but agreed to accept reservations that clarified the american role in the league.
the election of 1920 candidate harding cox debs party republican democrat socialist popular vote 16 152 200 9 147 353 917 799 electoral vote on the republican side senator warren g harding of ohio who had nominated taft in 1912 won the presidential nomination.
harding waffled on the treaty but that issue made little difference.
voters wanted a change.
harding won in a landslide taking 61 percent of the vote and beating cox by seven million votes.
without a peace treaty the united states remained technically at war and it was not until july 1921 almost three years after the last shot was fired that congress passed a joint resolution ending the war.
conclusion postwar disillusionment after 1919 there was disillusionment.
world war i was feared before it started popular while it lasted and hated when it ended.
to a whole generation that followed it appeared futile killing without cause sacrificing without benefit.
books plays and movies hemingways a farewell to arms 1929 john dos passoss three soldiers 1921 laurence stallings and maxwell andersons what price glory.
1924 among others showed it as waste horror and death.
the war and its aftermath damaged the humanitarian progressive spirit of the early years of the century.
it killed something precious and perhaps irretrievable in the hearts of thinking men and women progressivism survived well into the 1920s and the new deal but it no longer had the old conviction and broad popular support.
bruising fights over the war and the league drained peoples energy and enthusiasm.
confined to bed woodrow wilson died in washington in 1924 three years after harding the new president promised not heroics but healing not nostrums but normalcy not revolution but restoration nonetheless the war to end all wars and the spirit of woodrow wilson left an indelible imprint on the country.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 24 on myhistorylab toward war over here watch the video read the document the outbreak of world war i p 568 read the document adolf k g e.
von spiegel u boat 202 1919 p 570 espionage act 1917 p 577 view the closer look mobilizing the home front p 579 read the document watch the video president wilsons war message to the great migration p 581 congress 1917 p 571 the treaty of versailles watch the video american entry into world war i p 572 listen to the audio file read the document president wilsons fourteen points p 582 over there over there p 573 complete the assignment measuring the mind p 574 indicates study plan media assignment transition to modern america contents and learning objectives the second industrial revolution pg.
589 politics of the 1920s pg.
603 what was new about the american economy in the 1920s.
feature essay marcus garvey racial redemption and black nationalism city life in the jazz age pg.
592 how did life in the cities change after world war i.
the rural counterattack pg.
598 how did conservatives resist the changes of the decade.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab how did the politics of the 1920s reflect changes in the economy and in american society.
law and society the scopes monkey trial contesting cultural differences chapter 25 transition to modern america read the document executive orders and senate resolutions on teapot dome during the administration of william h taft the u s government had set aside tracts of oil rich land to be held in reserve for the u s navy to be used in case of national emergency.
the land was under the control and discretion of the secretary of the navy.
vice president calvin coolidge assumed the presidency upon hardings death and his honesty and integrity quickly reassured the nation.
coolidge born in vermont of old yankee stock had first gained national attention in 1919 as governor of massachusetts when he had dealt firmly with a boston police strike by declaring there is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody anywhere any time a reserved reticent man coolidge became famous for his epigrams which contemporaries mistook for wisdom.
the business of america is business he proclaimed.
the man who builds a factory builds a temple the man who works there worships there consistent with this philosophy he believed his duty was simply to preside benignly not govern the nation.
four fifths of all our troubles in this life would disappear he said if we would just sit down and be still calvin coolidge one observer noted aspired to become the least president the country ever had he attained his desire satisfied with the prosperity of the mid 1920s the people responded favorably.
coolidge was elected to a full term by a wide margin in 1924 politics of the 1920s when coolidge announced in 1927 that he did not choose to run herbert hoover became the republican choice to succeed him.
by far the ablest gop leader of the decade hoover epitomized the american myth of the self made man.
orphaned as a boy he had worked his way through stanford university and had gained both wealth and fame as a mining engineer.
during world war i he had displayed admirable administrative skills in directing wilsons food program at home and relief activities abroad.
sober intelligent and immensely hardworking hoover embodied the nations faith in individualism and free enterprise.
as secretary of commerce under harding and coolidge he had sought cooperation between government and business.
he used his office to assist american manufacturers and exporters in expanding their overseas trade and he strongly supported a trade association movement to encourage cooperation rather than cutthroat competition among smaller american companies.
he did not view business and government as antagonists.
instead he saw them as partners working together to achieve efficiency and affluence for all americans.
his optimistic view of the future led him to declare in his speech accepting the republican presidential nomination in 1928 that we in america today are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land republican policies during the 1920 campaign warren harding urged a return to not heroism but healing not nostrums but normalcy misreading his speechwriters normality he coined a new word that became the theme for the republican administrations of the 1920s.
aware that the public was tired of zealous reformminded presidents such as teddy roosevelt and woodrow wilson harding and his successors sought a return to traditional republican policies.
in some areas they were successful but in others the republican leaders were forced to adjust to the new realities of a mass production society.
the result was a mixture of traditional and innovative measures that was neither wholly reactionary nor entirely progressive.
the most obvious attempt to go back to the republicanism of william mckinley came in tariff and tax policy.
fearful of a flood of postwar european imports congress passed an emergency tariff act in 1921 and followed it a year later with the protectionist fordney mccumber tariff act.
the net effect was to raise the basic rates substantially over the moderate underwood tariff schedules of the wilson period.
secretary of the treasury andrew mellon a wealthy pittsburgh banker and industrialist worked hard to achieve a similar return to normalcy in taxation.
condemning the high wartime tax rates on businesses and wealthy individuals mellon pressed for repealing an excess profits tax on corporations and slashing personal rates on the very rich.
using the new budget system adopted by congress in 1921 he reduced government spending from its world war i peak of 18 billion to just over 3 billion by 1925 thereby creating a slight surplus.
congress responded in 1926 by cutting the highest income tax bracket to a modest 20 percent.
the revenue acts of the 1920s greatly reduced the burden of taxation by the end of the decade the government was collecting one third less than it had in 1921 and the number of people paying income taxes dropped from more than 6 5 million to 4 million.
yet the greatest relief went to the wealthy.
the public was shocked to learn in the 1930s that j p morgan jr and his nineteen partners had paid no income tax at all during the depths of the great depression.
the growing crisis in american farming during the decade forced the republican administrations to seek new solutions.
the end of the european war led to a sharp decline in farm prices and a return to the problem of overproduction.
southern and western lawmakers formed a farm bloc in congress to press for special legislation for american agriculture.
the farm bloc supported the higher tariffs which included protection for constituents crops and helped secure passage of legislation to create federal supervision over stockyards packinghouses and grain trading.
this special interest legislation failed to get at the root of overproduction however.
farmers then supported more controversial measures designed to raise domestic crop prices by having the government sell the surplus overseas at low world prices.
coolidge vetoed the legislation on grounds that it involved unwarranted government interference in the economy.
yet the governments role in the economy increased rather than lessened in the 1920s.
republicans widened the scope of federal activity and nearly doubled the ranks of government employees.
herbert hoover led the way in the commerce department establishing new bureaus to help make american industry more efficient in housing transportation and mining.
under his leadership the government encouraged corporations to develop welfare programs that undercut trade unions and he tried to minimize labor disturbances by devising new federal machinery to mediate disputes.
instead of going back to the laissez faire tradition of the nineteenth century the republican administrations of the 1920s were pioneering a close relationship between government and private business.
the divided democrats while the republicans ruled in the 1920s the democrats seemed bent on self destruction.
the wilson coalition fell apart in 1920 as pent up dissatisfaction stemming from the war enabled harding to win by a landslide.
the pace of the second industrial revolution and the growing urbanization split the party in two.
one faction was centered in the rural south and west.
traditional democrats who had supported wilson stood for prohibition fundamentalism the klan and other facets of the rural counterattack against the city.
in contrast a new breed of democrat was emerging in the metropolitan areas of the north and midwest.
immigrants and their descendants began to become active in the democratic party.
catholic or jewish in religion and strongly opposed to prohibition they had little in common with their rural counterparts.
the split within the party surfaced dramatically at the national convention in new york in 1924 held in madison square garden a hall built in the 1890s and too small and chapter 25 transition to modern america cramped for the more than one thousand delegates the convention soon degenerated into what one observer described as a snarling cursing tenuous suicidal homicidal roughhouse city slickers mocked the rubes and hicks from the sticks populist orators struck back by denouncing the city as wanting in national ideals devoid of conscience.
rooted in corruption directed by greed and dominated by selfishness an urban resolution to condemn the ku klux klan led to a spirited response from the rural faction and its defeat by a single vote.
then for nine days in the midst of a stifling heat wave the delegates divided between alfred e smith the governor of new york and william g mcadoo of california wilsons secretary of the treasury.
when it became clear that neither the city nor the rural candidate could win a majority both men withdrew on the 103rd ballot the weary democrats finally chose john w davis a former west virginia congressman and new york corporation lawyer as their compromise nominee.
in the ensuing election the conservative davis had difficulty setting his views apart from those of republican president calvin coolidge.
for the discontented senator robert la follette of wisconsin offered an alternative by running on an independent progressive party ticket.
coolidge won easily receiving 15 million votes to 8 million for davis and nearly 5 million for la follette.
davis had made the poorest showing of any democratic candidate in the twentieth century.
election of 1928 electoral vote by state popular vote republican herbert c hoover 21 391 381 democratic alfred e smith 15 016 443 330 725 minor parties 36 738 549 the election of 1924 candidate coolidge davis la follette party republican democrat progressive popular vote 15 725 016 8 386 503 4 822 856 electoral vote yet the democrats were in far better shape than this setback indicated.
beginning in 1922 the party had made heavy inroads into the gop majority in congress.
the democrats took seventy eight seats away from the republicans in that election many of them in the cities of the east and midwest.
in new york alone they gained thirteen new congressmen all but one in districts with heavy immigrant populations.
even in 1924 the republican vote in large cities declined as many urban voters chose la follette in the absence of an attractive democratic candidate.
in 1926 the democrats came within one vote of controlling the senate and picked up nine more seats in the house in metropolitan areas.
the large cities were swinging clearly into the democratic column all the party needed was a charismatic leader who could fuse the older rural elements with the new urban voters.
the election of 1928 the selection of al smith as the democratic candidate in 1928 indicated the growing power of the city.
born on the lower east side of manhattan of mixed irish german ancestry smith was the prototype of the urban democrat.
he was catholic he was associated with a big city machine he was a wet who wanted to end prohibition.
starting out in the fulton fish market as a boy he had joined tammany hall and gradually climbed the political ladder rising from subpoena server to state legislator to governor a post he held with distinction for nearly a decade.
rejected by rural democrats in 1924 he still had to prove he could unite the south and west behind his leadership.
his lack of education poor grammar and distinctive new york accent all hurt him as did his eastern provincialism.
when reporters asked him about his appeal in the states west of the mississippi he replied what states are west of the mississippi the choice facing the american voter in 1928 seemed unusually clear cut.
herbert hoover was a protestant a dry and an oldstock american who stood for efficiency and individualism smith was a catholic a wet and a descendant of immigrants who was closely associated with big city politics.
just as smith appealed to new voters in the cities so hoover won the support of many oldline democrats who feared the city tammany hall and the pope.
yet beneath the surface as allan j lichtman points out there were striking similarities between smith and hoover both were self made men who embodied the american belief in freedom of opportunity and upward mobility.
neither advocated any significant degree of economic change nor any redistribution of national wealth or power.
though religion proved to be the most important issue in the minds of the voters hurting smith far more than prohibition or his identification with the city the democratic candidates failure to spotlight the growing cracks in prosperity or to offer alternative economic policies ensured his defeat.
conclusion the old and the new the 1928 election was a dubious victory for the republicans.
hoover won easily defeating smith by more than six million votes and carrying such traditionally democratic states as oklahoma texas and florida.
but smith succeeded for the first time in winning a majority of votes for the democrats in the nations twelve largest cities.
a new democratic electorate was emerging consisting of catholics and jews irish and italians poles and greeks.
now the task was to unite the traditional democrats of the south and west with the urban voters of the northeast and midwest.
watch the video prosperity of the 1920s and the great depression conclusion the old and the new the election night celebrations at hoover campaign headquarters were muted by prohibition and by the president elects natural reserve.
had hoover known what lay just ahead for the country and for his presidency no doubt the party would have been even more somber.
during the 1920s america struggled to enter the modern era.
the economics of mass production and the politics of urbanization drove the country forward but the persistent appeal of individualism and rural based values held it back.
americans achieved greater prosperity than ever before but the prosperity was unevenly distributed.
further as the outbursts of nativism ethnic and racial bigotry and intolerance revealed prosperity hardly guaranteed generosity or unity.
nor for that matter did it guarantee continued prosperity even for those who benefited initially.
as much as america changed during the 1920s in one crucial respect the country remained as before.
the american economy for all its remarkable productive capacity was astonishingly fragile.
this was the message hoover was soon to learn.
the development of mile long breadlines in cities and towns throughout the country following the onset of the great depression in 1929 symbolized the crushing end of the prosperity of the 1920s.
complete the assignment the scopes monkey trial contesting cultural differences on myhistorylab law and society d uring the postwar 1920s a new america emerged.
largely urban secular and focused on the future the modern culture challenged the traditional values and familiar way of life of many americans especially those living in rural areas.
intense cultural conflict characterized the decade.
those who saw in modern culture numerous threats to the moral fabric of the nation increasingly turned to their faith for stability and comfort.
the popularity of protestant fundamentalism which held to a literal interpretation of the bible increased dramatically during this period particularly in the south.
according to fundamentalists one of the key modernist attacks on traditional religious beliefs came from the realm of science.
advancements in science in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries fueled modernization and americans increasingly placed their faith in the authority of science and progress.
there was growing acceptance of charles darwins theory of evolution which demonstrated that plants and animals including humans evolved from lower life forms by a process of natural selection.
by the 1920s discussion of evolution theory had entered public school classrooms.
though many americans could reconcile a belief in evolution with their religious beliefs fundamentalists thought the theory of evolution contradicted the biblical story of creation and was therefore blasphemous particularly the notion that humans evolved from a lower primate form.
fundamentalists led a charge against evolution particularly against its teaching in the schools and several southern states turned to the scopes monkey trial contesting cultural differences legislation to keep the scientific theory out of the classroom.
such a law was introduced in tennessee by john w butler a state representative.
the statute passed both houses of the tennessee legislature by a large majority and was signed into law by the governor in march 1925 the butler act as it became known made it unlawful for a teacher in statesupported schools to teach any theory that denies the story of divine creation of man as taught in the bible and to teach instead that man has descended from a lower order of animals violating the law was designated a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of 100 to 500 for each offense.
in response to the butler act the american civil liberties union aclu advertised for teachers in tennessee willing to challenge the new law in court.
civic boosters in dayton eager to draw attention to their small town in eastern tennessee persuaded john scopes a science teacher and assistant football coach in dayton to accept the aclu offer.
scopes was a logical choice.
he opposed the antievolution law on philosophical grounds and he had little to lose personally being twenty four and single and with no particular desire to remain in dayton.
furthermore he was a likable young man popular around town and with otherwise conventional views and so wouldnt muddy the legal waters by provoking the judge or jury unnecessarily.
scopes admitted that anyone teaching from the states approved biology textbook hunters civic biology which included sections on evolution of animals and humans would be breaking the new law.
scopes had used the text as a substitute biology teacher.
he agreed to be arrested to test the law in court.
from the start tennessee v john thomas scopes was about far more than scopes.
supporters and opponents of the antievolution law converged on dayton from around the country.
the laws supporters brought in the renowned orator william jennings bryan a three time democratic nominee for president former secretary of state and fervent christian fundamentalist to assist the prosecution headed by chief prosecutor a thomas stewart attorney general of tennessee.
since the early 1920s bryan had led the charge against the theories of charles darwin and the teaching of evolution in the schools his syndicated newspaper column weekly bible talks frequently hammered darwinism and what bryan considered excessive faith in science.
the aclu summoned counsel for the defense and clarence darrow one of the most celebrated trial lawyers in america in the 1920s volunteered his services as the chief defense attorney.
he delighted in defending unpopular causes including labor activists he had defended socialist leader eugene v debs in the pullman strike of 1894 political radicals and murder suspects.
he was also an outspoken agnostic doubting the existence of god and a vocal critic of christian fundamentalists including bryan.
a small army of reporters descended upon dayton including journalist h l mencken widely known for his biting wit and disdain for middle america who was writing for the baltimore sun and the american mercury.
from all over america and from various foreign countries the journalists came eager to convey to their readers every detail of the monkey trial as the trial was dubbed.
the new technology of radio supplemented the newspaper coverage especially after judge john raulston agreed to allow microphones in the courtroom.
the proceedings opened on friday july 10 to the prosecution the case was fairly simple.
they held that the state had the constitutional right to set the curriculum in state funded schools.
the question to be decided was whether scopes had violated the butler act by covering the theory of evolution in his classroom.
prosecution witnesses including a school official and several of scopess students testified that he had.
darrow and the defense argued principally that the antievolution law violated several clauses of the tennessee constitution as well as the guarantee of freedom of speech and provision for separation of church and state in the first amendment of the u s constitution.
contending that the law also violated the fourteenth amendments declaration that no state was permitted to pass a law that abridged citizens privileges darrow argued if today you can take a thing like evolution and make it a crime to teach it in the public school tomorrow you can make it a crime to teach it in the private schools and the next year you can make it a crime to teach it to the hustings or in the church darrow and the defense team wanted to introduce scientific evidence supporting the theory of evolution by summoning a number of scientists from various fields as expert witnesses.
the prosecution protested opening the case to this wider issue.
i say bar the door and not allow science to enter declared stewart the chief prosecutor.
after hearing arguments from both sides and initial testimony from the defenses first witness the court sided with stewart and tennessee.
the evidence of experts would shed no light on the issues judge raulston ruled.
it was bryans speech for the prosecution that brought real excitement to the courtroom and the nationwide attention to dayton that the citys supporters had hoped for.
the great commoner as bryan was known commenced softly conveying an impression of calm reason.
but as he warmed to his subject his voice rose and his words became more intense.
he denied that he or most of the citizens of tennessee advocated teaching the bible in schools.
and even if they did advocate it the tennessee constitution prevented them.
the question at hand was different bryan said.
the question is can a minority in this state come in and compel a teacher to teach that the bible is not true and make the parents of these children pay the expenses of the teacher to tell their children what these people believe is false and dangerous.
has it come to a time when the minority can take charge of a state like tennessee and compel the majority to pay their teachers while they take religion out of the heart of the children of the parents who pay the teachers.
bryan was a master at working an audience and the jurors and spectators in the courtroom and a larger group listening in the yard outside the court hung on his every word.
they laughed as he lampooned the darwinians they nodded agreement as he affirmed the teachings of the bible.
they thundered their approval of his wry observation the christian believes that man came from above but the evolutionist believes he must have come from below following a loud amen from the audience darrow who had been sitting silently through bryans long speech interjected i hope the reporters got the amens in the record.
i want somewhere at some point to find some court where a picture of this will be painted such information in the official record would ensure higher courts a more complete picture of the atmosphere in the courtroom.
denied the opportunity to call on expert witnesses to provide support for the theory of evolution darrow found another opportunity after the defense made an unusual request to place bryan on the witness stand.
there was some question as to whether bryan could or should testify as he had no firsthand knowledge of what scopes had or hadnt done and was no expert on the constitutions of tennessee or the united states.
but the defense asked permission to question bryan as an expert witness on the bible.
bryan indicated willingness and judge raulston who relished the publicity the case was generating let the two celebrities go at each other.
what resulted was one of the most dramatic courtroom scenes in american history.
darrow asked bryan whether he had given considerable study to the bible bryan responded i have studied the bible for about fifty years or some time more than that.
given that opening darrow went on to ask questions designed to undermine a strictly literal interpretation of the bible.
darrow do you claim that everything in the bible should be literally interpreted.
bryan i believe everything in the bible should be accepted as it is given there.
some of the bible is given illustratively.
for instance ye are the salt of the earth i would not insist that man was actually salt or that he had flesh of salt but it is used in the sense of salt as saving gods people.
darrow pressed on.
did bryan believe that a whale swallowed jonah.
bryan when i read that a big fish swallowed jonah it does not say whale darrow doesnt it.
are you sure.
bryan that is my recollection of it.
a big fish and i believe it and i believe in a god who can make a whale and can make a man and make both do what he pleases.
darrow continued his line of questioning asking bryan to interpret other passages of the bible.
had joshua really made the sun stand still.
bryan i believe what the bible says.
did that mean that the sun actually stood still or that the earth stopped spinning.
for that matter did mr bryan believe that the earth circled the sun or vice versa.
bryan assured darrow and the court that he knew that the earth orbited the sun.
but he allowed that the author of the joshua passage might not have.
i believe that the bible is inspired an inspired author.
whether one who wrote as he was directed to write understood the things he was writing about i dont know darrow interrupted but bryan went on i believe it was inspired by the almighty and he may have used language that could be understood at that time instead of using language that could not be understood until darrow was born listeners siding with bryan but squirming under darrows questioning broke into loud applause here.
when the applause recurred darrow said sarcastically great applause from the bleachers bryan from those whom you call yokels darrow i have never called them yokels.
the exchange grew nastier.
bryan those are the people whom you insult.
darrow you insult every man of science and learning in the world because he does not believe in your fool religion.
judge raulston i will not stand for that.
darrow for what he is doing.
judge raulston i am talking to both of you.
such dignity as the trial initially possessed had disappeared by now.
after the exchange continued for some time darrow asked bryan if he had ever wondered where cains wife came from.
no sir bryan replied.
i leave the agnostics to hunt for her darrow asked bryan if the six days of creation were twenty four hour days.
bryan allowed that they might have been longer.
finally tom stewart broke into darrows questioning.
what is the purpose of this examination the chief prosecutor demanded.
the purpose is to cast ridicule on everybody who believes in the bible bryan asserted.
darrow answered differently.
we have the purpose of preventing bigots and ignoramuses from controlling the education of the united states darrow was allowed to continue his questioning about creation.
might it have lasted more than a modern week.
bryan granted that it could have.
how much more.
it might have continued for millions of years darrows examination of bryan lasted two hours.
before the end it was obvious that it had little to do with the case at hand but everything to do with the larger issue joined by darrow and bryan.
as a reporter for the nashville banner explained in reality it was a debate between darrow and bryan on biblical history on agnosticism and belief in revealed religion not surprisingly judgments regarding the outcome of the debate depended on the source of those judgments.
the new york times thought darrow scored a clear victory.
bryans complete lack of interest in many of the things closely connected with such religious questions as he had been supporting for many years was strikingly shown again and again by mr darrow the times explained.
the memphis commercial appeal thought bryan had held his own darrow succeeded in showing that bryan knows little about the science of the world.
bryan succeeded in bearing witness bravely to the faith which he believes transcends all the learning of men the reaction to the trials verdict was similar.
scopes to no ones surprise was convicted of violating the law and judge raulston fined him 100.
even darrow intending to appeal the verdict to a higher court recommended that the jury find scopes guilty.
antievolutionists in tennessee and elsewhere took the conviction as vindication of their beliefs.
but to many americans with more secular views the conviction was simply further evidence of the wrongheadedness of bryan and the tennessee legislature.
when bryan died suddenly just five days after the trial ended a southern journalist approached darrow for comment.
people down here believe that bryan died of a broken heart because of your questioning the journalist said.
darrow referring to bryans notoriously large appetite reportedly responded broken heart nothing.
he died of a busted belly h l mencken remarked god aimed at darrow missed and hit bryan instead the scopes trial settled nothing.
the defense appealed the conviction to the tennessee supreme court where it was set aside on a technicality.
but the antievolution law was left intact and stood for another forty years until the tennessee legislature repealed it in 1967 in the immediate aftermath of the scopes trial both sides claimed moral victory and the rift that gave rise to the case simply grew wider.
fundamentalism was discredited in large parts of urban america but it sank roots in the rural regions of the country becoming stronger than ever if sometimes less visible.
several state legislatures considered antievolution bills in the latter half of the 1920s but only georgia and mississippi actually passed laws restricting teaching of darwins theory.
concern over diminishing sales in the south and west however drove textbook publishers to revise coverage of evolution in many textbooks deemphasizing the topic or eliminating it entirely.
with or without legislation opposing its teaching evolution did disappear from many classrooms.
in 1960 the liberal new republic declared the monkey trial is now a historical curiosity a judgment that proved premature when evolution reemerged as a controversial issue.
the constitutional question of whether the first amendment permitted states to ban teaching of a theory that contradicted religious beliefs had not been resolved by the scopes case.
in the 1968 case epperson v arkansas however the u s supreme court ruled that such bans were unconstitutional.
during the 1970s and 1980s various sunbelt school districts mandated that creationism essentially the biblical version of lifes origins though typically without the explicit references to genesis be given equal time in the classroom with evolution.
arkansas and louisiana passed such laws but in 1987 the u s supreme court ruled in edwards v aguillard that these laws were also unconstitutional.
still the issue refused to die.
in 1999 the kansas school board ordered that the theory of evolution should be deemphasized in the states classrooms.
the kansas board eventually changed its mind but in 2005 it reversed course again directing teachers to point out the deficiencies in the theory of evolution in the name of intelligent design the latest variant of creationism.
other states considered similar measures demonstrating if nothing else that the scopes trial was far more than a curiosity from the past.
questions for discussion 1 why did different observers interpret the outcome of the scopes trial so differently.
2 why does the issue of evolution in the public schools continue to resurface decades after laws banning its teaching were found unconstitutional.
chapter 25 on myhistorylab the second industrial revolution view the closer look the great white way times square p 591 city life in the jazz age read the document elanor rowland wembridge petting and the campus 1925 p 594 complete the assignment marcus garvey racial redemption and black nationalism p 596 read the document garvey p 594 pearson profiles marcus watch the video watch the video the harlem renaissance p 598 the rural counterattack read the document a mitchell palmer on the menace of communism 1920 p 599 read the document vanzetti p 601 court statements from sacco and read the document 1924 p 602 creed of klanswomen politics of the 1920s read the document executive orders and senate resolutions on teapot dome p 604 watch the video prosperity of the 1920s and the great depression p 607 complete the assignment the scopes monkey trial contesting cultural differences p 608 indicates study plan media assignment franklin d roosevelt and the new deal contents and learning objectives questions the great depression pg.
614 the impact of the new deal pg.
627 what were the causes and effects of the great depression.
what was the lasting impact of the new deal.
fighting the depression pg.
619 end of the new deal pg.
630 how did franklin roosevelt fight the depression.
how and why did the new deal end.
roosevelt and reform pg.
624 feature essay eleanor roosevelt and the quest for social justice how did the new deal reform american life.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab chapter 26 chapter review chapter 28 the onset of the cold war barnstormed around the country denouncing the do nothing republican eightieth congress.
the presidents give em hell tactics reminded voters of how much they owed the democrats for helping them survive the great depression.
to the amazement of the pollsters truman won a narrow but decisive victory in november.
the old roosevelt coalition farmers organized labor urban ethnic groups and blacks had held together enabling truman to remain in the white house and the democrats to regain control of congress.
there was one more reason for trumans win in 1948 during this election held at the height of the berlin crisis the gop failed to challenge trumans conduct of the cold war.
locked in a tense rivalry with the soviet union the american people saw no reason to reject a president who had countered aggression overseas with the truman doctrine and the marshall plan.
the republicans committed to support the bipartisan policy of containment had allowed the democrats to preempt the foreign policy issue.
until they found a way to challenge trumans cold war policies gop leaders had little chance to regain the white house.
the loyalty issue program ordering security checks of government employees in order to root out communists.
originally intended to remove subversives for whom reasonable grounds exist for belief that the person involved is disloyal within four years the loyalty review board was dismissing workers as security risks if there was reasonable doubt of their loyalty.
thousands of government workers lost their jobs charged with guilt by association with radicals or with membership in left wing organizations.
often those who were charged had no chance to face their accusers.
the most famous disclosure came in august 1948 when whittaker chambers a repentant communist accused alger hiss of having been a soviet spy in the 1930s.
when hiss who had been a prominent state department official denied the charges chambers led investigators to a hollowed out pumpkin on his maryland farm.
inside the pumpkin were microfilms of confidential government documents.
chambers claimed that hiss had passed the state department materials to him in the late 1930s.
although the statute of limitations prevented a charge of treason against hiss he was convicted of perjury in january 1950 and sentenced to a five year prison term.
in 1948 the justice department further heightened fears of subversion.
it charged eleven officials of the communist party with advocating the violent overthrow of the government.
after a long trial the jury found them guilty and the party officials received prison sentences and heavy fines in 1951 the supreme court upheld the convictions as constitutional.
such repressive measures failed however to reassure the nation.
events abroad intensified the sense of danger.
the communist triumph in china in the fall of 1949 came as a shock soon there were charges that fellow travelers in the state department despite trumans surprising victory in 1948 there was one area on which the democrats were vulnerable.
the fear of communism abroad that had led to the bipartisan containment policy could be used against them at home by politicians who were more willing to exploit the publics deep seated anxiety.
fear of radicalism had been a recurrent feature of american life since the early days of the republic.
federalists had tried to suppress dissent with the alien and sedition acts in the 1790s the knownothings had campaigned against foreigners and catholics in the 1850s and the red scare after world war i had been directed against both aliens and radicals.
the cold war heightened the traditional belief that subversion from abroad endangered the republic.
bold rhetoric from members of the truman administration portraying the men in the kremlin as inspired revolutionaries bent on world conquest frightened the american people.
they viewed the soviet union as a successor to nazi germany a totalitarian police state that threatened the basic liberties of a free people.
a series of revelations of communist espionage activities reinforced these fears sparking a second red scare.
canadian officials uncovered a soviet spy ring in 1946 and the house un american activities committee huac held hearings indicating that communist agents had flourished in the agriculture and treasury departments in the 1930s.
although truman tried to dismiss the loyalty issue as a red herring he felt compelled to take protective measures thus lending substance to the charges of subvera jubilant harry truman on the morning after his 1948 election win displays the headline blazoned sion.
in march 1947 he initiated a loyalty on the front page of the chicago daily tribune a newspaper that believed the pollsters.
the cold war at home read the document ronald reagan testimony before huac 1947 alger hiss accused of being a communist spy by whittaker chambers takes an oath during his august 1948 hearings before the house un american activities committee.
hisss conviction on charges of perjury convinced many americans that internal subversion threatened the nations survival.
were responsible for the loss of china in september 1949 when the truman administration announced that the russians had detonated their first atomic bomb the end of americas nuclear monopoly was blamed on soviet espionage.
in early 1950 klaus fuchs a british scientist who had worked on the wartime manhattan project admitted giving the russians vital information about the a bomb.
a few months later the government charged american communists ethel and julius rosenberg with conspiracy to transmit atomic secrets to the soviet union.
in 1951 a jury found the rosenbergs guilty of espionage and judge irving kaufman sentenced them to die for what he termed their loathsome offense despite their insistent claims of innocence and worldwide appeals on their behalf the rosenbergs were electrocuted on june 19 1953 thus by the early 1950s nearly all the ingredients were at hand for a new outburst of hysteria fear of russia evidence of espionage and a belief in a vast unseen conspiracy.
the only element missing was a leader to release the new outburst of intolerance.
mccarthyism in action on february 12 1950 senator joseph r mccarthy of wisconsin delivered a routine lincolns birthday speech in wheeling west virginia.
this little known republican suddenly attracted national attention when he declared i have here in my hand a list of 205 a list of names that were made known to the secretary of state as being members of the communist party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the state department the charge that there were communists in the state department on different occasions with the number changed to 57 then 81 was never substantiated.
but mccarthys wheeling speech triggered a four and a half year crusade to hunt down alleged communists in government.
the stridency and sensationalism of the senators accusations soon won the name mccarthyism.
mccarthys basic technique was the multiple untruth.
he leveled a bevy of charges of treasonable activities in government.
while officials were refuting his initial accusations he brought forth a steady stream of new ones so the corrections never caught up with the latest blast.
he failed to unearth a single confirmed communist in government but he kept the truman administration in turmoil.
drawing on an army of informers primarily disgruntled federal workers with grievances against their colleagues and superiors mccarthy charged government agencies with harboring and protecting communist agents and accused the state department of deliberately losing the cold war.
his briefcase bulged with documents but he did very little actual research relying instead on reports often outdated from earlier congressional investigations.
he exploited the press with great skill combining current accusations with promises of future disclosures to guarantee headlines.
the secret of mccarthys power was the fear he engendered among his senate colleagues.
in 1950 maryland senator millard tydings who headed a committee critical of mccarthys activities failed to win reelection when mccarthy opposed him after that other senators ran scared.
mccarthy delighted in making sweeping startling charges of communist sympathies against prominent public figures.
a favorite target was patrician secretary of state dean acheson whom mccarthy ridiculed as the red dean with his cane spats and tea sipping little finger he even went after general george marshall claiming that the wartime army chief of staff was an agent of the communist conspiracy.
nor were fellow republicans immune.
one gop senator was described as a living miracle in that he is without question the only man who has lived so long with neither brains nor guts the attacks on the wealthy famous and privileged won mccarthy a devoted national following though at the height of his influence in early 1954 he gained the approval of only 50 percent of the respondents in a gallup poll.
mccarthy drew a disproportionate backing from working class catholics and ethnic groups especially the irish poles and italians who normally voted democratic.
he offered a simple solution to the complicated cold war defeat the enemy at home rather than continue to engage in costly foreign aid programs and entangling alliances abroad.
above all mccarthy appealed to conservative republicans in the midwest who shared his right wing views and felt cheated by trumans upset victory in 1948 even gop leaders who viewed mccarthys tactics with distaste such as robert a taft of ohio quietly encouraged him to attack the vulnerable democrats.
chapter 28 the onset of the cold war the united states to defend formosa.
when the communists began shelling the offshore islands eisenhower persuaded congress to pass a resolution authorizing him to use force to defend formosa and closely related localities despite repeated requests however the president refused to say whether he would use force to repel a chinese attack on quemoy or matsu.
instead he and dulles hinted at the use of nuclear weapons carefully stating that their action would depend on whether they considered an attack on the offshore islands part of a larger offensive aimed at formosa.
the chinese leaders unsure whether eisenhower was bluffing decided not to test american resolve.
the shelling ended in 1955 and when the communists resumed it again in 1958 another firm but equally ambiguous american response forced them to desist.
the apparent refusal of the soviet union to come to chinas aid in these crises with the united states contributed to a growing rift between the two communist nations by the end of the 1950s.
unfortunately the eisenhower administration failed to take full advantage of the opportunity that it had helped to create.
covert actions amid these dangerous crises the eisenhower administration worked behind the scenes in the 1950s to expand the nations global influence.
in 1953 the cia was instrumental in overthrowing a popularly elected government in iran and placing the shah in full control of that country.
see the feature essay america enters the middle east pp.
closer to home in latin america eisenhower once again relied on covert action.
in 1954 the cia masterminded the overthrow of a leftist regime in guatemala.
the immediate advantage was in denying the soviets a possible foothold in the western hemisphere but latin americans resented the thinly disguised interference of the united states in their internal affairs.
more important when fidel castro came to power in cuba in 1959 the eisenhower administration after a brief effort at conciliation adopted a hard line that helped drive cuba into the soviet orbit and led to new attempts at covert action.
eisenhowers record as a cold warrior was thus mixed.
his successful ending of the korean war and his peacekeeping efforts in indochina and formosa and in the suez crisis are all to his credit.
yet his reliance on coups and subversion directed by the cia in iran and guatemala reveal ikes corrupting belief that the ends justified the means.
and despite the 1952 campaign call for the liberation of eastern europe eisenhower accepted soviet domination of this region refusing to act on behalf of east german protesters in 1953 or hungarian freedom fighters in 1956 nevertheless eisenhower did display an admirable ability to stay calm and unruffled in moments of great tension reassuring the nation and the world.
and above all he could boast as he did in 1962 of his ability to keep the peace.
in those eight years he reminded the nation we lost no inch of ground to tyranny.
one war was ended and incipient wars were blocked waging peace eisenhower hoped to ease cold war tensions by ending the nuclear arms race.
the advent of the hydrogen bomb intensified his concern over nuclear warfare by 1955 both the united states and the soviet union had added this dread new weapon to their arsenals.
with new long range ballistic missiles being perfected it was only a matter of time before russia and the united states would be capable of destroying each other completely.
peace as winston churchill noted now depended on a balance of terror.
throughout the 1950s eisenhower sought a way out of the nuclear dilemma.
in april 1953 shortly after stalins death he gave a speech in which he called on the russians to join him in a new effort at disarmament pointing out that every warship launched every rocket fired signifies in the final sense a theft from those who hunger and are not fed those who are cold and are not clothed when the soviets ignored this appeal the president tried again in december 1953 addressing the un general assembly he outlined an atoms for peace plan whereby the united states and the soviet union would donate fissionable material to a new un agency to be used for peaceful purposes.
despite ikes appeal to serve the needs rather than the fears of mankind the russians again rebuffed him.
undaunted eisenhower tried once more.
at a summit conference in geneva switzerland in 1955 ike proposed to nikita khrushchev just emerging as stalins successor after a two year struggle for power a way to break the disarmament deadlock.
open skies as reporters dubbed the plan would overcome the traditional russian objection to on site inspection by having both superpowers open their territory to mutual aerial surveillance.
unfortunately khrushchev dismissed open skies as a very transparent espionage device and the conference ended without any significant breakthrough in the cold war.
after his reelection in 1956 the president renewed his efforts toward nuclear arms control.
concern over atmospheric fallout from nuclear testing had led presidential candidate adlai stevenson to propose a mutual ban on such experiments.
at first eisenhower rejected the test ban idea arguing that it could be effective only as part of a comprehensive disarmament agreement but the russians supported it.
finally in 1958 the president changed his mind after american and soviet scientists developed a system to detect nuclear testing in the atmosphere without on site inspection.
in october 1958 eisenhower and khrushchev each voluntarily suspended further weapons tests pending the outcome of a conference held at geneva to work out a test ban treaty.
although the geneva conference failed to make progress neither the united states nor the soviet union resumed testing for the remainder of ikes term in office.
the suspension of testing halted the nuclear pollution of the worlds atmosphere but it did not lead to the improvement in soviet american relations that eisenhower sought.
instead the soviet feat in launching sputnik the first artificial satellite to orbit the earth intensified the cold war.
see the feature essay in chapter 29 affluence and anxiety the role of wife and mother continued to be viewed as the ideal for women in the 1950s.
trends toward getting married earlier and having larger families reinforced the pattern of women devoting all their efforts to housework and child raising rather than acquiring professional skills and pursuing careers outside the home.
adlai stevenson extolling the humble role of housewife told smith college graduates that there was much they could do in the living room with a baby in your lap or in the kitchen with a can opener in your hand dr benjamin spocks 1946 best seller baby and child care became a fixture in millions of homes while the traditional womens magazines such as mccalls and good housekeeping thrived by featuring articles on natural childbirth and inspirational pieces such as homemaking is my vocation nonetheless the number of working wives doubled between 1940 and 1960 by the end of the 1950s 40 percent of american women and nearly one third of all married women had jobs outside the home.
the heavy expenses involved in rearing and educating children led wives and mothers to seek ways to augment the family income inadvertently preparing the way for a new demand for equality in the 1960s.
the good life.
how did american culture change after the war.
consumerism became the dominant social theme of the 1950s.
yet even with an abundance of creature comforts and added hours of leisure time the quality of life left many americans anxious and dissatisfied.
areas of greatest growth organized religion flourished in the climate of the 1950s.
ministers priests and rabbis all commented on the rise in church and synagogue attendance in the new communities.
will herberg claimed that religious affiliation had become the primary identifying feature of modern american life dividing the nation into three separate segments protestant catholic and jewish.
some observers condemned the bland secular nature of suburban churches which seemed to be an integral part of the consumer society.
on weekdays one shops for food wrote one critic on saturdays one shops for recreation and on sundays one shops for the holy ghost but the popularity of religious writer norman vincent peale with his positive gospel that urged people to start thinking faith enthusiasm and joy suggested that the new churches filled a genuine if shallow human need.
at the same time the emergence of neo orthodoxy in protestant seminaries notably through the ideas of reinhold niebuhr and the rapid spread of radical forms of fundamentalism such as the assemblies of god indicated that millions of americans still were searching for a more personal religious faith.
schools provided an immediate problem for the growing new suburban communities.
the increase in the number of school age children from twenty to thirty million in the first eight grades overwhelmed the resources of many local districts leading to demands for federal aid.
congress granted limited help for areas affected by defense plants and military bases but eisenhowers reluctance to unbalance the budget along with traditional adherence to state control over public education blocked further federal assistance prior to 1957 when the government reacted to sputnik.
see the feature essay the reaction to sputnik pp.
equally important a controversy arose over the nature of education in the 1950s.
critics of progressive education called for sweeping educational reforms and a new emphasis on traditional academic subjects.
suburban communities often had bitter fights affluent parents demanded kindergarten enrichment programs and grade school foreign language instruction while workingclass people resisted such costly innovations.
the one thing all seemed to agree on was the desirability of a college education.
the number of young people attending colleges increased from 1 5 million in 1940 to 3 6 million in 1960 the largest advances were made in the exciting new medium of television.
from a shaky start just after the war tv boomed in the 1950s pushing radio aside and undermining many of the nations magazines.
by 1957 three networks controlled the airwaves reaching forty million sets over nearly five hundred stations.
advertisers soon took charge of the new medium using techniques first pioneered in radio including taped commercials quiz shows and soap operas.
at first the insatiable demand for programs encouraged a burst of creativity.
playwrights such as reginald rose rod serling and paddy chayefsky wrote a series of notable dramas for playhouse 90 studio one and the goodyear television playhouse.
broadcast live from cramped studios these productions thrived on tight dramatic structures movable scenery and frequent close ups of the actors.
advertisers however quickly became disillusioned with the live anthology programs which usually dealt with controversial subjects or focused on ordinary people and events.
in contrast sponsors wanted shows that stressed excitement glamour and instant success.
aware that audiences were fascinated by contestants with unusual expertise a shoemaker answering tough questions on operas a grandmother stumping experts on baseball producers began giving away huge cash prizes on the 64 000 question and twenty one.
in 1959 the nation was shocked when charles van doren a columbia university professor confessed he had been given the answers in advance to win 129 000 on twenty one.
the three networks quickly dropped all the big prize quiz programs replacing them with comedy action and adventure shows such as the untouchables and bonanza.
despite its early promise of artistic innovation television had become a technologically sophisticated but safe conveyor of the consumer culture.
critics of the consumer society one striking feature of the 1950s was the abundance of self criticism.
a number of widely read books explored the flaws in the new suburbia.
john keatss the crack in the picture window described the endless rows of tract houses vomited up by developers as identical boxes spreading like gangrene their occupants whom he dubbed the drones the amiables and the fecunds lost any sense of individuality in their obsession with material goods.
richard gordon katherine gordon and max gunther were more concerned about the psychological toll of suburban life in the good life.
their 1960 book the split level trap.
they labeled the new lifestyle disturbia and bemoaned the haggard men the tense and anxious women and the gimme kids it produced.
the most sweeping indictment came in william h whytes the organization man 1956 based on a study of the chicago suburb of park forest.
whyte perceived a change from the old protestant ethic with its emphasis on hard work and personal responsibility to a new social ethic centered on the team with the ultimate goal of belongingness the result was a stifling conformity and the loss of personal identity.
the most influential social critic of the 1950s was harvard sociologist david riesman.
his book the lonely crowd appeared in 1950 and set the tone for intellectual commentary about suburbia for the rest of the decade.
riesman described the shift from the innerdirected americans of the past who had relied on such traditional values as self denial and frugality to the other directed americans of the consumer society who constantly adapted their behavior to conform to social pressures.
the consequences a decline in individualism and a tendency for people to become acutely sensitive to the expectations of others produced a bland and tolerant society of consumers lacking creativity and a sense of adventure.
view the closer look c wright mills was a far more caustic commentator on american society in the 1950s.
anticipating government statistics that revealed white collar workers salesclerks office workers bank tellers now outnumbered blue collar workers miners factory workers mill hands mills described the new middle class in ominous terms in his books white collar 1951 and power elite 1956.
the corporation was the villain for mills depriving office workers of their own identities and imposing an impersonal discipline through manipulation and propaganda.
the industrial assembly line had given way to an even more dehumanizing workplace the modern office.
at rows of blank looking counters sat rows of blank looking girls with blank white folders in their blank hands all blankly folding blank papers this disenchantment with the consumer culture reached its most eloquent expression with the beats literary groups that rebelled against the materialistic society of the 1950s.
jack kerouacs novel on the road published in 1957 set the tone for the new movement.
the name came from the quest for beatitude a state of inner grace sought in zen buddhism.
flouting the respectability of suburbia the beatniks as middle america termed them were i love lucy a 1950s family watching television i love lucy was one of the most popular television shows of the 1950s.
manufacturers designed television sets as living room furniture and marketed televisions as promoting family togetherness and facilitating domestic leisure time.
complete the assignment the reaction to sputnik on myhistorylab feature essay the reaction to sputnik sputnik was launched into an elliptical low orbit by the soviet union on october 4 1957 the surprise success of the launching of the worlds first artificial satellite by the soviet union served as catalyst in the united states for major changes and initiatives in national security education and space exploration.
o n october 4 1957 the soviet union launched sputnik the worlds first artificial satellite.
every 92 minutes the 184 pound sphere orbited the globe emitting its distinctive radio signal beep.
beep americans were stunned.
the united states had been planning to send up its own satellite as part of the international geophysical year established as july 1 1957 to december 31 1958 but the vanguard program kept separate from the militarys quest for an intercontinental ballistic missile icbm was far behind schedule.
all american scientists could do was offer their congratulations to the soviets while political leaders tried to downplay the feat with one official dismissing sputnik as a silly bauble critics of the eisenhower administration however reacted quite differently.
a sense of panic gripped the nation.
edward teller father of the h bomb spoke of a technological pearl harbor and raised the fear that the soviets with a rocket powerful enough to send sputnik into space were ahead of the united states in the race for the icbm.
even more important many soon began to worry that the soviets threatened the superiority of the united states in science and technology areas in which americans had long felt invincible.
thus senator henry jackson a cold war democrat called the launch of sputnik a devastating blow to the prestige of the united states as the leader in the scientific and technical world in responding to sputnik americans began to voice doubts about the vitality and quality of their own society.
critics warned of excessive devotion to material objects cars appliances luxury goods at the expense of traditional american values such as hard work dedication and national pride.
one senator proclaimed that it was time to be less concerned with the depth of pile on the new broadloom rug or the height of the tail fin on the car and to be more prepared to shed blood sweat and tears if this country and the free world are to survive others worried over the realization that the soviets were training more scientists and engineers than the united states and called for a complete overhaul of the american educational system.
sputnik gave new momentum to reformers who for years had been critical of the trend toward social adjustment in american schools and were crying out for more stress on the basics reading writing and arithmetic.
events in the first few months following the launch of sputnik did little to calm the nation.
in november 1957 the soviets orbited a second satellite one weighing over 1 000 pounds and carrying a dog into space.
a month later american scientists readied vanguard for its first launch at cape canaveral in florida.
the slim rocket carrying a tiny 4 pound sphere as its payload rose only a few inches off the ground and then toppled over in a cloud of smoke and fire.
reporters covering the event quickly derided vanguard referring to it as flopnik and kaputnik president eisenhower then approved plans to let an army team led by german scientist wernher von braun attempt to put a satellite into orbit using the reliable intermediate range jupiter rocket.
on january 31 1958 explorer the first american satellite successfully orbited the earth.
much smaller than the original sputnik explorer did carry a more sophisticated set of instruments to send back data from space.
informed of the successful launch president eisenhower expressed the sentiments of millions of americans when he exclaimed i surely feel a lot better now sputnik served as a catalyst for change that led to many positive developments.
the most significant came in the area of national security.
democrats led by senator lyndon johnson criticized eisenhower for cutting defense spending in an effort to balance the budget and warned of a future missile gap claiming that the powerful rocket that launched sputnik into orbit showed the soviets were ahead in developing the icbm.
the president responded by increasing the pentagon budget by several billion dollars and speeding up the american missile program.
his most important action however was the appointment of mit president james killian to the new post of presidential science adviser.
killian quickly created a presidents science advisory committee psac composed of 17 leading scientists who met regularly to advise eisenhower on technical issues.
science commented time magazine has never before been given that kind of attention at that level killian and the psac persuaded eisenhower to take a gamble on icbms that paid off handsomely.
instead of focusing on liquid fuel missiles which took hours to load and could not be placed in hardened sites the president gave priority to development of solidfuel missiles the minuteman and the polaris which could be fired almost immediately and could be protected against attack in underground silos or underwater onboard submarines.
by the 1960s fears of a missile gap evaporated as americas second generation of missiles made the original soviet icbms obsolete.
in 1958 the nation moved quickly to address the other issues raised by sputnik.
with strong bipartisan support congress acted on long overdue educational reform.
the national defense education act ndea helped schools improve and broaden their science and math offerings as academic leaders helped design new math and new physics courses.
the act also created a loan fund to assist needy students in meeting the costs of a college education as well as establishing graduate fellowships in science engineering and foreign area studies.
sputnik had allowed those calling for educational reform to break the logjam and upgrade and improve school curriculums as well as make higher education more affordable.
another important congressional action came with the creation of the national aeronautics and space administration nasa in 1958 concerned by the interservice rivalry that hampered the missile program its sponsors insisted on a new civilian agency to oversee the nations space program.
while dependent on the military for the rocket boosters nasa was able to develop its own agenda for space exploration and started a program that would eventually place astronauts in orbit around the earth and land them on the moon by the end of the next decade.
the reaction to sputnik illustrates the curious way that democracy often works.
advocates of space exploration educational reform and intercontinental ballistic missiles had made little headway before october 4 1957 the soviet feat in launching sputnik helped arouse the nation and despite the initial overreaction led to important advances in all three areas.
sputnik thus proved to be like a fire bell in the night filling the american people with alarm but triggering a positive response that served the nation well.
questions for discussion 1 how did the cold war influence americas decision to invest heavily in space exploration.
2 why did nasa favor manned space flight over instrument probes.
chapter 30 the turbulent sixties watch the video president john f kennedy and the cuban missile crisis the cuban missile crisis occurred in 1962 when u s spy planes detected soviets supplying nuclear warheads being delivered to cuba.
the american people on the defensive since sputnik suddenly felt that they had proved their superiority over the russians.
arthur schlesinger jr kennedys confidant and later his biographer claimed that the cuban crisis showed the whole world.
the ripening of an american leadership unsurpassed in the responsible management of power.
it was this combination of toughness and restraint of will nerve and wisdom so brilliantly controlled so matchlessly calibrated that dazzled the world the cuban missile crisis had more substantial results as well.
shaken by their close call kennedy and khrushchev agreed to install a hot line to speed direct communication between washington and moscow in an emergency.
long stalled negotiations over the reduction of nuclear testing suddenly resumed leading to the limited test ban treaty of 1963 which outlawed tests in the atmosphere while still permitting them underground.
above all kennedy displayed a new maturity as a result of the crisis.
in a speech at american university in june 1963 he shifted from the rhetoric of confrontation to that of conciliation.
speaking of the russians he said our most basic common link is the fact that we all inhabit this planet.
we all breathe the same air.
we all cherish our childrens future.
and we are all mortal despite these hopeful words the missile crisis also had an unfortunate consequence.
those who believed that the russians understood only the language of force were confirmed in their penchant for a hard line.
hawks who had backed kennedys military buildup believed events had justified a policy of nuclear superiority.
the russian leaders drew similar conclusions.
aware the united states had a four to one advantage in nuclear striking the new frontier at home power during the cuban crisis one soviet official told his american counterpart never will we be caught like this again after 1962 the soviets embarked on a crash program to build up their navy and to overtake the american lead in nuclear missiles.
within five years they had the nucleus of a modern fleet and had surpassed the united states in icbms.
kennedys fleeting moment of triumph thus ensured the escalation of the arms race.
his legacy was a bittersweet one of short term success and long term anxiety.
the new frontier at home what was the new frontier and what did it accomplish.
kennedy hoped to change the course of history at home as well as abroad.
his election marked the arrival of a new generation of leadership.
for the first time people born in the twentieth century who had entered political life after world war ii were in charge of national affairs.
kennedys inaugural call to get the nation moving again was particularly attractive to young people who had shunned political involvement during the eisenhower years.
the new administration reflected kennedys aura of youth and energy.
major cabinet appointments went to activists notably connecticut governor abraham ribicoff as secretary of health education and welfare labor lawyer arthur j goldberg as secretary of labor and arizona congressman stuart udall as secretary of the interior.
the most controversial choice was robert f kennedy the presidents brother as attorney general.
critics scoffed at his lack of legal experience leading jfk to note jokingly he wanted to give bobby a little experience before he goes out to practice law in fact the president prized his brothers loyalty and shrewd political advice.
equally important were the members of the white house staff who handled domestic affairs.
like their counterparts in foreign policy these new frontiersmen kenneth odonnell theodore sorensen richard goodwin and walter heller prided themselves on being tough minded and pragmatic.
in contrast to eisenhower kennedy relied heavily on academics and intellectuals to help him infuse the nation with energy and a new sense of direction.
kennedys greatest asset was his own personality.
a cool attractive and intelligent man he possessed a sense of style that endeared him to the american public.
encouraged by his wife jacqueline the president invited artists and musicians as well as corporate executives to white house functions and he sprinkled his speeches with references to emerson and shakespeare.
he seemed to be a new lancelot bent on calling forth the best in national life admirers likened his inner circle to king arthurs court at camelot.
reporters loved him both for his fact filled and candid press conferences and for his witty comments.
after an embarrassing foreign policy failure when his standing in the polls actually went up he remarked its just like eisenhower.
the worse i do the more popular i get the congressional obstacle neither kennedys wit nor his charm proved strong enough to break the logjam in congress.
since the late 1940s a series of reform bills ranging from health care to federal aid to education had been stalled on capitol hill.
despite jfks victory the election of 1960 clouded the outlook for his new frontier program.
the democrats had lost twenty seats in the house and two in the senate even though they retained majorities in both branches a conservative coalition of northern republicans and southern democrats opposed all efforts at reform.
the situation was especially critical in the house where 101 southern representatives held the balance of power between 160 northern democrats and 174 republicans.
aided by speaker sam rayburn kennedy was able to enlarge the rules committee and overcome a traditional conservative roadblock but the narrowness of the vote 217 to 212 revealed how difficult it would be to enact reform measures.
the president gave up the fight for health care in the senate and settled instead for a modest increase in the minimum wage and the passage of manpower training and arearedevelopment legislation.
kennedy had no more success in enacting his program in 1962 and 1963 the conservative coalition stood firmly against education and health care proposals.
shifting ground the president did win approval for a trade expansion act in 1962 designed to lower tariff barriers but no significant reform legislation was passed.
although the composition of congress was his main obstacle kennedys greater interest in foreign policy and his distaste for legislative infighting contributed to the outcome.
jfk did not enjoy blarneying with pompous congressmen and simply would not take the time to do it one observer noted.
as a result the new frontier languished in congress.
economic advance kennedy gave a higher priority to the sluggish american economy.
during the last years of eisenhowers administration the rate of economic growth had slowed to just over 2 percent annually while unemployment rose to new heights with each recession.
jfk was determined to stimulate the economy to achieve a much higher rate of long term growth.
in part he wanted to redeem his campaign pledge to get the nation moving again he also believed the united states had to surpass the soviet union in economic vitality.
kennedy received conflicting advice from the experts.
those who claimed the problem was essentially a technological one urged manpower training and area redevelopment programs to modernize american industry.
others called for federal spending to rebuild the nations public facilities from parks and playgrounds to decaying bridges and urban courthouses.
kennedy sided with the first group largely because congress was opposed to massive spending on public works.
the actual stimulation of the economy however came not from social programs but from greatly increased appropriations for defense and space.
a 6 billion increase in the arms budget in 1961 gave the economy a great lift and kennedys decision to send an astronaut to the moon eventually cost 25 billion.
by 1962 more than half the federal budget was devoted to space and defense aircraft and computer companies in the south and west benefited but unemployment remained uncomfortably high in the older industrial areas of the northeast and midwest.
the administrations desire to keep the inflation rate low led to a serious confrontation with the business community.
kennedy chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 on myhistorylab time line 1969 stonewall riots in new yorks greenwich village spark gay rights movement june american astronauts land on the moon july u s forces invade cambodia april ohio national guardsmen kill four students at kent state university may states ratify twenty sixth amendment to the constitution giving 18 year olds the right to vote july president nixon freezes wages and prices for ninety days august richard nixon visits china february u s and ussr sign salt i accords in moscow may white house plumbers unit breaks into democratic headquarters in watergate complex june nixon wins reelection in landslide victory over george mcgovern november united states and north vietnam sign truce january arab oil embargo creates energy crisis in the united states october supreme court orders nixon to surrender white house tapes june nixon resigns presidency august last evacuation helicopter leaves roof of u s embassy in saigon south vietnam april nation celebrates bicentennial with fireworks patriotic music and parade of sailing ships july jimmy carter defeats gerald ford in presidential election november 1977 carter signs panama canal treaties restoring sovereignty to panama september carter orchestrates camp david accords between israel and egypt september 1979 iranian militants seize american hostages tehran november soviet invasion of afghanistan leads to u s withdrawal from 1980 moscow olympics december 1980 ronald reagan wins presidency over carter 1981 american hostages in iran released after 444 days in captivity january sandra day oconnor becomes first woman u s supreme court justice september 1982 equal rights amendment fails state ratification june unemployment reaches postwar record high of 10 4 percent october 1984 russia boycotts summer olympics in los angeles july reagan reelected president november 1985 mikhail gorbachev becomes leader of the soviet union march 1986 iran contra affair made public november 1987 reagan and gorbachev sign inf treaty at washington summit 1988 george h w bush defeats michael dukakis decisively in presidential election chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 election of 2008 electoral vote by state popular vote democratic barack obama 69 456 897 republican john mccain 59 934 814 129 391 711 hawaii wash d c alaska but the warm feeling soon wore off in the cold wind of the bleak economy.
the rescue package helped stabilize the financial sector but unemployment rose inexorably peaking at 10 percent in 2009 and remaining near there for the next year.
obama and the democratic majority in congress pushed through an economic stimulus package which may have kept unemployment from going even higher but did little to bring it down.
obama and the democrats also achieved something democratic presidents since harry truman had been attempting passage of a comprehensive program of medical insurance for nearly all americans.
but the measure passed in the face of bitter resistance from republicans in congress prompted a backlash among voters.
together with the lengthening recession it contributed to the rebuke the democrats received in the 2010 midterm elections in which the republicans reclaimed control of the house of representatives gained six seats in the senate and carried most of the governors races.
obama scored an important success when american special forces killed osama bin laden the al qaeda mastermind in 2011 and he withdrew american troops from iraq and scheduled the removal of troops from afghanistan foreshadowing a reduction of the american military role in the middle east.
but instability in pakistan and the nuclear ambitions of iran suggested that americas worries about the region were far from over.
new challenges and old meanwhile the great recession knocked the federal budget wildly out of balance.
government revenues fell as unemployed workers no longer paid income taxes government spending rose to cover unemployment compensation and other recession related expenses.
by 2011 the annual deficit seemed stuck at more than 1 trillion.
reducing the deficit was the first priority to many voters and elected officials but if reducing the deficit required laying off government workers as it seemed certain to do it might aggravate the recession.
the problem for the moment defied solution.
other problems had deeper roots but no easier solutions.
the race question remained alive and contentious despite the presence of an african american in the white house.
affirmative action policies policies designed to ensure greater participation by minorities had been under scrutiny for years.
the bakke v regents of the university of california decision of 1978 had allowed the use of race as one factor in determining admission to colleges and universities so long as rigid racial quotas werent employed.
this dissatisfied many conservatives who during the 1980s and 1990s attacked affirmative action politically and in the courts.
in 1992 cheryl hopwood an unsuccessful white applicant to the university of texas law school challenged her rejection contending that the school had admitted less qualified african americans.
in 1996 the fifth circuit court of appeals decided in her favor and the hopwood decision raised the hopes of anti affirmative action groups that the supreme court would overturn bakke.
but in a 2003 case involving the university of michigan the supreme court ruled that student body diversity is a compelling state interest that can justify the use of race in university admissions in other words affirmative action in higher education could continue.
but the narrowness of the 5 4 vote suggested that affirmative action would continue to spark controversy as indeed it did.
even more controversial was abortion.
the issue had roiled american politics for decades but it did so particularly after the 2005 death of chief justice william rehnquist and the nearly concurrent retirement of associate justice sandra day oconnor.
the two vacancies on the supreme court allowed george w bush to nominate their replacements.
rehnquist had been a reliable conservative but oconnor was a swing vote and liberals feared that a more conservative successor would tip the balance against abortion rights among other contentious issues.
yet john roberts bushs nominee for chief justice and samuel alito the nominee for associate justice dodged democrats questions in hearings and both nominations succeeded.
almost immediately the south dakota legislature essentially banned abortion hoping to persuade the newly reconfigured court to revisit the 1973 roe decision which guaranteed abortion rights.
south dakota voters subsequently overturned the state law but the issue remained highly charged.
gay rights provoked fresh controversy as gay advocates pushed for equal marital rights.
after the massachusetts supreme court in 2004 struck down a state law barring same sex marriages gay advocates celebrated but conservatives in dozens of states pressed for laws and constitutional amendments reaffirming traditional views on the subject and defining marriage as the union of one man and one woman.
nearly all these efforts were successful suggesting that on this front at least the advances gay men and women had achieved since the 1960s had hit a wall.
the issue of military service proved similarly controversial.
bill clinton had achieved a minor breakthrough with the dont ask dont tell policy which allowed gay service as long as the men and women in question kept their sexual orientation to themselves.
barack obama campaigned to let gays come out of the military closet but the republican party resisted.
finally however in the lame duck session of congress in december 2010 the legislature approved and obama signed a measure repealing the dont ask dont tell policy and permitting gays to serve openly in the armed forces.
barack obamas triumph and trials watch the video the historical significance of the 2008 election barack obama takes the presidential oath of office from supreme court justice john roberts on january 20 2011 to become the 44th president of the united states.
president obamas wife michelle is holding the bible as an estimated 1 8 million people attended the inaugural on the national mall.
science and religion continued to battle in americas classrooms.
opponents of evolution revised their challenge to darwin replacing creationism with intelligent design and demanding that biology classes air this version of their beliefs.
school board elections hinged on the issue ohio embraced intelligent design only to reject it following an adverse 2005 court decision in a case from the dover school district.
for the moment the evolutionists held their own but given that public opinion polls consistently showed most americans rejecting evolution in favor of divine creation the fight was sure to continue.
doubting the future during most of american history every generation had been better off materially than the generation before.
events of the early twenty first century called this implicit guarantee into question.
the stubbornness of the great recession made americans wonder whether the economy would ever recover its resiliency.
the towering federal deficit imperiled such cherished programs as social security and medicare and put the myriad other contributions the federal government had long made to american life even more at risk.
demographics didnt help.
as the baby boom generation neared retirement the load on the social security system increased.
everyone realized that something would have to be done to keep the pension program afloat but no one could figure out how to make the necessary changes politically palatable.
middle aged americans faced the prospect of delayed retirement smaller pensions or both.
not surprisingly they objected.
younger americans resisted the tax increases that could have spared their elders such sacrifice.
the trend in health care costs was even more alarming.
for years medical costs had grown rapidly and as the population.

chapters 1 and 2 addresses three main developments that are central to this period native american diversity and complexity colonial settlement and the columbian exchange popular culture can lead us to think of native american societies as being substantially the same everywhere in north america they were organized into tribes with few material possessions and primitive beliefs and cultures and reliant mostly on hunting for their subsistence.
this impression distorts a much more complicated picture.
native american political organization ran the gamut from vast complex imperial states to kin based bands of hunters and gatherers.
patterns of political organization varied widely and the familiar label of tribe does more to obscure than to clarify their workings.
native americans economic and social systems were adapted to the ecosystems they inhabited.
many were extremely productive farmers some hunted bison and deer while others were expert salmon fishermen who plied coastal waters in large oceangoing boats.
native american religions and cultures also varied widely though they shared some broad characteristics.
these variations in native american societies shaped colonial enterprise.
europeans conquered and coopted native american empires with relative ease but smaller and more decentralized polities were harder to exploit.
mobile hunter gatherers appeared politically amorphous but they became especially formidable opponents of colonial expansion.
european colonization triggered a series of sweeping changes that historians have labeled the columbian exchange at the same time that people crossed the atlantic in large numbers so too did plants animals and germs.
old world grains like wheat and barley were planted in the americas for the first time and weeds like dandelions were carried across the ocean as well.
potatoes maize corn and tomatoes among other foods crossed the atlantic in the other direction and transformed dietary practices in asia as well as europe.
native americans domesticated very few animals the columbian exchange introduced horses pigs cattle and a variety of other creatures to the american landscape.
germs also made the voyage especially the deadly pathogens that had so disordered life in europe in the centuries prior to colonization.
smallpox influenza and bubonic plague among others took an enormous toll on native american populations.
inanimate materials made the voyage as well enough gold and silver traveled from the americas to europe and asia to transform the worlds economies intensifying competition and empire building in europe.
old world diseases devastated native american peoples.
on average they lost ninety percent of their numbers over the first century of contact forcing them to cope with european and african newcomers in a weakened and vulnerable state.
part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 transformations of north america 1450 1700 experimentation and transformation thematic understanding the collisions of american european and african worlds challenged the beliefs and practices of all three groups.
colonization was above all a long and tortured process of experimentation.
over time europeans carved out three distinct types of colonies in the americas each shaped by the constraints and opportunities presented by american landscapes and peoples.
where native american societies were organized into densely settled empires europeans conquered the ruling class and established tribute based empires of their own.
in tropical and subtropical settings colonizers created plantation societies that demanded large imported labor forces a need that was met through the african slave trade.
and in the temperate regions of the mainland north america where neither the landscape nor the native population yielded easy wealth european colonists came in large numbers hoping to create familiar societies in unfamiliar settings.
everywhere in the americas core beliefs and worldviews were shaken by contact with radically unfamiliar peoples.
native americans and africans struggled to maintain autonomy in their relations with colonizers while europeans labored to understand and profit from their relations with nonwhite peoples.
these transformations are the subject of part 1 this timeline arranges some of the important events of this period into themes.
look at the entries for ideas beliefs and culture from 1450 to 1700 how did the protestant reformation and the response of the catholic church influence the colonization of the americas in these years.
in the realm of work exchange and technology how did colonial economies evolve and what roles did native american and african labor play in them.
work exchange technology diversified economies of native america rise of the ottoman empire blocks asian trading routes of the italian city states europeans fish off north american coast portuguese traders explore african coast growth of the outwork system in english textile industry spanish encomienda system organizes native labor in mexico inca mita system is co opted by the spanish in the andes first staple exports from the english mainland colonies furs and tobacco subsistence farms in new england transition to sugar plantation system in the caribbean islands tobacco trade stagnates maturing yeoman economy and emerging atlantic trade in new england peopling politics power christopher columbus explores the bahamas and west indies 1492 1504 pedro alvares cabral makes landfall in brazil 1500 spanish conquest of mexico and peru 1519 1535 rise of monarchical nation states in europe aztecs and incas consolidate their empires ideas beliefs culture protestant reformation 1517 sparks century of religious warfare henry viii creates church of england 1534 identity castile and aragon joined to create spain the inquisition helps create a sense of spanishness founding of jesuit order 1540 john calvin establishes a protestant commonwealth in geneva switzerland elizabeths sea dogs plague spanish shipping philip ii defends the roman catholic church against protestantism english conquest and persecution of native irish english monarchs adopt mercantilist policies elizabeth i adopts protestant book of common prayer 1559 growing protestant movement in england persecuted english puritans and catholics migrate to america pilgrims and puritans seek to create godly commonwealths established churches set up in puritan new england and anglican virginia powhatan and virginia company representatives attempt to extract tribute from each other probable founding of the iroquois confederacy rise of the songhai empire in africa castilians and africans arrive in spanish america in large numbers english colonies in newfoundland maine and roanoke fail defeat of the spanish armada 1588 first set of anglo indian wars james i claims divine right to rule england african servitude begins in virginia 1619 virginias house of burgesses 1619 caribbean islands move from servitude to slavery english puritan revolution native americans rise up against english invaders 1622 1640s dissenters settle in rhode island growing gentry immigration to virginia restoration of the english crown 1660 metacoms war in new england 1675 1676 white indentured servitude shapes chesapeake society english conquer new netherland 1664 bacons rebellion calls for removal of indians and end of elite rule africans defined as property rather than people in the chesapeake social mobility for africans ends with collapse of tobacco trade and increased power of gentry salem witchcraft crisis 1692 part 1 part 1 thematic timeline 1450 1700 transformations of north america 1450 1700 colliding worlds 1450 1600 c h a p t e r the native american experience the first americans american empires chiefdoms and confederacies patterns of trade sacred power western europe the edge of the old world hierarchy and authority peasant society expanding trade networks myths religions and holy warriors west and central africa origins of the atlantic slave trade empires kingdoms and ministates trans saharan and coastal trade the spirit world exploration and conquest portuguese expansion the african slave trade sixteenth century incursions i n april 1493 a genoese sailor of humble identify the big idea origins appeared at the court of queen how did the political economic and isabella of castile and king ferdinand religious systems of native ameriof aragon along with six caribbean natives cans europeans and africans comnumerous colorful parrots and samples of pare and how did things change as finest gold and many other things never a result of contacts among them.
before seen or heard tell of in spain the sailor was christopher columbus just returned from his first voyage into the atlantic.
he and his party entered barcelonas fortress in a solemn procession.
the monarchs stood to greet columbus he knelt to kiss their hands.
they talked for an hour and then adjourned to the royal chapel for a ceremony of thanksgiving.
columbus now bearing the official title admiral of the ocean sea remained at court for more than a month.
the highlight of his stay was the baptism of the six natives whom columbus called indians because he mistakenly believed he had sailed westward all the way to asia.
in the spring of 1540 the spanish explorer hernando de soto met the lady of cofachiqui ruler of a large native american province in present day south carolina.
though an epidemic had carried away many of her people the lady of the province offered the spanish expedition as much corn and as many pearls as it could carry.
as she spoke to de soto she unwound a great rope of pearls as large as hazelnuts and handed them to the spaniard in return he gave her a gold ring set with a ruby.
de soto and his men then visited the temples of cofachiqui which were guarded by carved statues and held storehouses of weapons and chest upon chest of pearls.
after loading their horses with corn and pearls they continued on their way.
a portuguese traveler named duarte lopez visited the african kingdom of kongo in 1578.
the men and women are black he reported some approaching olive colour with black curly hair and others with red.
the men are of middle height and excepting the black skin are like the portuguese the royal city of kongo sat on a high plain that was entirely cultivated with a population of more than 100 000 the city included a separate commercial district a mile around where portuguese traders acquired ivory wax honey palm oil and slaves from the kongolese.
three glimpses of three lost worlds.
soon these peoples would be transforming one anothers societies often through conflict and exploitation.
but at the moment they first met europeans native americans and africans stood on roughly equal terms.
even a hundred years after columbuss discovery of the americas no one could have foreseen the shape that their interactions would take in the generations to come.
to begin we need to understand the three worlds as distinct places each home to unique societies and cultures.
village of secoton 1585 english colonist john white painted this view of an algonquian village on the outer banks of present day north carolina.
its cluster of houses surrounded by fields of crops closely resembled european farming communities of the same era.
white captured everyday details of the towns social life including food preparation and a ceremony or celebration in progress lower right.
service historique de la marine vincennes france giraudon the bridgeman art library.
part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 the native american experience when europeans arrived perhaps 60 million people occupied the americas 7 million of whom lived north of mexico.
in mesoamerica present day mexico and guatemala and the andes empires that rivaled the greatest civilizations in world history ruled over millions of people.
at the other end of the political spectrum hunters and gatherers were organized into kinbased bands.
between these extremes semisedentary societies planted and tended crops in the spring and summer fished and hunted made war and conducted trade.
though we often see this spectrum as a hierarchy in which the empires are most impressive and important while hunter gatherers deserve scarcely a mention this bias toward civilizations that left behind monumental architecture and spawned powerful ruling classes is misplaced.
regardless of size or political complexity the energies and innovations of native american societies everywhere profoundly transformed american landscapes.
to be fully understood the americas must be treated in all their complexity with an appreciation for their diverse societies and cultures.
the first americans archaeologists believe that migrants from asia crossed a 100 mile wide land bridge connecting siberia and alaska during the last ice age sometime between 13 000 and 3000 b c.
and thus became the first americans.
the first wave of this migratory stream from asia lasted from about fifteen thousand to nine thousand years ago.
then the glaciers melted and the rising ocean submerged the land bridge beneath the bering strait map 1 1.
around eight thousand years ago a second movement of peoples traveling by water across the same narrow strait brought the ancestors of the navajos and the apaches to north america.
the forebears of the aleut and inuit peoples the eskimos came in a third wave around five thousand years ago.
then for three hundred generations the peoples of the western hemisphere were largely cut off from the rest of the world.
during this long era migrants identify causes dispersed through the continents what factors allowed as they hunted and gathered availfor the development of able resources.
the predominant empires in central mexico flow was southward and the densand the andes.
est populations developed in central mexico home to some 20 million people at the time of first contact with europeans and the andes mountains with a population of perhaps 12 million.
in north america a secondary trickle of migration pushed eastward across the rockies and into the mississippi valley and the eastern woodlands.
around 6000 b c some native american peoples in present day mexico and peru began raising domesticated crops.
mesoamericans cultivated maize into a nutritious plant with a higher yield per acre than wheat barley or rye the staple cereals of europe.
in peru they also bred the potato a root crop of unsurpassed nutritional value.
the resulting agricultural surpluses encouraged population growth and laid the foundation for wealthy urban societies in mexico and peru and later in the mississippi valley and the southeastern woodlands of north america map 1 2.
american empires in mesoamerica and the andes the two great empires of the americas the aztecs and incas dominated the landscape.
dense populations productive agriculture and an aggressive bureaucratic state were the keys to their power.
each had an impressive capital city.
tenochtitln established in 1325 at the center of the aztec empire had at its height around 1500 a population of about 250 000 at a time when the european cities of london and seville each had perhaps 50 000 the aztec state controlled the fertile valleys in the highlands of mexico and aztec merchants forged trading routes that crisscrossed the empire.
trade along with tribute demanded from subject peoples comparable to taxes in europe brought gold textiles turquoise obsidian tropical bird feathers and cacao to tenochtitln.
the europeans who first encountered this city in 1519 marveled at the citys wealth and beauty.
some of the soldiers among us who had been in many parts of the world wrote spanish conquistador bernal daz del castillo in constantinople and all over italy and in rome said that they had never seen so large a market place and so full of people and so well regulated and arranged see american voices p 32.
ruled by priests and warrior nobles the aztecs subjugated most of central mexico.
captured enemies were brought to the capital where aztec priests brutally sacrificed thousands of them.
the aztecs believed that these ritual murders sustained the cosmos ensuring fertile fields and the daily return of the sun.
cuzco the inca capital located more than 11 000 feet above sea level had perhaps 60 000 residents.
a dense network of roads storehouses and administrative chapter.
more to explore visual evidence return to the image of the last judgment on page 21 how does the emphasis on universal truth and everlasting punishment and reward make christianity different from animism.
how might faith in such a religious system shape the values and priorities of believers.
start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter 2 american experiments 1521 1700 queen elizabeth receiving dutch ambassadors this sixteenth century dutch painting by an anonymous artist depicts a pair of dutch ambassadors being received by englands queen elizabeth i the seventeen provinces that constituted the dutch republic were in rebellion against spanish rule in the later decades of the sixteenth century and hoped for elizabeths support.
in 1585 she signed the treaty of nonsuch pledging her support for the dutch cause.
an undeclared war with spain ensued punctuated by the defeat of the spanish armada in 1588.
museumslandschaft hessen kassel the bridgeman art library.
protestants but the independent anglican church was anathema to the spanish king philip ii.
elizabeth supported a generation of english seafarers who took increasingly aggressive actions against spanish control of american wealth.
the most famous of these elizabethan sea dogs was francis drake a rough hewn devoutly protestant farmers son from devon who took to the sea and became a scourge to philips american interests.
in 1577 he ventured into the pacific to disrupt spanish shipping to manila.
drakes fleet lost three ships and a hundred men but the survivors completed the first english circumnavigation of the globe and captured two spanish treasure ships.
when drakes flagship the golden hind returned to england in 1580 it brought enough silver gold silk and spices to bring his investors a 4 700 percent return on their investment.
at the same time elizabeth supported military expeditions that imposed english rule over gaelicspeaking catholic ireland.
calling the irish wild savages who were more barbarous and more brutish in their customs.
than in any other part of the world english soldiers brutally massacred thousands prefiguring the treatment of indians in north america.
to meet elizabeths challenges philip sent a spanish armada 130 ships and 30 000 men against england in 1588 philip intended to restore the roman church in england and then to wipe out calvinism in holland.
but he failed utterly a fierce storm and english ships destroyed the spanish fleet.
philip continued to spend his american gold and silver on religious wars an ill advised policy that diverted workers and resources from spains fledgling industries.
the gold was like a shewer of raine complained one critic that left no benefite behind oppressed by high taxes on agriculture and fearful of military service more than 200 000 residents of castile once the most prosperous region of spain migrated to america.
by the time of philips death in 1598 spain was in serious economic decline.
by contrast england grew significantly during the sixteenth century its economy stimulated as colonial advocate richard hakluyt noted by a wounderful increase of our people as englands population soared from 3 million in 1500 to 5 million in 1630 its monarchs supported the expansion of commerce and manufacturing.
english merchants had long supplied european weavers with highquality wool around 1500 they trace change created their own outwork tex over time tile industry.
merchants bought why did spains economy wool from the owners of great deteriorate and englands estates and sent it out to land economy improve in the less peasants in small cottages sixteenth century.
to spin and weave into cloth.
the government aided textile entrepreneurs by setting low wage rates and helped merchants by giving them monopolies in foreign markets.
this system of state assisted manufacturing and trade became known as mercantilism.
by encouraging textile production elizabeth reduced imports and increased exports.
the resulting favorable balance of trade caused gold and silver to flow into england and stimulated further economic expansion.
increased trade part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 turn to survive the present and carve out pathways to the future.
with turkey and india also boosted import duties which swelled the royal treasury and the monarchs power.
by 1600 elizabeths mercantile policies had laid the foundations for overseas colonization.
now the english had the merchant fleet and wealth needed to challenge spains control of the western hemisphere.
brazils sugar plantations portuguese colonists transformed the tropical lowlands of coastal brazil into a sugar plantation zone like the ones they had recently created on madeira the azores the cape verdes and so tom.
the work proceeded slowly but by 1590 more than a thousand sugar mills had been established in pernambuco and bahia.
each large plantation had its own milling operation because sugarcane is extremely heavy and rots quickly it must be processed on site.
thus sugar plantations combined backbreaking agricultural labor with milling extracting and refining processes that made sugar plantations look like industrial revolution era factories.
initially portuguese planters hoped that brazils indigenous peoples would supply the labor required to plantation colonies as spain hammered out its american empire and struggled against its protestant rivals portugal england france and the netherlands created successful plantation settlements in brazil jamestown maryland and the caribbean islands map 2 2.
worldwide demand for sugar and tobacco fuelled the growth of these new colonies and the resulting influx of colonists diminished spains dominance in the new world.
at the same time they imposed dramatic new pressures on native populations who scrambled in europe north america boston maryland virginia portugal spain jamestown azores lisbon seville madeira is.
at l a n t i c st augustine florida mexico havana veracruz saint domingue cuba jamaica caribbean sea canary is.
ocean africa st kitts nevis cartegena cape verde is.
martinique barbados mandesp s t a t ee a k i n g s guyana akan states bight of benin so tom quito south america pernambuco peru pac ifi c o c e an brazil bahia kongo recife angola salvador brazil plantation colony rio de janeiro 1 000 1 000 2 000 miles 2 000 kilometers map 2 2 the plantation colonies the plantation zone in the americas extended from the tropical coast of brazil northwestward through the west indies and into the tropical and subtropical lowlands of southeastern north america.
sugar was the most important plantation crop in the americas but where the soil or climate could not support it planters experimented with a wide variety of other possibilities including tobacco indigo cotton cacao and rice.
chapter 2 chapter 3 planter women deferred to their husbands reared pious children and maintained elaborate social networks in time creating a new ideal the southern gentlewoman.
using the profits generated by enslaved africans in the south atlantic system of commerce wealthy planters formed an increasingly well educated refined and stable ruling class.
the northern maritime economy the south atlantic system had a broad geographical reach.
as early as the 1640s new england farmers supplied the sugar islands with bread lumber fish and meat.
as a west indian explained planters had rather buy foode at very deare rates than produce it by labour soe infinite is the profitt of sugar works by 1700 the economies of the west indies and new england were closely interwoven.
soon farmers and merchants in new york new jersey and pennsylvania were also shipping wheat corn and bread to the caribbean.
by the 1750s about two thirds of new englands exports and half of those from the middle atlantic colonies went to the british and french sugar islands.
the sugar economy linked britains entire atlantic empire.
in return for the sugar they sent to england west indian planters received credit in the form of bills of exchange from london merchants.
the planters used these bills to buy slaves from africa and to pay north american farmers and merchants for their provisions and shipping services.
the mainland colonists then exchanged the bills for british manufactures primarily textiles and iron goods.
the urban economy the west indian trade created the first american merchant fortunes and the first urban industries.
merchants in boston newport providence philadelphia and new york invested their profits in new ships some set up manufacturing enterprises including twenty six refineries that processed raw sugar into finished loaves.
mainland distilleries turned west indian molasses into rum producing more than 2 5 million gallons in massachusetts alone by the 1770s.
merchants in salem marblehead and smaller new england ports built a major fishing industry by selling salted mackerel and cod to the sugar islands and to southern europe.
baltimore merchants transformed their town into a major the british atlantic world 1660 1750 port by developing a bustling export business in wheat while traders in charleston shipped deerskins indigo and rice to european markets map 3 4.
as transatlantic commerce expanded from five hundred voyages a year in the 1680s to fifteen hundred annually in the 1730s american port cities grew in size and complexity.
by 1750 the populations of newport and charleston were nearly 10 000 boston had 15 000 residents and new york had almost 18 000 the largest port was philadelphia whose population by 1776 had reached 30 000 the size of a large european provincial city.
smaller coastal towns emerged as centers of the lumber and shipbuilding industries.
seventy sawmills lined the piscataqua river in new hampshire providing low cost wood for homes warehouses and especially shipbuilding.
hundreds of shipwrights turned out oceangoing vessels while other artisans made ropes sails and metal fittings for the new fleet.
by the 1770s colonial built ships made up one third of the british merchant fleet.
the south atlantic system extended far into the interior.
a explain fleet of small vessels sailed back consequences and forth on the hudson and how did the rise of the delaware rivers delivering car south atlantic system goes of european manufactures impact economic development in the northern and picking up barrels of flour colonies.
and wheat to carry to new york and philadelphia for export to the west indies and europe.
by the 1750s hundreds of professional teamsters in maryland were transporting 370 000 bushels of wheat and corn and 16 000 barrels of flour to urban markets each year more than 10 000 wagon trips.
to service this traffic entrepreneurs and artisans set up taverns horse stables and barrel making shops in towns along the wagon roads.
lancaster the town that hosted the iroquois conference described in the chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
first navigation act 1660 1685 reign of charles ii king of england charles ii grants carolina proprietorship english capture new netherland rename it new york virginia law declares that the murder of a slave cannot be treated as a felony william penn founds pennsylvania 1685 1688 reign of james ii king of england 1686 1689 dominion of new england 1688 1689 glorious revolution in england william and mary ascend throne in england revolts in massachusetts maryland and new york 1689 1713 england france and spain at war parliament creates board of trade 1714 1750 british policy of salutary neglect american assemblies gain power 1720 1742 robert walpole leads parliament 1720 1750 african american communities form rice exports from south carolina soar planter aristocracy emerges seaport cities expand parliament charters georgia challenging spain hat act limits colonial enterprise molasses act threatens distillers stono rebellion in south carolina 1739 1748 war with spain in the caribbean and france in canada and europe iron act restricts colonial iron production currency act prohibits land banks and paper money key turning points the glorious revolution 1688 1689 salutary neglect and the rise of the assemblies 1714 1750 and the hat molasses iron and currency acts 1732 1751.
how do these developments reflect britains new attitude toward its colonies.
in what matters did parliament seek to control the colonies and in what did it grant them autonomy.
growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 c h a p t e r new englands freehold society farm families women in the household economy farm property inheritance freehold society in crisis diversity in the middle colonies economic growth opportunity and conflict cultural diversity religion and politics commerce culture and identity transportation and the print revolution the enlightenment in america american pietism and the great awakening religious upheaval in the north social and religious conflict in the south the midcentury challenge war trade and social conflict 1750 1765 the french and indian war the great war for empire british industrial growth and the consumer revolution the struggle for land in the east western rebels and regulators i n 1736 alexander macallister left the identify the big idea highlands of scotland for the backin what ways were britains americountry of north carolina where his can colonies affected by events wife and three sisters soon joined him.
across the atlantic and how were macallister prospered as a landowner and their societies taking on a life of mill proprietor and had only praise for his their own.
carolina was the best poor mans country he wrote to his brother hector urging him to advise all poor people.
to take courage and come in north carolina there were no landlords to keep the face of the poor.
to the grinding stone and so many highlanders were arriving that it will soon be a new scotland here on the far margins of the british empire people could breathe the air of liberty and not want the necessarys of life some 300 000 european migrants primarily highland scots scots irish and germans heeded macallisters advice and helped swell the population of britains north american settlements from 400 000 in 1720 to almost 2 million by 1765 macallisters air of liberty did not last forever as the rapid increase in white settlers and the arrival of nearly 300 000 enslaved africans transformed life throughout mainland british north america.
long settled towns in new england became overcrowded and antagonistic ethnic and religious communities jostled uneasily with one another in the middle atlantic colonies in 1748 there were more than a hundred german lutheran and reformed congregations in quaker led pennsylvania.
by then the macallisters and thousands of other celtic and german migrants had altered the social landscape and introduced religious conflict into the southern backcountry.
everywhere two european cultural movements the enlightenment and pietism changed the tone of intellectual and spiritual life.
advocates of rational thought viewed human beings as agents of moral self determination and urged americans to fashion a better social order.
religious pietists outnumbered them and had more influence.
convinced of the weakness of human nature evangelical ministers told their followers to seek regeneration through divine grace.
amidst this intellectual and religious ferment migrants and the landless children of long settled families moved inland and sparked wars with the native peoples and with france and spain.
a generation of dynamic growth produced a decade of deadly warfare that would set the stage for a new era in american history.
john collet george whitefield preaching no painting could capture english minister george whitefields charismatic appeal although this image conveys his open demeanor and religious intensity.
when whitefield spoke to a crowd near philadelphia an observer noted that his words were sharper than a two edged sword.
some of the people were pale as death others were wringing their hands.
and most lifting their eyes to heaven and crying to god for mercy an astute businessman as well as a charismatic preacher whitefield tirelessly promoted the sale of his sermons and books.
private collection the bridgeman art library.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 new englands freehold society in the 1630s the puritans had fled england where a small elite of nobles and gentry owned 75 percent of the arable land while tenants renters and propertyless workers farmed it.
in new england the puritans created a yeoman society of relatively equal landowning farm families.
but by 1750 the migrants numerous descendants had parceled out the best farmland threatening the future of the freehold ideal.
farm families women in the household economy the puritans vision of social equality did not extend to women and their ideology placed the husband firmly at the head of the household.
in the well ordered family 1712 the reverend benjamin wadsworth of boston advised women since he is thy husband god has made him the head and set him above thee it was a wifes duty to love and reverence her husband.
women learned this subordinate role throughout their lives.
understand small girls watched their mothers points of view defer to their fathers and as what ideas instituyoung women they were told to tions and responsibilities be silent in company they saw shaped new england farm the courts prosecute more women womens lives.
than men for the crime of fornication sex outside of marriage and they found that their marriage portions would be inferior to those of their brothers.
thus ebenezer chittendon of guilford connecticut left his land to his sons decreeing that each daughter shall have half so much as each son one half in money and the other half in cattle throughout the colonies women assumed the role of dutiful helpmeets helpmates to their husbands.
in addition to tending gardens farmwives spun thread and yarn from flax and wool and then wove it into cloth for shirts and gowns.
they knitted sweaters and stockings made candles and soap churned milk into butter fermented malt for beer preserved meats and mastered dozens of other household tasks.
notable women those who excelled at domestic arts won praise and high status thinking like a historian p 118.
bearing and rearing children were equally important tasks.
most women in new england married in their early twenties and by their early forties had given birth to six or seven children delivered with the help of a female neighbor or a midwife.
one massachusetts mother confessed that she had little time for religious activities because the care of my babes takes up so large a portion of my time and attention yet most puritan congregations were filled with women in a church of between three and four hundred communicants the eminent minister cotton mather noted there are but few more than one hundred men all the rest are women womens lives remained tightly bound by a web of legal and cultural restrictions.
ministers praised women for their piety but excluded them from an equal role in the church.
when hannah heaton a connecticut farmwife grew dissatisfied with her prudence punderson 1758 1784 the first second and last scenes of mortality this powerful image reveals both the artistic skills of colonial women in the traditional medium of needlework and the puritans continuing cultural concern with the inevitability of death.
prudence punderson the connecticut woman who embroidered this scene rejected a marriage proposal and followed her loyalist father into exile on long island in 1778 sometime later she married a cousin timothy rossiter and bore a daughter sophia who may well be the baby in the cradle being rocked by jenny a slave owned by prudences father.
long worried by my ill state of health and perhaps now anticipating her own death prudence has inscribed her initials on the coffin and in creating this embroidery transformed her personal experience into a broader meditation on the progression from birth to motherhood to death.
connecticut historical society.
chapter 4 growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 map 4 2 ethnic and racial diversity in the british colonies 1775 scots and scots irish made up 15 percent of the population.
l michigan uron l h me.
vt part of n y n h n y abenaki o l ontari mass.
iroquois penn.
r i s r ie l e n in ottawa conn ta delaware n miami u s md.
m e w n j o those of german ancestry made up about 7 percent of the population.
atlantic ocean n ia ch in 1700 most colonists in british north america were of english origin by 1775 settlers of english descent constituted only about 50 percent of the total population.
african americans now accounted for onethird of the residents of the south while tens of thousands of german and scots irish migrants added ethnic and religious diversity in the middle colonies the southern backcountry and northern new england see figure 4 2.
quebec algonquin va la people of african origin accounted for 20 percent of the total population and were particularly numerous in the south.
ap pa shawnee cherokee n c catawba s c chickasaw ga predominant ethnic group choctaw creek florida officials carried such sentiments to pennsylvania.
the preachers do not have the power to punish anyone or to force anyone to go to church complained gottlieb mittelberger an influential german minister.
as a result sunday is very badly kept.
many people plough reap thresh hew or split wood and the like he concluded liberty in pennsylvania does more harm than good to many people both in soul and body mittelberger was mistaken.
although ministers in pennsylvania could not invoke government authority to uphold religious values the result was not social anarchy.
instead religious sects enforced moral behavior through communal self discipline.
quaker families attended a weekly meeting for worship and a monthly meeting for business every three months a committee reminded parents to provide proper religious instruction.
the committee also supervised adult behavior a chester county meeting for example disciplined a member to reclaim him from drinking to excess and keeping vain company significantly quaker meetings allowed couples to marry only if they had land and livestock sufficient to support a family.
as a result the 200 miles 200 kilometers african dutch english german scots irish scots swedish welsh children of well to do friends usually married within the sect while poor quakers remained unmarried wed later in life or married without permission in which case they were often ousted from the meeting.
these marriage rules helped the quakers build a selfcontained and prosperous community.
in the 1740s the flood of new migrants reduced quakers to a minority a mere 30 percent of pennsylvanians.
moreover scots irish settlers in central pennsylvania demanded an aggressive indian policy challenging the pacifism of the assembly.
to retain power understand quaker politicians sought an alli points of view ance with those german religious what issues divided the groups that also embraced paci various ethnic and relifism and voluntary not compul gious groups of the middle sory militia service.
in response colonies.
what core values german leaders demanded more did they agree upon.
seats in the assembly and laws that respected their inheritance customs.
other germans lutherans and baptists tried to gain control of the assembly by forming a general confederacy part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 with scots irish presbyterians.
an observer predicted that the scheme was doomed to failure because of mutual jealousy map 4 3.
by the 1750s politics throughout the middle colonies roiled with conflict.
in new york a dutchman declared that he valued english law no more than a turd while in pennsylvania benjamin franklin disparaged the boorish character and swarthy complexion of german migrants.
yet there was broad agreement on the importance of economic opportunity and liberty of conscience.
the unstable balance between shared values and mutual mistrust prefigured tensions that would pervade an increasingly diverse american society in the centuries to come.
conn r i pennsylvania n n j e w s md.
atlantic ocean new york ie er virginia north carolina anglican south carolina ga congregational lutheran presbyterian baptist roman catholic jewish reformed churches 200 miles 200 kilometers after 1720 transatlantic shipping grew more frequent and britain and its colonies more closely connected while a burgeoning print culture flooded the colonies with information and ideas.
two great european cultural movements the enlightenment which emphasized the power of human reason to understand and shape the world and pietism an evangelical christian movement that stressed the individuals personal relationship with god reached america as a result.
at the same time an abundance of imported goods began to reshape material culture bringing new comforts into the lives of the middling sort while allowing prosperous merchants and landowners to set themselves apart from their neighbors in new ways.
n h l ontario l commerce culture and identity dutch german french quaker map 4 3 religious diversity in 1750 by 1750 religious diversity was on the rise not only in the multiethnic middle colonies but also in all of british north america.
baptists had increased their numbers in new england long the stronghold of congregationalists and would soon become important in virginia.
already there were considerable numbers of presbyterians lutherans and german reformed in the south where anglicanism was the established religion.
transportation and the print revolution in the eighteenth century improved transportation networks opened britains colonies in new ways and british shipping came to dominate the north atlantic.
in 1700 britain had 40 000 sailors by 1750 the number had grown to 60 000 while many more hailed from the colonies.
an enormous number of vessels plied atlantic waters in the late 1730s more than 550 ships arrived in boston annually.
about a tenth came directly from britain or ireland the rest came mostly from other british colonies either on the mainland or in the west indies.
a road network slowly took shape as well though roadbuilding was expensive and difficult.
in 1704 sarah kemble knight traveled from boston to new york on horseback.
the road was smooth and even in some places treacherous in others it took eight days of hard riding to cover 200 miles.
forty years later a physician from annapolis maryland traveled along much better roads to portsmouth new hampshire and back more than 1 600 miles in all.
he spent four months on the road stopping frequently to meet the locals and satisfy his curiosity.
by the mid eighteenth century the great wagon road carried migrating families down the shenandoah valley as far as the carolina backcountry.
all of these water and land routes carried people produce and finished merchandise.
they also carried information as letters newspapers pamphlets and crates of books began to circulate widely.
the trip across the atlantic took seven to eight weeks on average so chapter 4 growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 continental assembly to manage trade indian policy and the colonies defense.
though it was attractive to a few reform minded colonists and administrators the plan would have compromised the independence of colonial assemblies and the authority of parliament.
it never received serious consideration but that did not stop the push toward war.
to see a longer excerpt of the albany plan of union along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
hendrick peters theyanoguin chief of the mohawks great britains alliance with the iroquois confederacy the covenant chain was central to its indian policy in the mid eighteenth century and the mohawk warrior and sachem hendrick peters theyanoguin emerged as its most powerful spokesman.
his speech at the albany congress of 1754 in which he urged great britain toward war was reported in newspapers in britain and the colonies and made him a transatlantic celebrity.
this print was advertised for sale in london bookstalls just as his death at the battle of lake george 1755 was being reported in newspapers there.
hendrick wears a rich silk waistcoat an overcoat trimmed with gold lace a ruffled shirt and a tricorn hat gifts from his british allies while he holds a wampum belt in one hand and a tomahawk in the other.
courtesy of the john carter brown library at brown university.
relations with the iroquois the british board of trade called a meeting at albany in june 1754 there a prominent mohawk leader named hendrick peters theyanoguin challenged britain to defend its interests more vigorously while benjamin franklin proposed a plan of union among the colonies to counter french expansion.
the albany plan of union proposed that one general government.
be formed in america including all the said colonies it would have created a the war hawks win in parliament the fight for the ohio prompted a debate over war with france.
henry pelham the british prime minister urged calm there is such a load of debt and such heavy taxes already laid upon the people that nothing but an absolute necessity can justifie our engaging in a new war but two expansionist minded war hawks rising british statesman william pitt and lord halifax the new head of the board of trade persuaded pelham to launch an american war.
in june 1755 british and new england troops captured fort beausjour in the disputed territory of nova scotia which the french called acadia.
soldiers from puritan massachusetts then forced nearly 10 000 french settlers from their lands arguing they were rebels without property rights and deported them to france the west indies and louisiana where acadians became cajuns.
english and scottish protestants took over the farms the french catholics left behind.
this anglo american triumph was quickly offset by a stunning defeat.
in july 1755 general edward braddock advanced on fort duquesne with a force of 1 500 british regulars and virginia militiamen.
braddock alienated potential allies by treating indians including tanaghrisson dismissively and denying the privilege of rank to colonial officers like george washington.
persuaded that british arms could easily triumph in the american backcountry he was instead routed by a french and indian force.
braddock was killed and more than half his troops were killed or wounded.
we have been beaten most shamefully beaten by a handfull of men george washington complained bitterly as he led the survivors back to virginia.
the great war for empire by 1756 the american conflict had spread to europe where it was known as the seven years war and pitted britain and prussia against france spain and austria.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 braddocks defeat and death july 1755 in may 1755 general edward braddock led a force of 1 500 british regulars and virginia militiamen out of fort cumberland in western maryland intending to oust the french from fort duquesne 50 miles to the west.
as braddock neared the fort the french garrison of 200 troops and about 600 indian allies mostly potawatomis ottawas shawnees and delawares set out to ambush his force.
instead they unexpectedly met the british along a narrow roadway.
as the french and indians fanned out to attack from the woods the british troops george washington reported were struck with such a panic that they behaved with more cowardice than it is possible to conceive.
the officers behaved gallantly in order to encourage their men for which they suffered greatly the british casualties 450 killed 500 wounded included general braddock pictured above who later died from his wounds.
chicago history museum usa the bridgeman art library.
when britain mounted major offensives in india west africa and the west indies as well as in north america the conflict became the great war for empire.
william pitt emerged as the architect of the british war effort.
pitt was a committed expansionist with a touch of arrogance.
i know that i can save this country and that i alone can he boasted.
a master strategist he planned to cripple france by seizing its colonies.
in north america he enjoyed a decisive demographic advantage since george iis 2 million subjects outnumbered the french 14 to 1 to mobilize the colonists pitt paid half the cost of their troops and supplied them with arms and equipment at a cost of 1 million a year.
he also committed a fleet of british ships and 30 000 british soldiers to the conflict in america.
beginning in 1758 the powerful anglo american forces moved from one triumph to the next in part because they brought indian allies back into the fold.
they forced the french to abandon fort duquesne renamed fort pitt and then captured fort louisbourg a stronghold at the mouth of the st lawrence.
in 1759 an armada led by british general james wolfe sailed down the st lawrence and took quebec the heart of frances american empire.
the royal navy prevented french reinforcements from crossing the atlantic allowing british forces to complete the conquest of canada in 1760 by capturing montreal map 4 5.
elsewhere the british likewise had great success.
from spain the british won cuba and the philippine islands.
fulfilling pitts dream the east india company chapter 4 growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 e 1 olf w gulf of st lawrence new france cape breton island ft louisbourg july 26 1758 quebec sept 13 1759 erie r ny he s ti philadelphia ri ft cumberland mac r baltimore oto p v n e w abenaki s t 1 ers h am portsmouth atlantic ocean boston new york b ft necessity july 3 4 1754 shawnee h on port royal ft beausjour micmac ia ot c s a halifax.
ohio r ft duquesne july 9 1755 l co ies d ela w are r delaware al leg e lak iroquois r no s ft oswego ft niagara july 25 1759 mo haw k r albany st john t montreal sept 8 1760 amher st 1760 connecti cut r.
lake ontario ft ticonderoga july 8 1758 hudson r on e hur lak ft frontenac aug 27 1758.
ce r ren aw l.
r algonquin otta wa 200 miles 200 kilometers british movement british victories french victories fort settlement map 4 5 the anglo american conquest of new france after full scale war with france began in 1756 it took almost three years for the british ministry to equip colonial forces and dispatch a sizable army to far off america.
in 1758 british and colonial troops attacked the heartland of new france capturing quebec in 1759 and montreal in 1760 this conquest both united and divided the allies.
colonists celebrated the great victory the illuminations and fireworks exceeded any that had been exhibited before reported the south carolina gazette.
however british officers had little respect for colonial soldiers.
said one they are the dirtiest most contemptible cowardly dogs you can conceive ousted french traders from india and british forces seized french senegal in west africa.
they also captured the rich sugar islands of martinique and guadeloupe in the french west indies but at the insistence of the west indian sugar lobby which wanted to protect its monopoly the ministry returned the islands to france in the treaty of paris of 1763 despite that controversial decision the treaty confirmed britains triumph.
it granted britain sovereignty over half of north america including french canada all french territory east of the mississippi river spanish florida and the recent conquests in africa and india.
britain had forged a commercial and colonial empire that was nearly worldwide.
though britain had won cautious support from some native american groups in the late stages of the war its territorial acquisitions alarmed many native peoples from new york to the mississippi who preferred the presence of a few french traders to an influx of thousands of anglo american settlers.
to encourage the french to return the ottawa chief pontiac declared i am french and i want to die french neolin a delaware prophet went further calling for explain the expulsion of all white skinned consequences invaders if you suffer the english how did the seven years among you you are dead men.
war reshape britains sickness smallpox and their empire in north america poison rum will destroy you and affect native peoples.
entirely in 1763 inspired by neolins nativist vision pontiac led a major uprising at detroit.
following his example indians throughout the great lakes and ohio valley seized nearly every british military garrison west of fort niagara besieged fort pitt and killed or captured more than 2 000 settlers.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 british military expeditions defeated the delawares near fort pitt and broke the siege of detroit but it took the army nearly two years to reclaim all the posts it had lost.
in the peace settlement pontiac and his allies accepted the british as their new political fathers the british ministry having learned how expensive it was to control the trans appalachian west issued the royal proclamation of 1763 which confirmed indian control of the region and declared it off limits to colonial settlement.
it was an edict that many colonists would ignore.
british industrial growth and the consumer revolution britain owed its military and diplomatic success to its unprecedented economic resources.
since 1700 when it had wrested control of many oceanic trade routes from the dutch britain had become the dominant commercial power in the atlantic and indian oceans.
by 1750 it was also becoming the first country to use new manufacturing technology and work discipline to expand output.
this combination of commerce and industry would soon make britain the most powerful nation in the world.
mechanical power was key to britains industrial revolution.
british artisans designed and built water mills and steam engines that efficiently powered a wide array of machines lathes for shaping wood jennies and looms for spinning and weaving textiles and hammers for forging iron.
compared with traditional manufacturing methods the new power driven machinery produced woolen and linen textiles iron tools furniture and chinaware in greater quantities and at lower cost.
moreover the entrepreneurs running the new workshops drove their employees hard forcing them to keep pace with the machines and work long hours.
to market the abundant factory produced goods english and scottish merchants extended credit to colonial shopkeepers for a full year instead of the traditional six months.
americans soon were purchasing 30 percent of all british exports.
to pay for british manufactures mainland colonists increased their exports of tobacco rice indigo and wheat.
using credit advanced by scottish merchants planters in virginia bought land slaves and equipment to grow tobacco explain which they exported to expandconsequences ing markets in france and central how did the prosperity of europe.
in south carolina rice the british empire improve planters used british government and endanger the lives and subsidies to develop indigo and interests of colonists.
rice plantations.
new york nicholas boylston c 1769 merchants in the coastal and transatlantic trades gained enormous wealth in the mid eighteenth century and displayed it in new ways.
among the most flamboyant was nicholas boylston.
of boylstons home john adams wrote a seat it is for a noble man a prince in this portrait painted by john singleton copley in 1769 boylston flaunts his exotic possessions.
in place of the wig he would have worn outside his home boylston wears a red velvet turban to keep his shaved head warm.
his morning gown of heavy silk damask covers a rich waistcoat casually unbuttoned in the middle to reveal his elegant ruffled shirt.
boylston rests his left elbow on two thick account books an unmistakable reminder of the source of his wealth.
photograph 2014 museum of fine arts boston.
bequest of david p kimball 23 504 pennsylvania maryland and virginia became the breadbasket of the atlantic world supplying europes exploding population with wheat.
americans used their profits and the generous credit extended from overseas to buy english manufactures.
when he was practicing law in boston john adams visited the home of nicholas boylston one of the citys wealthiest merchants to view the furniture which alone cost a thousand pounds sterling he wrote.
t he marble tables the rich beds with crimson damask curtains and counterpins the beautiful chimny clock the spacious garden are the most magnificent of any thing i have ever seen through their possessions well to do colonists set themselves apart from their humbler or as they might have said more vulgar neighbors.
chapter 2 had a colonial dispute caused so much political agitation.
in 1771 as in 1675 and 1688 colonial conflicts became linked with imperial politics.
in connecticut the reverend ezra stiles defended the north carolina regulators.
what shall an injured oppressed people do he asked when faced with oppression and tyranny stiless remarks reflected growing resistance to recently imposed british policies of taxation and control.
the american colonies still depended primarily on britain for their trade and military defense.
however by the 1760s the mainland settlements had evolved into complex societies with the potential to exist independently.
british policies would chapter 6 attack converging on albany new york.
general john burgoyne would lead a large contingent of regulars south from quebec colonel barry st leger and a force of iroquois would attack from the west and general howe would lead troops north from new york city.
howe instead decided to attack philadelphia the home of the continental congress hoping to end the rebellion with a single decisive blow.
but instead of marching quickly across new jersey howe loaded his troops onto boats and sailed up the chesapeake bay to attack philadelphia from the south.
the plan worked.
howes troops easily outflanked the american positions along brandywine creek in delaware and in late september marched triumphantly into philadelphia.
however the capture of the rebels capital did not end the uprising the continental congress determined to continue the struggle fled to the countryside.
howes slow campaign against philadelphia contributed to the defeat of burgoynes army at saratoga.
burgoynes troops had at first advanced quickly overwhelming the american defenses at fort ticonderoga in early july and driving south toward the hudson river.
then they stalled.
burgoyne nicknamed gentleman johnny was used to high living and had fought in europe in a leisurely fashion believing his large army would easily dominate the rebels he stopped early each day to pitch comfortable tents and eat elaborate dinners with his officers.
the american troops led by general horatio gates also slowed burgoynes progress by felling huge trees in his path and raiding british supply lines to canada.
at summers end burgoynes army of 6 000 british and german troops and 600 loyalists and indians was stuck near saratoga new york.
desperate for food and horses in august the british raided nearby bennington vermont but were beaten back by 2 000 american militiamen.
patriot forces in the mohawk valley also threw st leger and the iroquois into retreat.
making matters worse the british commander in new york city recalled 4 000 troops he had sent toward albany and ordered them to philadelphia to bolster howes force.
while burgoyne waited in vain for help thousands of patriot militiamen from massachusetts new hampshire and new york joined gates blocking burgoyne in a series of skirmishes that finally gave the british no avenue of escape.
the patriots swarmed around the army like birds of prey reported an english sergeant and in october 1777 they forced burgoyne to surrender.
the victory at saratoga was the turning point of the war.
the patriots captured more than 5 000 british making war and republican governments 1776 1789 joseph brant mohawk chief thayendanegea known to whites as joseph brant was a devout member of the church of england and helped to translate the bible into the mohawk language.
brant persuaded four of the six iroquois nations to support britain in the war.
in 1778 and 1779 he led iroquois warriors and tory rangers in devastating attacks on american settlements in the wyoming valley of pennsylvania and cherry valley in new york.
in this 1797 portrait artist charles willson peale has portrayed brant with european features.
independence national historic park.
troops and ensured the diplomatic success of american representatives in paris who won a military alliance with france.
the perils of war the patriots triumph at saratoga was tempered by wartime difficulties.
a british naval blockade cut off supplies of european manufactures and disrupted the new england fishing industry meanwhile the british occupation of boston new york and philadelphia reduced trade.
as patriots along with unemployed artisans and laborers moved to the countryside new york citys population declined from 21 000 to 10 000 the british blockade cut tobacco exports in the chesapeake so planters grew grain to sell to the contending armies.
all across the land farmers and artisans adapted to a war economy.
with goods now scarce governments requisitioned military supplies directly from the people.
in 1776 connecticut officials asked the citizens of hartford to part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 american militiamen beset by continuing shortages of cloth the patriot army dressed in a variety of uniforms and fabrics.
this german engraving taken from a drawing by a hessian officer shows two american militiamen one of them barefoot wearing hunting shirts and trousers made of ticking the strong linen fabric often used to cover mattresses and pillows.
anne s k brown military collection brown university.
provide 1 000 coats and 1 600 shirts and soldiers echoed their pleas.
after losing all his shirts except the one on my back in the battle of long island captain edward rogers told his wife that the making of cloath.
must go on patriot women responded in elizabeth new jersey they promised upwards of 100 000 yards of linnen and woolen cloth other women assumed the burdens of farmwork while their men were away at war and acquired a taste for decision making.
we have sowd our oats as you desired sarah cobb paine wrote to her absent husband.
had i been master i should have planted it to corn their selfesteem boosted by wartime activities some women expected greater legal rights in the new republican society.
still goods remained scarce and pricey.
hardpressed consumers assailed shopkeepers as enemies extortioners and monopolizers and called for government regulation.
but when the new england states imposed price ceilings in 1777 many farmers and artisans refused to sell their goods.
ultimately a government official admitted consumers had to pay the higher market prices or submit to starving the fighting endangered tens of thousands of civilians.
a british officer lord rawdon favored giving free liberty to the soldiers to ravage the country at will that these infatuated creatures may feel what a calamity war is as british and american armies marched back and forth across new jersey they forced patriot and loyalist families to flee their homes to escape arrest or worse.
soldiers and partisans looted farms and disorderly troops harassed and raped women and girls.
an army even a friendly one are a dreadful scourge to any people wrote one connecticut soldier.
you cannot imagine what devastation and distress mark their steps the war divided many farm communities.
patriots formed committees of safety to collect taxes and seized the property of those who refused to pay.
every body submitted to our sovereign lord the mob lamented a loyalist preacher.
in parts of maryland the number of nonassociators those who refused to join either side was so large that they successfully defied patriot mobs.
stand off you dammed rebel sons of bitches shouted robert davis of anne arundel county i will shoot you if you come any nearer financial crisis such defiance exposed the weakness of patriot governments.
most states were afraid to raise taxes so officials issued bonds to secure gold or silver from wealthy individuals.
when those funds ran out individual states financed the war by issuing so much paper money some 260 million all told that it lost worth and most people refused to accept it at face value.
in north carolina even tax collectors eventually rejected the states currency.
the finances of the continental congress collapsed too despite the efforts of philadelphia merchant robert morris the governments chief treasury official.
because the congress lacked the authority to impose taxes morris relied on funds requisitioned from the states but the states paid late or not at all.
so morris secured loans from france and holland and sold continental loan certificates to some thirteen thousand firms and individuals.
all the while the congress was issuing paper money some 200 million between 1776 and 1779 which like state currencies quickly fell in value.
in 1778 a family needed 7 in continental bills to buy goods worth 1 in gold or silver.
as the exchange rate deteriorated to 42 to 1 in chapter 5 we saw the way that protests against imperial policy grew until colonists chose to declare their independence rather than submit to parliaments authority.
by 1787 the problems created by the revolutionary war forced leaders of the newly independent states to consider plans for their own powerful central government.
what problems led nationalists to believe such a step was necessary.
how did antifederalists draw on revolutionary ideas to make their case against the constitution.
what claims did nationalists make in response to dampen antifederalist fears.
across time and place more to explore 3 federalists and antifederalists both claimed to rep look again at map 6 5 on page 202 showing western land claims in the 1780s.
if these claims had not been ceded to the continental congress what would have been the likely result.
why was it so important to the survival of the confederation that individual states give up their claims to these western lands.
visual evidence start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
second continental congress declares independence howe forces washington to retreat from new york and new jersey pennsylvania approves democratic state constitution john adams publishes thoughts on government articles of confederation create central government howe occupies philadelphia september gates defeats burgoyne at saratoga october franco american alliance february lord north seeks political settlement congress rejects negotiations british adopt southern strategy british capture savannah december 1778 1781 severe inflation of continental currency british and american forces battle in georgia clinton seizes charleston may french troops land in rhode island cornwallis invades virginia april surrenders at yorktown october states finally ratify articles of confederation treaty of paris september 3 officially ends war 1784 1785 congress enacts political and land ordinances for new states nationalists hold convention in annapolis maryland shayss rebellion roils massachusetts congress passes northwest ordinance constitutional convention in philadelphia 1787 1788 jay madison and hamilton write the federalist eleven states ratify u s constitution key turning points gates defeats burgoyne at saratoga 1777 the franco american alliance 1778 and cornwallis surrenders at yorktown 1781.
how were these three events linked.
how important was the french alliance to the patriot victory.
hammering out a federal republic 1787 1820 c h a p t e r the political crisis of the 1790s the federalists implement the constitution hamiltons financial program jeffersons agrarian vision the french revolution divides americans the rise of political parties a republican empire is born sham treaties and indian lands migration and the changing farm economy the jefferson presidency jefferson and the west the war of 1812 and the transformation of politics conflict in the atlantic and the west the war of 1812 the federalist legacy l ike an earthquake the american identify the big idea revolution shook the european what was required to make the monarchical order and its afterunited states a strong viable indeshocks reverberated for decades.
by crependent republic in its early years ating a new republic based on the rights of and how did debates over the conthe individual the north americans introstitution shape relations between duced a new force into the world the the national government and the eminent german historian leopold von states.
ranke warned the king of bavaria in 1854 a force that might cost the monarch his throne.
before 1776 a king who ruled by the grace of god had been the center around which everything turned.
now the idea emerged that power should come from below from the people other republican inspired upheavals englands puritan revolution of the 1640s and the french revolution of 1789 ended in political chaos and military rule.
similar fates befell many latin american republics that won independence from spain in the early nineteenth century.
but the american states escaped both anarchy and dictatorship.
having been raised in a radical whig political culture that viewed standing armies and powerful generals as instruments of tyranny general george washington left public life in 1783 to manage his plantation astonishing european observers but bolstering the authority of elected patriot leaders.
tis a conduct so novel american painter john trumbull reported from london that it is inconceivable to people here the great task of fashioning representative republican governments absorbed the energy and intellect of an entire generation and was rife with conflict.
seeking to perpetuate the elite led polity of the colonial era federalists celebrated natural aristocrats such as washington and condemned the radical republicanism of the french revolution.
in response jefferson and his republican followers claimed the fourth of july as their holiday and we the people as their political language.
there was a grand democrat procession in town on the 4th of july came a report from baltimore all the farmers tanners black smiths shoemakers etc.
were there.
and afterwards they went to a grand feast many people of high status worried that the new state governments were too attentive to the demands of such ordinary workers and their families.
when considering a bill connecticut conservative ezra stiles grumbled every elected official instantly thinks how it will affect his constituents rather than how it would enhance the general welfare.
what stiles criticized as irresponsible however most americans welcomed.
the concerns of ordinary citizens were now paramount and traditional elites trembled.
an emblem of america 1800 in the first years of independence citizens of the united states searched for a symbolic representation of their new nation.
this engraving shows many of the choices should the symbol of america have an ideological meaning as in the goddess of liberty.
or should it enshrine national heroes as in the stone memorial to washington.
or should americas symbol be found among its unique features such as niagara falls pictured in the background or the presence of africans and indians as represented by the black youth to the right and the spear brandishing figure in front of the falls.
or finally should its symbol be the national flag.
courtesy of the john carter brown library at brown university.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 the political crisis of the 1790s the final decade of the eighteenth century brought fresh challenges for american politics.
the federalists split into two factions over financial policy and the french revolution and their leaders alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson offered contrasting visions of the future.
would the united states remain an agricultural nation governed by local officials as jefferson hoped.
or would hamiltons vision of a strong national government and an economy based on manufacturing become reality.
the federalists implement the constitution the constitution expanded the dimensions of political life by allowing voters to choose national leaders as well as local and state officials.
the federalists swept the election of 1788 winning forty four seats in the house of representatives only eight antifederalists won election.
as expected members of the electoral college chose george washington as president.
john adams received the second highest number of electoral votes and became vice president.
devising the new government once the military savior of his country washington now became its political father.
at age fifty seven the first president possessed great personal dignity and a cautious personality.
to maintain continuity he adopted many of the administrative practices of the confederation and asked congress to reestablish the existing executive departments foreign affairs state finance treasury and war.
to head the department of state washington chose thomas jefferson a fellow virginian and an experienced diplomat.
for secretary of the treasury he turned to alexander hamilton a lawyer and his former military aide.
the president designated jefferson hamilton and secretary of war henry knox as his cabinet or advisory body.
the constitution mandated a supreme court but the philadelphia convention gave congress the task of creating a national court system.
the federalists wanted strong national institutions and the judiciary act of 1789 reflected their vision.
the act established a federal district court in each state and three circuit courts to hear appeals from the districts with the supreme court having the final say.
the judiciary act also specified that cases arising in state courts that involved federal laws could be appealed to the supreme court.
this provision ensured that federal judges would have the final say on the meaning of the constitution.
the bill of rights the federalists kept their promise to add a declaration of rights to the constitution.
james madison now a member of the house of representatives submitted nineteen amendments to the first congress by 1791 ten had been approved by congress and ratified by the states.
these ten amendments known as the bill of rights safeguard fundamental personal rights including freedom of speech and religion and mandate legal procedures such as trial by jury.
by protecting individual citizens the amendments eased antifederalists fears of an oppressive national government and secured the legitimacy of the constitution.
they also addressed the issue of federalism the proper balance between the authority of the national and state governments.
but that question was constantly contested until the civil war and remains important today.
hamiltons financial program george washingtons most important decision was choosing alexander hamilton as secretary of the treasury.
an ambitious self made man of great intelligence hamilton married into the schuyler family influential hudson river valley landowners and was a prominent lawyer in new york city.
at the philadelphia convention he condemned the democratic spirit and called for an authoritarian government and a president with near monarchical powers.
as treasury secretary hamilton devised bold policies to enhance national authority and to assist financiers and merchants.
he outlined his plans in three pathbreaking reports to congress on public credit january 1790 on a national bank december 1790 and on manufactures december 1791.
these reports outlined a coherent program of national mercantilism government assisted economic development.
public credit redemption and assumption the financial and social implications of hamiltons report on the public credit made it instantly controversial.
hamilton asked congress to redeem at face value the 55 million in confederation securities held by foreign and domestic investors figure 7 1.
his reasons were simple as an underdeveloped nation the united states needed good credit to secure loans from dutch and chapter 7 planting winter wheat in september for market sale.
women and girls milked the family cows and made butter and cheese to sell in the growing towns and cities.
whether hacking fields out of western forests or carting manure to replenish eastern soils farmers now worked harder and longer but their increased productivity brought them a better standard of living.
european demand for american produce was high in these years and westward migration the settlement and exploitation of indian lands boosted the farming economy throughout the country.
the jefferson presidency from 1801 to 1825 three republicans from virginia thomas jefferson james madison and james monroe each served two terms as president.
supported by farmers in the south and west and strong republican majorities in congress this virginia dynasty completed what jefferson had called the revolution of 1800 it reversed many federalist policies and actively supported westward expansion.
when jefferson took office in 1801 he inherited an old international conflict.
beginning in the 1780s the barbary states of north africa had raided merchant ships in the mediterranean and like many european nations the united states had paid an annual bribe massive in relation to the size of the federal budget to protect its vessels.
initially jefferson refused to pay this tribute and ordered the u s navy to attack the pirates home ports.
after four years of intermittent fighting in which the united states bombarded tripoli and captured the city of derna the jefferson administration cut its costs.
it signed a peace treaty that included a ransom for returned prisoners and algerian ships were soon taking american sailors hostage again.
at home jefferson inherited a national judiciary filled with federalist appointees including the formidable john marshall of virginia the new chief justice of the supreme court.
to add more federalist judges the outgoing federalist congress had passed the judiciary act of 1801 the act created sixteen new judgeships and various other positions which president adams filled at the last moment with midnight appointees the federalists have retired into the judiciary as a stronghold jefferson complained and from that battery all the works of republicanism are to be beaten down and destroyed jeffersons fears were soon realized.
when republican legislatures in kentucky and virginia repudiated the alien and sedition acts as unconstitutional hammering out a federal republic 1787 1820 marshall declared that only the supreme court held the power of constitutional review.
the court claimed this authority for itself when james madison the new secretary of state refused to deliver the commission of william marbury one of adamss midnight appointees.
in marbury v madison 1803 marshall asserted that marbury had the right to the appointment but that the court did not have the constitutional power to enforce it.
in defining the courts powers marshall voided a section of the judiciary act of 1789 in effect asserting the courts authority to review congressional legislation and interpret the constitution.
it is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is the chief justice declared directly challenging the republican view that the state legislatures had that power.
ignoring this setback jefferson and the republicans reversed other federalist policies.
when the alien and sedition acts expired in 1801 congress branded them unconstitutional and refused to extend them.
it also amended the naturalization act restoring the original waiting period of five years for resident aliens to become citizens.
charging the federalists with grossly expanding the national governments size and power jefferson had the republican congress shrink it.
he abolished all internal taxes including the excise tax that had sparked the whiskey rebellion of 1794 to quiet republican fears of a military coup jefferson reduced the size of the permanent army.
he also secured repeal of the judiciary act of 1801 ousting forty of adamss midnight appointees.
still jefferson retained competent federalist officeholders removing only 69 of 433 properly appointed federalists during his eight years as president.
jefferson likewise governed tactfully in fiscal affairs.
he tolerated the economically important bank of the united states which he had once condemned as unconstitutional.
but he chose as his secretary of the treasury albert gallatin a fiscal conservative who believed that the national debt was an evil of the first magnitude by limiting expenditures and using customs revenue to redeem government bonds gallatin reduced the debt from 83 million in 1801 to 45 million in 1812 with jefferson and gallatin at the helm the nations fiscal affairs were no longer run in the interests of northeastern creditors and merchants.
jefferson and the west jefferson had long championed settlement of the west.
he celebrated the yeoman farmer in notes on the state of virginia 1785 wrote one of the confederations part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 america in the middle east 1804 to protect american merchants from capture and captivity in the barbary states president thomas jefferson sent in the u s navy.
this 1846 lithograph created by the famous firm of currier ives depicts one of the three attacks on the north african port of tripoli by commodore edward preble in august 1804 as the uss constitution and other large warships lob shells into the city small american gunboats defend the fleet from tripolitan gunboats.
our loss in killed wounded has been considerable preble reported and the enemy must have suffered very much.
among their shipping and on shore the granger collection new york.
western land ordinances and supported pinckneys treaty 1795 the agreement between the united states and spain that reopened the mississippi river to american trade and allowed settlers to export crops via the spanish held port of new orleans.
as president jefferson pursued policies that made it easier for farm families to acquire land.
in 1796 a federalist dominated congress had set the price of land in the national domain at 2 per acre by the 1830s jefferson inspired republican congresses had enacted more than three hundred laws that cut the cost to 1 25 eased credit terms and allowed illegal squatters to buy their farms.
eventually in the homestead act of 1862 congress gave farmsteads to settlers for free.
the louisiana purchase international events challenged jeffersons vision of westward expansion.
in 1799 napoleon bonaparte seized power in france and sought to reestablish frances american empire.
in 1801 he coerced spain into signing a secret treaty that returned louisiana to france and restricted american access to new orleans violating pinckneys treaty.
napoleon also launched an invasion to restore french rule in saint domingue.
it was once the richest sugar colony in the americas but its civil war had ruined the economy and cost france a fortune.
napoleon wanted to crush the rebellion restore its planter class and destroy the new algiers that has been growing up in the middle of america napoleons actions in haiti and louisiana prompted jefferson to question his pro french foreign policy.
the day that france takes possession of new orleans we must marry ourselves to the british fleet and nation the president warned dispatching james monroe to chapter 7 jefferson.
a federalist hamilton supported a strong national government and created a fiscal infrastructure the national debt tariffs and a national bank to spur trade and manufacturing.
by contrast jefferson wanted to preserve the authority of state governments and he envisioned an america enriched by farming rather than industry.
jefferson and the republicans promoted a westward movement that transformed the agricultural economy and sparked new wars with indian peoples.
expansion westward also shaped american diplomatic and military policy leading to the louisiana purchase chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place in chapter 8 manumission and gradual emancipation yet thousands of african americans supported the patriot cause.
eager to raise their social status free blacks in new england volunteered for military service in the first rhode island company and the massachusetts bucks in maryland some slaves took up arms for the rebels in return for the promise of freedom.
enslaved virginians struck informal bargains with their patriot owners trading loyalty in wartime for the hope of liberty.
following the virginia legislatures passage of a manumission act in 1782 allowing owners to free their slaves 10 000 slaves won their freedom.
two other developments one religious the other intellectual encouraged manumission.
beginning in the 1750s quaker evangelist john woolman urged friends to free their slaves and many did so.
rapidly growing evangelical churches especially methodists and baptists initially advocated slave emancipation in 1784 a conference of virginia methodists declared map 8 2 l the status of slavery 1800 s er up ior this simple map illustrates a complex process the abolition of slavery in the united states up to 1800 the political boundaries are those of the states and territories in 1800 vermont maine 1777 part of mass.
br i ti s h 1780 n o r th a mer i c a l l michigan ron hu n h 1783 rio l onta new york l e mass.
1780 rhode island conn rie pennsylvania new jersey ohio territory 1787 indiana territory 1787 delaware virginia sp a n i s h lou i s i a n a maryland kentucky some areas marked free on the map the indiana territory for example actually had slaves dating from the french colonial days.
north carolina in 1800 the free black population of the united states numbered about 100 000 roughly 10 percent of those of african ancestry.
half of these free blacks lived in states in which slavery remained legal until the end of the civil war.
georgia fl s free date when slavery eliminated gradual abolition slave o ri da gulf of me x i co e at l a n t i c ocean south carolina spanish n w tennessee future mississippi territory the three colors show areas where slavery was legally abolished where it continued to exist and where it was in the process of being eliminated.
after paullin that slavery was contrary to the identify causes golden law of god on which why did aristocratic repubhang all the law and prophets licanism develop in the meanwhile enlightenment south and what were its philosophy challenged the wide defining features.
spread belief among whites that africans were inherently inferior to europeans.
according to john locke ideas were not innate but stemmed from a persons experiences in the world.
pointing out the obvious a state of slavery has a mighty tendency to shrink and contract the minds of men enlightenment influenced americans suggested that the debased condition of blacks reflected their oppressive captivity.
quaker philanthropist anthony benezet declared that african americans were as capable of improvement as white people and funded a philadelphia school for their education.
swept along by these religious and intellectual currents legislators in northern states enacted gradual emancipation statutes map 8 2.
these laws recognized white property rights by requiring slaves to buy their freedom by years even decades of additional africa a settlement founded by english antislavery organizations.
in 1775 racial slavery was legal in all of the british colonies in north america.
by the time the confederated states achieved their independence in 1783 the new england region was mostly free of slavery.
by 1800 all of the states north of maryland had provided for the gradual abolition of slavery but the process of gradual emancipation dragged on until the 1830s.
some slave owners in the chesapeake region manumitted a number of their slaves leaving only the whites of the lower south firmly committed to racial bondage.
creating a republican culture 1790 1820 200 miles 200 kilometers part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 labor.
for example the new york emancipation act of 1799 allowed slavery to continue until 1828 and freed slave children only at the age of twenty five.
consequently as late as 1810 almost 30 000 blacks in the northern states nearly one fourth of the african americans living there were still enslaved.
freed blacks faced severe prejudice from whites who feared job competition and racial melding.
when massachusetts judges abolished slavery through case law in 1784 the legislature reenacted an old statute that prohibited whites from marrying blacks mulattos or indians.
for african americans in the north freedom meant second class citizenship.
slavery defended the southern states faced the most glaring contradiction between liberty and property rights because enslaved blacks represented a huge financial investment.
some chesapeake tobacco planters moved by evangelical religion or an oversupply of workers manumitted their slaves or allowed them to buy their freedom by working as artisans or laborers.
such measures gradually brought freedom to one third of the african americans in maryland.
farther south slavery remained ascendant.
fearing total emancipation hundreds of slave owners petitioned the virginia legislature to repeal the manumission act.
heeding this demand to protect the most valuable and indispensible article of our property our slaves legislators forbade further manumissions in 1792 following the lead of thomas jefferson who owned more than a hundred slaves political leaders now argued that slavery was a necessary evil required to maintain white supremacy and the luxurious planter lifestyle.
in north carolina legislators condemned private quaker manumissions as highly criminal and reprehensible moreover the slave hungry ricegrowing states of south carolina and georgia reopened the atlantic slave trade.
between 1790 and 1808 merchants in charleston and savannah imported about 115 000 africans selling thousands to french and american sugar planters in louisiana.
debate in the south over emancipation ended in 1800 when virginia authorities thwarted an uprising planned by gabriel prosser an enslaved artisan and hanged him and thirty of his followers.
liberty and equality have brought the evil upon us a letter to the virginia herald proclaimed denouncing such doctrines as dangerous and extremely wicked to preserve their privileged social position southern leaders redefined republicanism.
they restricted individual liberty and legal equality to whites creating what historians call a herrenvolk master race republic.
the north and south grow apart european visitors to the united states agreed that north and south had distinct characters.
a british observer labeled new england the home to religious fanaticism but added that the lower orders of citizens there had a better education and were more intelligent than those he met in the south.
the state of poverty in which a great number of white people live in virginia surprised the marquis de chastellux.
other visitors to the south likewise commented on the rude manners heavy drinking and weak work ethic of its residents.
white tenants and smallholding farmers seemed only to have a passion for gaming at the billiard table a cock fight or cards and rich planters squandered their wealth on extravagant lifestyles while their slaves endured bitter poverty.
some southerners worried that human bondage had corrupted white society.
where there are negroes a white man despises to work one south carolina merchant commented.
moreover well to do planters able to hire tutors for their own children did little to provide other whites with elementary schooling.
in 1800 elected officials in essex county virginia spent about 25 cents per person for local government including schools while their counterparts in acton massachusetts allocated about 1 per person.
this difference in support for education mattered by the 1820s nearly all native born men and women in new england could read and write while more than onethird of white southerners could not.
slavery and national politics as the northern states ended human bondage the souths commitment to slavery became a political issue.
at the philadelphia convention in 1787 northern delegates had reluctantly accepted clauses allowing slave imports for twenty years and guaranteeing the return of fugitive slaves chapters 10 and 12 analyze this story of political change and party politics.
part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 growing sectional divisions thematic understanding however the party system could not overcome the increasingly sharp sectional divisions.
as the north developed into an urban industrial society based on free labor the south increasingly defended white supremacy and slavery as a positive good and expanded its plantation based agricultural society.
beginning in the 1820s the two sections had differed over economic issues and indian policy.
georgia and other southeastern states demanded and won over the objections of northeastern reformers the indian removal act of 1830 which resettled native peoples west of the mississippi river.
concurrently between 1816 and 1832 northern manufacturers workers and farmers won high protective tariffs which southern planters bitterly opposed.
eventually party politicians negotiated a compromise with the north accepting tariff reductions.
the sections had clashed again over the expansion of slavery into missouri and the louisiana purchase in the 1820s and into texas and the southwest in the 1840s and political leaders again devised compromises.
however by the 1850s slavery and the social system it symbolized increasingly divided the nation.
moreover because the democratic political revolution had engaged the passions of millions of ordinary americans the political system had become more volatile and resistant to compromise.
chapter 9 remained important for their foreign commerce and increasingly as centers of finance and small scale manufacturing.
new york city and nearby brooklyn grew at a phenomenal rate between 1820 and 1860 their combined populations increased nearly tenfold to 1 million people thanks to the arrival of hundreds of thousands of german and irish immigrants.
drawing on these workers new york became a center of the ready made clothing industry which relied on thousands of low paid seamstresses.
the wholesale clothing establishments are.
absorbing the business of the country a country tailor complained to the new york tribune casting many an honest and hardworking man out of employment and helping.
the large cities to swallow up the small towns new york citys growth stemmed primarily from its dominant position in foreign and domestic trade.
it had the best harbor in the united states and thanks to the erie canal was the best gateway to the midwest and the best outlet for western grain.
recognizing the citys advantages in 1818 four english quaker merchants founded the black ball line to carry cargo people and mail between new york and london liverpool and le havre establishing the first regularly scheduled transatlantic shipping service.
by 1840 its port handled almost two thirds of foreign imports into the united states almost half of all foreign trade and much of the immigrant traffic.
new york likewise monopolized trade with the newly independent south american nations of brazil peru and venezuela and its merchants took over the trade in cotton by offering finance insurance and shipping to southern planters and merchants.
new social classes and cultures the industrial revolution and the market revolution improved the lives of many americans who now lived in larger houses cooked on iron stoves and wore better made clothes.
yet in the booming cities the new economic order spawned distinct social classes a small but wealthy business elite a substantial middle class and a mass of propertyless wage earners.
by creating a class divided society industrialization posed a momentous challenge to americas republican ideals.
the business elite before industrialization white americans thought of their society in terms of rank notable families had higher status than those from the lower orders yet in transforming the economy 1800 1860 rural areas people of different ranks often shared a common culture.
gentlemen farmers talked easily with yeomen about crop yields while their wives conversed about the art of quilting.
in the south humble tenants and aristocratic slave owners enjoyed the same amusements gambling cockfighting and horse racing.
rich and poor attended the same quaker meetinghouse or presbyterian church.
almost everyone eats drinks and dresses in the same way a european visitor to hartford connecticut reported in 1798 and one can see the most obvious inequality only in the dwellings the industrial revolution shattered this agrarian social order and fragmented society into distinct classes and cultures.
the urban economy made a few city residents the merchants manufacturers bankers and landlords who made up the business elite very rich.
in 1800 the richest 10 percent of the nations families owned about 40 percent of the wealth by 1860 they held nearly 70 percent.
in new york chicago baltimore and new orleans the superrich the top 1 percent owned more than 40 percent of the land buildings and other tangible property and an even higher share of intangible property such as stocks and bonds.
government tax policies facilitated the accumulation of wealth.
there were no federal taxes on individual and corporate income.
rather the u s treasury raised most of its revenue from tariffs regressive taxes on textiles and other imported goods purchased mostly by ordinary citizens.
state and local governments also favored the wealthy.
they taxed real estate farms city lots and buildings and tangible personal property furniture tools and machinery but almost never taxed stocks and bonds or the inheritances the rich passed on to their children.
as cities expanded in size and wealth affluent families consciously set themselves apart.
they dressed in well tailored clothes rode in fancy carriages and bought expensively furnished houses tended by butlers cooks and other servants.
the women no longer socialized with those of lesser wealth and the men no longer labored side by side with their employees.
instead they became managers and directors and relied on trusted subordinates to supervise hundreds of factory operatives.
increasingly merchants manufacturers and bankers placed a premium on privacy and lived in separate neighborhoods often in exclusive central areas or trace change over time at the citys edge.
the geographic how and why did elite isolation of privileged families families change between and the massive flow of immi 1800 and 1860.
grants into separate districts part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 hartford family completely at home in their elegant drawing room this elite family in hartford connecticut enjoys the fruits of the fathers business success.
as the father lounges in his silk robe his eldest son and presumptive heir adopts an air of studied nonchalance and his daughter fingers a piano signaling her musical accomplishments and the familys gentility.
a diminutive african american servant her size suggesting her status serves fruit to the lavishly attired woman of the house.
the sumptuously appointed drawing room reflects the owners prosperity and their aesthetic and cultural interests.
white house historical association photo by national geographic society.
divided cities spatially along lines of class race and ethnicity.
the middle class standing between wealthy owners and propertyless wage earners was a growing middle class the social product of increased commerce.
the middling class a boston printer explained was made up of the farmers the mechanics the manufacturers the traders who carry on professionally the ordinary operations of buying selling and exchanging merchandize professionals with other skills building contractors lawyers surveyors and so on were suddenly in great demand and well compensated as were middling business owners and white collar clerks.
in the northeast men with these qualifications numbered about 30 percent of the population in the 1840s.
but they also could be found in small towns of the agrarian midwest and south.
in 1854 the cotton boomtown of oglethorpe georgia population 2 500 boasted eighty business houses and eight hotels.
the emergence of the middle class reflected a dramatic rise in prosperity.
between 1830 and 1857 the per capita income of americans increased by about 2 5 percent a year a remarkable rate that has never since chapter review expansion of commerce the market revolution.
water steam and minerals such as coal and iron were crucial ingredients in both revolutions driving factory machinery carrying goods to market on canals and rivers and propelling steamboats and railroad engines.
we also explored the consequences of that transformation the rise of an urban society the increasing similarity between the northeast and midwest and their growing difference from the south and the creation of a society divided by class and ethnicity.
to shape this emerging society benevolent reformers and evangelical revivalists worked to instill moral discipline and christian values.
however artisan republicans unionized workers and irish and german immigrants had their own cultural values and economic interests.
the result was a fragmented society.
as the next chapter 6 on the american revolution and their grandmothers whose work lives and cultural experiences were considered in chapter 7.
by limiting the property claims of existing canal and turnpike companies taneys decision allowed legislatures to charter competing railroads that would provide cheaper and more efficient transportation.
the taney court also limited marshalls nationalistic interpretation of the commerce clause by enhancing the regulatory role of state governments.
for example in mayor of new york v miln 1837 the taney court ruled that new york state could use its police power to inspect explain the health of arriving immigrants.
consequences the court also restored to the how did the taney court states some of the economic powand the jacksonian state constitutions alter the ers they had exercised prior to the american legal and consticonstitution of 1787 in briscoe v tutional system.
bank of kentucky 1837 the justices allowed a bank owned by the state of kentucky to issue currency despite the wording of article 1 section 10 of the constitution which prohibits states from issuing bills of credit states revise their constitutions inspired by jackson and taney democrats in the various states mounted their own constitutional revolutions.
between 1830 and 1860 twenty states called conventions that furthered democratic principles by reapportioning state legislatures on the basis of population and giving the vote to all white men.
voters also had more power because the new documents mandated the election rather than the appointment of most public officials including sheriffs justices of the peace and judges.
the new constitutions also embodied the principles of classical liberalism or laissez faire by limiting the governments role in the economy.
twentieth century social welfare liberalism endorses the opposite principle that government should intervene in economic and social life.
as president jackson had destroyed the american system and his disciples now attacked the state based commonwealth system which used chartered corporations and state funds to promote economic development.
most jackson era constitutions prohibited states from granting special charters to corporations and extending loans and credit guarantees to private businesses.
if there is any danger to be feared in.
government declared a new jersey democrat it is the danger of associated wealth with special privileges the revised constitutions also protected taxpayers by setting strict limits on state debt and encouraging judges to enforce them.
said new york reformer michael hoffman we will not trust the legislature with the power of creating indefinite mortgages on the peoples property the world is governed too much the jacksonians proclaimed as they embraced a small government laissez faire outlook and celebrated the power of ordinary people to make decisions in the voting booth and the marketplace.
class culture and the second party system the rise of the democracy and jacksons tumultuous presidency sparked the creation in the mid 1830s of a second national party the whigs.
for the next two decades whigs and democrats competed fiercely for votes and appealed to different cultural groups.
many evangelical protestants became whigs while most catholic immigrants and traditional protestants joined the democrats.
by debating issues of economic policy class power and moral reform party politicians offered americans a choice between competing programs and political leaders.
of the two great parties remarked philosopher ralph waldo emerson the democracy has the best cause.
for free trade for wide suffrage but the whig party has the best men the whig worldview the whig party arose in 1834 when a group of congressmen contested andrew jacksons policies and his high handed kinglike conduct.
they took the name whigs to identify themselves with the pre revolutionary american and british parties also called whigs that had opposed the arbitrary actions of british monarchs.
the whigs accused king andrew i of violating the constitution by creating a spoils system and undermining elected legislators whom they saw as the true representatives of the sovereign people.
one whig accused jackson of ruling in a manner more absolute than that of any absolute monarchy of europe initially the whigs consisted of political factions with distinct points of view.
however guided by senators webster of massachusetts clay of kentucky and calhoun of south carolina they gradually coalesced into a party with a distinctive stance and coherent chapter 10 a democratic revolution 1800 1844 ideology.
like the federalists of the 1790s the whigs wanted a political world dominated by men of ability and wealth unlike the federalists they advocated an elite based on talent not birth.
the whigs celebrated the entrepreneur and the enterprising individual this is a country of self made men they boasted pointing to the relative absence of permanent distinctions of class and status among white citizens.
embracing the industrial revolution northern whigs welcomed the investments of moneyed capitalists which provided workers with jobs and bread clothing and homes indeed whig congressman edward everett championed a holy alliance among laborers owners and governments and called for a return to henry clays american system.
many new england and pennsylvania textile and iron workers shared everetts vision because they benefitted directly from protective tariffs.
calhouns dissent support for the whigs in the south less widespread than that in the north rested on the appeal of specific policies and politicians.
some southern whigs were wealthy planters who invested in railroads and banks or sold their cotton to new york merchants.
but the majority were yeomen whites who resented the power and policies of low country planters most of whom were democrats.
in addition some virginia and south carolina democrats such as john tyler became whigs because they condemned andrew jacksons crusade against nullification.
southern whigs rejected their partys enthusiasm for high tariffs and social mobility and john c calhoun was their spokesman.
extremely conscious of class divisions in society calhoun believed that northern whigs rhetoric of equal opportunity was contradicted not only by slavery which he considered a fundamental american institution but also by the wage labor system of industrial capitalism.
there is and always has been in an advanced state of wealth and civilization a conflict between labor and capital calhoun declared in 1837 he urged slave owners and factory owners to unite against their common foe the working class of enslaved blacks and propertyless whites.
most northern whigs rejected calhouns classconscious social ideology.
a clear and well defined line between capital and labor might fit the slave south or class ridden europe daniel webster conceded but in the north this distinction grows less and less definite as commerce advances ignoring the ever increasing numbers of propertyless immigrants and native born wageworkers webster focused on the growing size of the middle class whose members generally favored whig candidates.
in the election of 1834 the whigs john c calhoun 1782 1850 this daguerreotype made close to the time of calhouns death suggests his emotional intensity and thwarted ambition.
the prime advocate of the doctrines of nullification and states rights a founder of the whig party and a steadfast defender of slavery calhoun found his lifelong pursuit of the presidency frustrated by martin van burens political skills and sectional divisions over tariffs and slavery.
image courtesy of the gibbes museum of art carolina art association.
took control of the house of repcompare and resentatives by appealing to evan contrast gelical protestants and upwardly how did the ideology mobile families prosperous of the whigs differ from farmers small town merchants that of the jacksonian and skilled industrial workers in democrats.
new england new york and the new communities along the great lakes.
anti masons become whigs many whig voters in 1834 had previously supported the anti masons a powerful but short lived party that formed in the late 1820s.
as its name implies anti masons opposed the order of freemasonry.
freemasonry began in europe as an organization of men seeking moral improvement by promoting the welfare and unity of humanity.
many masons espoused republicanism and the order spread rapidly in america after the revolution.
its ideology mysterious symbols and semisecret character gave the order an air of exclusivity that attracted ambitious businessmen and political leaders including george washington henry clay and andrew jackson.
in new part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 york state alone by the mid 1820s there were more than 20 000 masons organized into 450 local lodges.
however after the kidnapping and murder in 1826 of william morgan a new york mason who had threatened to reveal the orders secrets the freemasons fell into disrepute.
thurlow weed a newspaper editor in rochester new york spearheaded an anti masonic party which condemned the order as a secret aristocratic fraternity.
the new party quickly ousted freemasons from local and state offices and just as quickly ran out of political steam.
because many anti masons espoused temperance equality of opportunity and evangelical morality they gravitated to the whig party.
throughout the northeast and midwest whig politicians won election by proposing legal curbs on the sale of alcohol and local ordinances that preserved sunday as a day of worship.
the whigs also secured the votes of farmers bankers and shopkeepers who favored henry clays american system.
for these citizens of the growing midwest the whigs program of government subsidies for roads canals and bridges was as important as their moral agenda.
in the election of 1836 the whig party faced martin van buren the architect of the democratic party and jacksons handpicked successor.
like jackson van buren denounced the american system and warned that its revival would create a consolidated government positioning himself as a defender of individual rights van buren also condemned the efforts of whigs and moral reformers to enact state laws imposing temperance and national laws abolishing slavery.
the government is best which governs least became his motto in economic cultural and racial matters.
to oppose van buren the whigs ran four candidates each with a strong regional reputation.
they hoped to garner enough electoral votes to throw the contest into the house of representatives.
however the whig tally 73 electoral votes collected by william henry harrison of ohio 26 by hugh l white of tennessee 14 by daniel webster of massachusetts and 11 by w p mangum of georgia fell far short of van burens 170 votes.
still the four whigs won 49 percent of the popular vote showing that the partys message of economic and moral improvement had broad appeal.
labor politics and the depression of 1837 1843 as the democrats battled whigs on the national level they faced challenges from urban artisans and workers.
between 1828 and 1833 artisans and laborers in fifteen states formed working mens parties.
past experience teaches us that we have nothing to hope from the aristocratic orders of society declared the new york working mens party.
it vowed to send men of our own description if we can to the legislature at albany the new parties agenda reflected the values and interests of ordinary urban workers.
the philadelphia working mens party set out to secure a just balance of power.
between all the various classes it called for the abolition of private banks chartered monopolies and debtors prisons and it demanded universal public education and a fair system of taxation thinking like a historian p 336.
it won some victories electing a number of assemblymen and persuading the pennsylvania legislature in 1834 to authorize tax supported schools.
elsewhere working mens candidates won office in many cities but their parties weakness in statewide contests soon took a toll.
by the mid 1830s most politically active workers had joined the democratic party.
the working mens parties left a mixed legacy.
they mobilized craft workers and gave political expression to their ideology of artisan republicanism.
as labor intellectual orestes brownson defined their distinctive vision all men will be independent proprietors working on their own capitals on their own farms or in their own shops however this emphasis on proprietorship inhibited alliances between the artisan based working mens parties and the rapidly increasing class of dependent wage earners.
as joseph weydemeyer a close friend of karl marx reported from new york in the early 1850s many american craft workers are incipient bourgeois and feel themselves to be such moreover the panic of 1837 threw the american economy and the workers movement into disarray.
the panic began when the bank of england tried to boost the faltering british economy by sharply curtailing the flow of money and credit to the united states.
since 1822 british manufacturers had extended credit to southern planters to expand cotton production and british investors had purchased millions of dollars of the canal bonds from the northern states.
suddenly deprived of british funds american planters merchants and canal corporations had to withdraw gold from domestic banks to pay their foreign debts.
moreover british textile mills drastically reduced their purchases of raw cotton causing its price to plummet from 20 cents a pound to 10 cents or less.
falling cotton prices and the drain of specie to britain set off a financial panic.
on may 8 the dry dock bank of new york city ran out of specie prompting worried depositors to withdraw gold and silver chapter 11 p 362.
a virginia court sent mrs margaret douglass to jail for a month as an example to all others for teaching free black children to read so they might have access to books on religion and morality.
there are persons i believe in our community opposed to the policy of the law in question.
they profess to believe that universal intellectual culture is necessary to religious instruction and education and that such culture is suitable to a state of slavery.
such opinions in the present state of our society i regard as manifestly mischievous.
it is not true that our slaves cannot be taught religious and moral duty without being able to read the bible and use the pen.
intellectual and religious instruction often go hand in hand but the latter may well be exist without the former.
among the whites one fou r th or more are entirely without a knowledge of letters nonetheless respect for the law and for moral and religious conduct and behavior are justly and prope r ly appreciated and practiced.
the first legislative provision upon this subject was introduced in the year 1831 immediately succeeding the bloody scenes of the memorable southampton insurrection and.
was re enacted with additional penalties in the year 1848.
after these several and repeated recognitions of the wisdom and propriety of the said act it may well be said that bold and open opposition to it must be condemned.
as a measure of self preservation and protection.
sources 1 religion and social reform the gilder lehrman institute of american history gilderlehrman org 2 new york legislature documents vol.
65 part 1 albany ny j b lyon company 1919 60 3 catharine e beecher educational reminiscences and suggestions new york j d ford company 1874 127 4 the north american review 36 no.
58 january 1833 5 the case of mrs margaret douglass africans in america pbs org.
source joshua r greenberg advocating the man.
analyzing the evidence 1 what arguments does the editorial in the philadelphia national gazette source 1 advance.
how does stevens source 2 reframe this argument.
2 what does the letter from a former student of beechers source 3 tell us about the links between educational reform and other social movements such as sabbatarianism p 305.
how does it help us to understand the fate of the notables and the log cabin campaign of 1840.
3 what is the larger agenda of the author of source 4.
how is the argument here similar to or different from that in sources 1 and 2.
4 how does judge baker source 5 justify the denial of education to african americans.
5 what do the occupations of the working mens party candidates suggest about its definition of worker source 6.
how does the political agenda of the party relate to the arguments advanced in sources 2 and 4.
to present day debates regarding the education of illegal immigrants.
putting it all together as these selections indicate the debate over education had many facets.
did the power traditionally held by notables rest on their access to private schooling.
should a democratic society ensure the literacy of citizen voters.
was religious instruction a telling argument for slave literacy.
using these documents your answers to the questions above and materials in chapter.
robert j conley mountain windsongs a novel of the trail of tears 1992.
captures the human impact of jacksons removal policy.
richard hofstadter the idea of a party system 1969.
lucidly explains the triumph of party politics.
thomas n ingersoll to intermix with our white brothers 2005.
argues that fear of racial intermixture shaped popular thought and government policy toward indians.
robert v remini the life of andrew jackson 1988.
highlights jacksons triumphs and shortcomings.
alexis de tocqueville democracy in america 1835.
a classic that is still worth dipping into also available at xroads virginia edu hyper detoc home html.
sean wilentz chants democratic 1986.
covers the ideology of working men.
chapter 10 timeline 1810s chapter 8.
for inspiration they turned to european romanticism a new conception of self and society.
romantic thinkers such as german philosopher immanuel kant and english poet samuel taylor coleridge rejected the ordered rational world of the eighteenth century enlightenment.
they embraced human passion and sought deeper insight into the mysteries of existence.
by tapping their intuitive powers the young unitarians believed people could come to know the infinite and the eternal.
as a unitarian emerson stood outside the mainstream of american protestantism.
unlike most christians unitarians believed that god was a single being not a trinity of father son and holy spirit.
in 1832 emerson took a more radical step by resigning his boston pulpit and rejecting all organized religion.
he moved to concord massachusetts and wrote influential essays probing what he called the infinitude of the private man the radically free person.
the young philosopher argued that people were trapped by inherited customs and institutions.
they the founder of transcendentalism as this painting of ralph waldo emerson by an unknown artist indicates the young philosopher was an attractive man his face brimming with confidence and optimism.
with his radiant personality and incisive intellect emerson deeply influenced dozens of influential writers artists and scholars and enjoyed great success as a lecturer to the emerging middle class.
the metropolitan museum of art.
image source art resource ny.
wore the ideas of earlier times new england calvinism for example as a kind of faded masquerade and they needed to shed those values.
what is a man born for but to be a reformer a remaker of what man has made emerson asked.
in his view individuals could be remade only by discovering their original relation with nature and entering into a mystical union with the currents of universal being the ideal setting for this transcendent discovery was under an open sky in solitary communion with nature.
the revivalist charles grandison finney described his religious conversion in emersonian terms an individual in the woods alone joining with god in a mystical union.
the transcendentalist message of individual selfrealization reached hundreds of thousands of people through emersons writings and lectures.
public lectures had become a spectacularly successful way of chapter 9.
this is a utilitarian age.
the speculative has in all things yielded to the practical.
words are mere noise unless they are things and result in action.
in this sense moral suasion is moral balderdash.
words my lord words.
are a delusion.
the drunkards mental and physical condition pronounces them an absurdity.
he is ever in one or other extreme under the excitement of drink or in a state of morbid collapse.
reason with a man when all reason has fled and it is doubtful whether he or you is the greater fool.
moral suasion.
place this man we have been describing out of the reach of temptation.
he will have time to ponder.
his mind and frame recover their native vigor.
the publichouse does not beset his path.
thus and thus only will reformation and temperance be secured.
and how is this accomplished.
never except through the instrumentality of the law.
if it were possible to reason the drunkard into sobriety it would not be possible to make the rumseller forego his filthy gains.
try your moral suasion on him.
the only logic he will comprehend is some such ordinance as this coming to him in the shape and with the voice of law you shall not sell.
source david brion davis antebellum american culture an interpretive anthology university park pennsylvania state university press 1997 395 398 403 409.
questions for analysis 1 what does lincolns address suggest about his general political philosophy.
2 compare beechers position to lincolns.
in what ways are they similar.
how are they different.
then compare beechers solution to that of the american temperance magazine.
are they the same.
whose view of personal responsibility versus institutional coercion is closest to the position of orestes brownson chapter 11 political skills in the crusade for african american freedom thousands of northern women now advocated greater rights for themselves.
seneca falls and beyond during the 1840s womens rights activists devised a pragmatic program of reform.
unlike radical utopians they did not challenge the institution of marriage or the conventional division of labor within the family.
instead they tried to strengthen the legal rights of married women by seeking legislation that permitted them to own property america compared p 372.
this initiative won crucial support from affluent men who feared bankruptcy in the volatile market economy and wanted to put crusading reformers elizabeth cady stanton 1815 1902 and susan b anthony 1820 1906 were a dynamic duo.
stanton the well educated daughter of a prominent new york judge was an early abolitionist and the mother of seven children.
anthony came from a quaker family and became a teacher and a temperance activist.
meeting in 1851 stanton and anthony became friends and co organizers.
from 1854 to 1860 they led a successful struggle to expand new yorks married womens property law of 1848 during the civil war they formed the womens loyal national league which helped win passage of the thirteenth amendment ending slavery.
in 1866 they joined the american equal rights association which demanded the vote for women and african americans.
bettmann corbis.
religion and reform 1800 1860 some family assets in their wives place events names.
fathers also desired their in context married daughters to have prop what was the relationship erty rights to protect them and between the abolitiontheir paternal inheritances from ist and womens rights financially irresponsible hus movements.
such motives prompted legislatures in three states mississippi maine and massachusetts to enact married womens property laws between 1839 and 1845 then women activists in new york won a comprehensive statute that became the model for fourteen other states.
the new york statute of 1848 gave women full legal control over the property they brought to a marriage.
also in 1848 elizabeth cady stanton and lucretia mott organized a gathering of womens rights activists in the small new york town of seneca falls.
seventy women and thirty men attended the seneca falls convention which issued a rousing manifesto extending to women the egalitarian republican ideology of the declaration of independence.
all men and women are created equal the declaration of sentiments declared yet the history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman and the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her to persuade americans to right this long standing wrong the activists resolved to employ agents circulate tracts petition the state and national legislatures and endeavor to enlist the pulpit and the press on our behalf by staking out claims for equality for women in public life the seneca falls reformers repudiated both the natural inferiority of women and the ideology of separate spheres.
most men dismissed the seneca falls declaration as nonsense and many women also rejected the activists and their message.
in her diary one small town mother and housewife lashed out at the female reformer who aping mannish manners.
wears absurd and barbarous attire who talks of her wrongs in harsh tone who struts and strides and thinks that she proves herself superior to the rest of her sex still the womens rights movement grew in strength and purpose.
in 1850 delegates to the first national womens rights convention in worcester massachusetts hammered out a program of action.
the women called on churches to eliminate notions of female inferiority in their theology.
addressing state legislatures they proposed laws to allow married women to institute lawsuits testify in court and assume custody of their children in the event of divorce or a husbands death.
finally they began a concerted campaign to win the vote for women.
as delegates to the 1851 convention america c o m pa r e d womens rights in france and the united states 1848 during the political uprising in france in 1848 pauline roland and jeanne deroine unsuccessfully sought voting rights and an equal civil status for french women.
however the two women won election to the central committee of the associative unions the umbrella organization of french trade unions.
imprisoned for their activism they dispatched a letter to the second womans rights convention which met in worcester massachusetts in 1851 when their letter was read to the convention ernestine potowsky rose 1810 1892 offered the following response which indicated the different perspective and political strategy of the american womens movement.
pauline roland and jeanne deroine letter to the convention of the women of america dear sisters your courageous declaration of womans rights has resounded even to our prison and has filled our souls with inexpressible joy.
in france the conservative reaction to the uprising of 1848 has suppressed the cry of liberty of the women of the future.
the assembly kept silence in regard to the right of one half of humanity.
no mention was made of the right of woman in a constitution framed in the name of liberty equality and fraternity.
however the right of woman has been recognized by the laborers and they have consecrated that right by the election of those who had claimed it in vain for both sexes.
it is by labor it is by entering resolutely into the ranks of the working people that women will conquer the civil and political equality on which depends the happiness of the world.
sisters of america.
your socialist sisters of france are united with you in the vindication of the right of woman to civil and political equality.
only by the union of the working classes of both sexes can we achieve.
the civil and political equality of woman.
ernestine rose speech to the second womans rights convention after having heard the letter read from our poor incarcerated sisters of france well might we exclaim alas poor france.
where is thy glory.
proclaimed suffrage was the corner stone of this enterprise since we do not seek to protect woman but rather to place her in a position to protect herself the activists legislative campaign required talented organizers and lobbyists.
the most prominent political.
but need we wonder that france governed as she is by russian and austrian despotism does not recognize.
the rights of woman when even here in this far famed land of freedom.
woman the mockingly so called better half of man has yet to plead for her rights.
in the laws of the land she has no rights in government she has no voice.
from the cradle to the grave she is subject to the power and control of man.
father guardian or husband one conveys her like some piece of merchandise over to the other.
carry out the republican principle of universal suffrage or strike it from your banners and substitute freedom and power to one half of society and submission and slavery to the other give women the elective franchise.
let married women have the same right to property that their husbands have.
there is no reason against womans elevation but.
prejudices.
the main cause is a pernicious falsehood propagated against her being namely that she is inferior by her nature.
inferior in what.
what has man ever done that woman under the same advantages could not do.
source history of woman suffrage ed.
elizabeth cady stanton susan b anthony and matilda joslyn gage new york fowler wells 1887 1 234 242.
questions for analysis 1 what strategy to achieve womens rights do roland and deroine advocate.
what strategy can be detected in roses remarks.
how are their perspectives similar to or different from one another.
2 what does this french american comparison and your reading in chapter 11 womens rights movement she worked closely with elizabeth cady stanton.
anthony created an activist network of political captains all women who relentlessly lobbied state legislatures.
in 1860 her efforts secured a new york law granting women the right to control their own wages which fathers or husbands had previously managed to own property acquired by trade business labors or services and if widowed to assume sole guardianship of their children.
genuine individualism for women the dream of transcendentalist margaret fuller had advanced a tiny step closer to reality.
in such small and much larger ways the midcentury reform movements had altered the character of american culture.
summary in this chapter review review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter 3.
their aristocratic oriented culture survived the revolution of 1776 and soon took on a republican glaze american voices the debate over free and slave labor as the abolitionist assault on slavery mounted its rhetoric shaped the debate over the emergent system of wage labor in the northern states.
by the 1850s new york senator william seward starkly contrasted the political systems of the south and the north in terms of their labor systems the one resting on the basis of servile or slave labor the other on voluntary labor of freemen seward strongly favored the free labor system crediting to it the strength wealth greatness intelligence and freedom which the whole american people now enjoy as the following documents show some americans agreed with seward while others such as new york tribune editor horace greeley and south carolina senator james henry hammond who is quoted often in this chapter 12 indian terr.
red r n na sa e w mexico 200 miles san antonio de ran og ri s r claimed by texas 1836 1850 n c os r os az br pe 100 200 kilometers main battles in texas war of independence o ni to.
ty r ini tr republic of texas 1836 1845 sabine r disputed territory.
edwardss colony san jacinto april 21 1836 austins colony ad ro galveston bay goliad dewitts colony s r the alamo corpus march 6 1836 christi bay nu ec e gulf of mexico matamoros map 12 2 american settlements the texas mexican war and boundary disputes during the 1820s the mexican government encouraged americans to settle in the sparsely populated state of coahuila y tejas.
by 1835 the nearly 30 000 americans far outnumbered mexican residents.
to put down an american led revolt general santa anna led 6 000 soldiers into tejas in 1836 after overwhelming the rebels at the alamo in march santa anna set out to capture the texas provisional government which had fled to galveston.
but the texans victory at san jacinto in april ended the war and secured de facto independence for the republic of texas 1836 1845.
however the annexation of texas to the united states sparked a war with mexico in 1846 and the states boundaries remained in dispute until the compromise of 1850 democratic ethos.
the alabama constitution of 1819 granted suffrage to all white men it also provided for a secret ballot rather than voice voting apportionment of legislative seats based on population and the election of county supervisors sheriffs and clerks of court.
given these democratic provisions political factions in alabama had to compete for votes.
when a whig newspaper sarcastically asked whether the states policies should be governed and controlled by the whim and caprice of the majority of the people democrats hailed the power of the common folk.
they called on farmers mechanics laboring men to repudiate whig aristocrats.
the soft handed and soft headed gentry taxation policy whatever the electioneering rhetoric most whig and democrat political candidates were men of substance.
in the early 1840s nearly 90 percent of alabamas legislators owned slaves testimony to the political power of the slave owning minority.
still relatively few lawmakers only about 10 percent were the south expands slavery and society 1800 1860 rich planters a group voters by and large distrusted.
a rich man cannot sympathize with the poor declared one candidate.
consequently the majority of elected state officials and most county officials in the cotton south came from the ranks of middle level planters and planter lawyers.
astute politicians they refrained from laying oppressive taxes on the people particularly the white majority who owned no slaves.
between 1830 and 1860 the alabama legislature obtained about 70 percent of the states revenue from taxes on slaves and land.
another 10 to 15 percent came from levies on carriages gold watches and other luxury goods and on the capital invested in banks transportation companies and manufacturing enterprises.
to win the votes of taxpaying slave owners alabama democrats advocated limited government and low taxes.
they attacked their whig opponents for favoring higher taxes and for providing government subsidies for banks canals railroads and other internal improvements.
voting against appropriations is the safe and popular side one democratic legislator declared and his colleagues agreed until the 1850s they rejected most of the bills that would have granted subsidies to transportation companies or banks.
if tax policy in alabama had a democratic thrust elsewhere in the south it did not.
in some states wealthy planters used their political muscle to exempt slave property from taxation.
or they shifted the burden to backcountry yeomen who owned low quality pasturelands by taxing farms according to acreage rather than value.
planter legislators also spared themselves the cost of building fences around their fields by enacting laws that required yeomen to fence in their livestock.
and during the 1850s wealthy legislators throughout the south used public funds to subsidize the canals and railroads in which they had invested ignoring the protests of yeoman backed legislators.
the paradox of southern prosperity even without these internal improvements the south had a strong economy.
indeed it ranked fourth in the world in 1860 with a per capita income among whites higher than that of france and germany.
as a contributor to a georgia newspaper argued in the 1850s planters and yeomen should not complain about tariffs and merchants and manufacturers because the most highly prosperous people now on earth are to be found in these very slave states such arguments tell only part of the story.
nearly all african americans 40 percent of the population lived in dire and permanent poverty.
and although the average southern white man was 80 percent richer than the average northerner in part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 1860 the southerners non slave wealth was only 60 percent of the northern average.
moreover how did the political the wealth of the industrializing power of slave owners northeast was increasing at a affect tax policy and the faster pace than that of the south.
character of economic between 1820 and 1860 slavedevelopment in the southrelated trade across the atlantic ern states.
declined from 12 6 percent of world trade to 5 3 percent.
influential southerners blamed the shortcomings of their plantation based economy on outsiders purely agricultural people intoned slave owning planter politician james henry hammond have been in all ages the victims of rapacious tyrants grinding them down and they steadfastly defended their way of life.
we have no cities we dont want them boasted u s senator louis wigfall of texas in 1861.
we want no manufactures we desire no trading no explain consequences mechanical or manufacturing classes.
as long as we have our rice our sugar our tobacco and our cotton we can command wealth to purchase all we want so wealthy southerners continued to buy land and slaves a strategy that neglected investments in the great technological innovations of the nineteenth century water and steam powered factories machine tools steel plows and crushed gravel roads that would have raised the souths productivity and wealth.
urban growth the key to prosperity in europe and the north occurred primarily in the commercial cities around the periphery of the south new orleans st louis and baltimore.
factories often staffed by slave labor appeared primarily in the chesapeake region which had a diverse agricultural economy and a surplus of bound workers.
within the cotton south wealthy planters invested in railroads primarily to grow more cotton when the western atlantic railroad reached the georgia upcountry the cotton colonel and mrs james a whiteside son charles and servants james a whiteside 1803 1861 was a tennessee lawyer politician land speculator and entrepreneur with investments in iron manufacturing banking steamboats and railroads.
in 1857 he became vice president of the nashville chattanooga and st louis railroad.
the following year whiteside persuaded the scottishborn painter james cameron 1817 1882 to move to chattanooga where cameron completed this ambitious portrait of the colonel his second wife harriet their youngest child charles and two enslaved servants the painting shows the family at home with a view of chattanooga and of lookout mountain where the colonel had built a hotel.
whiteside died from pneumonia in 1861 after returning home from virginia with his son james who had fallen ill while serving in the confederate army.
hunter museum of american art chattanooga tennessee.
gift of mr mrs thomas b whiteside 1975 7 chapter 11.
other black christians saw themselves as chosen people de people dat is born of god charles davenport a mississippi slave recalled black preachers exhort ing us dat us was de chillun o israel in de wilderness an de lawd done sont us to take dis lan o milk an honey still african americans expressed their christianity in distinctive ways.
the thousands of blacks who joined the methodist church respected its ban on profane dancing but praised the lord in what minister henry george spaulding called the religious dance of the negroes spaulding described the african derived part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 black kitchen ball from time to time festive celebrations punctuated the demanding work routine of slaves lives.
in this 1838 painting kitchen ball at white sulphur springs virginia african americans dance to the music of a fiddle and a fife on the right.
note the light complexions and europeanized features of the most prominent figures the result of either racial mixing or the cultural perspective of the artist.
the painter christian mayr was born in germany in 1805 and migrated to the united states in 1833 after working for years as a traveling portrait painter mayr settled in new york city in 1845 and died there in 1850 north carolina museum of art raleigh.
purchased with funds from the state of north carolina.
ring shout this way three or four standing still clapping their hands and beating time with their feet commence singing in unison one of the peculiar shout melodies while the others walk around in a ring in single file joining also in the song the songs themselves were usually collective creations devised spontaneously from bits of old hymns and tunes.
recalled an ex slave wed all be at the prayer house de lords day and de white preacher hed splain de word and read whar esekial done say dry bones gwine ter lib ergin.
and honey de lord would come a shinin thoo dem pages and revive dis ole niggers heart and id jump up dar and den and holler and shout and sing and pat and dey would all cotch de words and id sing it to some ole shout song id heard em sing from africa and deyd all take it up and keep at it and keep a addin to it and den it would be a spiritual.
by such african influenced means black congregations devised a distinctive and joyous brand of protestant worship to sustain them on the long journey to emancipation and the promised land.
o my lord delivered daniel the slaves sang o why not deliver me too forging families and communities black protestantism was one facet of an increasingly homogeneous african american culture in the rural south.
even in south carolina a major point of entry for imported slaves only 20 percent of the black residents in 1820 had been born in africa.
the domestic chapter 13 with these preparations in place polk launched a secret diplomatic initiative he sent louisiana congressman john slidell to mexico telling him to secure the rio grande boundary for texas and to buy the provinces of california and new mexico for 30 million.
however mexican officials refused to meet with slidell.
events now moved quickly toward war.
polk ordered general zachary taylor and an american army of 2 000 soldiers to occupy disputed lands between the nueces river the historic southern boundary of spanish texas and the rio grande which the republic of texas had claimed as its border with mexico.
we were sent to provoke a fight recalled ulysses s grant then a young officer serving with taylor but it was essential that mexico should commence it when the armies clashed near the rio grande in may 1846 polk delivered the war message he had drafted long before.
taking liberties with the truth the president declared that mexico has passed the boundary of the united states has invaded our territory and shed american blood upon the american expansion war and sectional crisis 1844 1860 soil ignoring pleas by some whigs for a negotiated settlement an overwhelming majority in congress voted for war a decision greeted with great popular acclaim.
to avoid a simultaneous war with britain polk retreated from his demand for fifty four forty or fight and in june 1846 accepted british terms that divided the oregon country at the forty ninth parallel.
american military successes american forces in texas quickly established their military superiority.
zachary taylors army crossed the rio grande occupied the mexican city of matamoros and after a fierce six day battle in september 1846 took the interior mexican town of monterrey.
two months later a u s naval squadron in the gulf of mexico seized tampico mexicos second most important port.
by the end of 1846 the united states controlled much of northeastern mexico map 13 3.
fighting also broke out in california.
in june 1846 naval commander john sloat landed 250 marines in monterey and declared that california henceforward will be a portion of the united states simultaneously map 13 3 oregon country 4 s acr iowa ft leavenworth albuquerque gila r.
texas nia f or austin presidio.
del norte nd.
san antonio e goliad 18 presidio de.
rio grande u e c e s r.
corpus christi.
ra a li buena vista mazatln.
w s fort brown matamoros tampico.
300 miles 300 kilometers gulf of mexico jalapa.
puebla cerro.
veracruz gordo san luis potosi.
mexico city e.
n mier 46 frmont 1845 1846 kearny 1846 1847 sloat 1846 major battle sequence of battles fort jessup monterrey taylor 1846 1847 doniphan 1846 1847 scott 1846 1847 santa anna 1847 r re d r.
claimed by texas g rio fc chihuahua.
as fort smith.
el paso campaigns in mexico campaigns in california.
santa fe ns socorro lf o gu pacific ocean mo.
taos ka santa barbara.
los angeles.
san pascual 3 san gabriel san diego.
a do ar lo r co bents fort r mexico.
monterey indian territory great salt lake sutters fort.
san francisco.
yerba buena sou ri r.
is a m e n to r m after moving west from fort leavenworth in present day kansas american forces commanded by captain john c frmont and general stephen kearny defeated mexican armies in california in 1846 and early 1847 simultaneously u s troops under general zachary taylor and colonel alfred a doniphan won victories over general santa annas forces south of the rio grande.
in mid 1847 general winfield scott mounted a successful seaborne attack on veracruz and mexico city ending the war.
the mexican war 1846 1848 part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 american settlers in the sacramento river valley staged a revolt and supported by frmonts force how was the american captured the town of sonoma acquisition of california where they proclaimed the insimilar to and different dependence of the bear flag from the american led republic to cement these victocreation of the texas ries polk ordered army units to republic discussed in capture santa fe in new mexico chapter 13 would allow slavery.
senator salmon p chase of ohio elected by a democratic free soil coalition and senator william h seward a new york whig urged a fourth position that federal legislation restrict slavery within its existing boundaries and eventually extinguish it completely.
condemning slavery as morally unjust politically unwise and socially pernicious and invoking a higher law than the constitution seward demanded bold action to protect freedom the common heritage of mankind a complex compromise standing on the brink of disaster senior whig and democratic politicians worked desperately to preserve the union.
aided by millard fillmore who became president in 1850 after compromise of 1850 voters allowed to decide whether to permit slavery territory left unorganized expansion war and sectional crisis 1844 1860 zachary taylors sudden death whig leaders henry clay and daniel webster and democrat stephen a douglas won the passage of five separate laws known collectively as the compromise of 1850 to mollify the south the compromise included a new fugitive slave act giving federal support to slave catchers.
to satisfy the north the legislation admitted california as a free state resolved a boundary dispute between new mexico and texas in favor of new mexico and abolished the slave trade but not slavery in the district of columbia.
finally the compromise organized the rest of the conquered mexican lands into the territories of new mexico and utah and invoking popular sovereignty left the issue of slavery in the hands of their residents map 13 6.
kansas nebraska act 1854 voters allowed to decide whether to permit slavery free states and territories new boundaries slave states canada oregon territory nebraska territory minnesota territory wis n y pa ohio ill kansas territory calif new mexico territory indian reserve ky n c tenn s c ark.
ala texas pacific ocean ind.
virginia mo.
r i conn n j del.
mich iowa utah territory maine vt ga atlantic ocean la.
fla n w e mexico s gulf of mexico map 13 6 the compromise of 1850 and the kansas nebraska act of 1854 the contest over the expansion of slavery involved vast territories.
the compromise of 1850 peacefully resolved the status of the far west california would be a free state and settlers in the utah and new mexico territories would vote for or against slavery the doctrine of popular sovereignty.
however the kansas nebraska act of 1854 voided the missouri compromise 1820 and instituted popular sovereignty in those territories.
that decision sparked a bitter local war and revealed a fatal flaw in the doctrine.
500 miles 500 kilometers part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 resolving the crisis of 1850 by 1850 whig henry clay had been in congress for nearly four decades.
now in partnership with fellow whig daniel webster and democrat stephen douglas clay fashioned a complex and controversial compromise that preserved the union.
in this engraving he addresses a crowded senate chamber with webster sitting immediately to his left.
clay addresses his remarks to his prime antagonist southern advocate john c calhoun the man with the long white hair at the far right of the picture.
library of congress.
the compromise of 1850 preserved national unity by accepting once again the stipulation how did the compromise advanced by the south since 1787 of 1850 resolve the various no union without slavery.
still disputes over slavery and southerners feared for the future who benefitted more from and threatened secession.
militant its terms.
activists or fire eaters in south carolina georgia mississippi and alabama organized special conventions to safeguard southern rights georgia congressman alexander h stephens called on convention delegates to prepare men and money arms and munitions etc.
to meet the emergency a majority of delegates remained committed to the union but only on the condition that congress protect slavery where it existed and grant statehood to any territory that ratified a proslavery constitution.
political wizardry had solved the immediate crisis but not the underlying issues.
place events in context the end of the second party system 1850 1858 the missouri compromise had endured for a generation and the architects of the compromise of 1850 hoped their agreement would have an even longer life.
religious leaders conservative businessmen and leading judges called upon citizens to support the compromise to preserve government and civil society their hopes quickly faded.
demanding freedom for fugitive slaves and free soil in the west antislavery northerners refused to accept the legitimacy of the compromise.
for their part proslavery southerners plotted to extend slavery into the west the caribbean and central america.
the resulting disputes destroyed the second party system and deepened the crisis of the union.
resistance to the fugitive slave act the fugitive slave act proved the most controversial element of the compromise.
the act required federal magistrates to determine the status of alleged runaways and denied them a jury trial or even the right to testify.
using its provisions southern owners re enslaved about 200 fugitives as well as some free blacks.
the plight of the runaways and the presence of slave catchers aroused popular hostility in the north and midwest.
ignoring the threat of substantial fines and prison sentences free blacks and white abolitionists protected fugitives.
in october 1850 boston abolitionists helped two slaves escape from georgia slave catchers.
rioters in syracuse new york broke into a courthouse freed a fugitive and accused the u s marshal of kidnapping.
abandoning nonviolence chapter 11 proclaimed him a saint awaiting his martyrdom the slaveholding states looked to the future with terror.
the aim of the present black republican organization is the destruction of the social system of the southern states warned one newspaper.
once republicans came to power another cautioned they would create insurrection and servile war in the south they would put the torch to our dwellings and the knife to our throats nor could the south count any longer on the democratic party to protect its interests.
at the partys convention in april 1860 northern democrats rejected jefferson daviss proposal to protect slavery in the territories and delegates from eight southern states quit the meeting.
at a second democratic convention northern and midwestern delegates nominated stephen douglas for president meeting separately southern democrats nominated the sitting vice president john c breckinridge of kentucky.
the election of 1860 with the democrats divided the republicans sensed victory.
they courted white voters with a free soil platform that opposed both slavery and racial equality missouri for white men and white men for missouri declared that states republican platform.
the national republican convention chose lincoln as its presidential candidate because he was more moderate on slavery than the best known republicans senators william seward of new york and salmon chase of ohio.
lincoln also conveyed a compelling egalitarian image that appealed to smallholding farmers wage earners and midwestern voters.
the republican strategy worked.
although lincoln received less than 1 percent of the popular vote in the south and only 40 percent of the national poll he won every northern and western state except new jersey giving him 180 of 303 electoral votes and an absolute chapters by answering these questions.
how were the american territorial acquisitions of the 1840s similar to and or different from those of the louisiana purchase and the paris treaty of 1783 discussed in chapter review timeline ask yourself why this chapter review key turning point three new political parties appeared in the six years from 1848 to 1854 free soil american know nothing and republican.
what accounts for this upsurge in political activity and what was its result.
two societies at war 1861 1865 c h a p t e r secession and military stalemate 1861 1862 the secession crisis the upper south chooses sides setting war objectives and devising strategies toward total war mobilizing armies and civilians mobilizing resources the turning point emancipation vicksburg and gettysburg the union victorious 1864 1865 soldiers and strategy the election of 1864 and shermans march w hat a scene it was union solidentify the big idea dier elisha hunt rhodes wrote how did the military and political in his diary at gettysburg in goals of the war bring significant july 1863.
oh the dead and the dying on changes to social economic and this bloody field thousands of men had cultural life.
already died and the slaughter would continue for two more years.
why is it that 200 000 men of one blood and tongue.
are seeking one anothers lives asked confederate lieutenant r m collins as another gruesome battle ended.
we could settle our differences by compromising and all be at home in ten days but there was no compromise.
god wills this contest and wills that it shall not yet end president abraham lincoln reflected.
the almighty has his own purposes while the reasons for the war are complex racial slavery played a primary role.
to southern whites the republican victory in 1860 presented an immediate danger to the slave owning republic that had existed since 1776.
o ur struggle is for inherited rights declared one southern leader.
southerners did not believe lincoln when he promised not directly or indirectly to interfere with the institution of slavery in the states where it exists soon a southern senator warned cohorts of federal officeholders abolitionists may be sent into our midst to encourage slave revolts and even worse racial mixture.
by racial mixture white southerners meant sexual relations between black men and white women given that white masters had already fathered untold thousands of children by their enslaved black women.
better far better.
to endure all horrors of civil war insisted a confederate recruit than to see the dusky sons of ham leading the fair daughters of the south to the altar to preserve black subordination and white supremacy radical southerners chose the dangerous enterprise of secession.
lincoln and the north would not let them go in peace.
living in a world still ruled by monarchies northern leaders believed that the collapse of the american union might forever destroy the possibility of democratic republican governments.
we cannot escape history lincoln eloquently declared.
we shall nobly save or meanly lose the last best hope of earth and so came the conflict.
called the war between the states by southerners and the war of the rebellion by northerners the struggle finally resolved the great issues of the union and slavery.
the costs were terrible more american lives lost than the combined total for all the nations other wars and a century long legacy of bitterness between the triumphant north and the vanquished white south.
fields of death fought with mass armies and new weapons the civil war took a huge toll in human lives as evidenced by this grisly photograph of a small section of the battlefield at antietam maryland.
the most costly single day battle in american history it left 22 700 dead wounded and missing confederate and union soldiers.
after the equally bloody three day battle at shiloh tennessee in april 1862 general ulysses grant surveyed a field so covered with dead that it would have been possible to walk.
in any direction stepping on dead bodies without a foot touching the ground library of congress.
part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 secession and military stalemate 1861 1862 following lincolns election in november 1860 secessionist fervor swept through the deep south.
veteran party leaders in washington still hoped to save the union.
in the four months between lincolns election and his inauguration on march 4 1861 they sought a new compromise.
the secession crisis the union collapsed first in south carolina the home of john c calhoun nullification and southern rights.
robert barnwell rhett and other fire eaters had demanded secession since the compromise of 1850 and their goal was now within reach.
our enemies are about to take possession of the government warned one south carolinian.
frightened by that prospect a state convention voted unanimously on december 20 1860 to dissolve the union now subsisting between south carolina and other states the lower south secedes fire eaters elsewhere in the deep south quickly called similar conventions and organized mobs to attack local union supporters.
in early january white mississippians joyously enacted a secession ordinance and florida alabama georgia and louisiana quickly followed.
texans soon joined them ousting unionist governor sam houston and ignoring his warning that the north.
will overwhelm the south map 14 1.
in february the jubilant secessionists met in montgomery alabama to proclaim a new nation the confederate states of america.
adopting a provisional constitution the delegates named mississippian jefferson davis a former u s senator and secretary of war as the confederacys president and georgia congressman alexander stephens as vice president.
secessionist fervor was less intense in the four states of the middle south virginia north carolina tennessee and arkansas where there were fewer slaves.
white opinion was especially divided in the four border slave states maryland delaware kentucky and missouri where yeomen farmers held greater political power and from bitter experience as well as the writings of journalist hilton helper knew that all too often the slaveholders.
have hoodwinked you reflecting such sentiments the legislatures of virginia and tennessee refused to join the secessionist movement and urged a compromise.
alabama secession flag in january 1861 a secession convention in alabama voted to leave the union and marked their decision for independence by designating this pennant created by a group of montgomery women as their official flag.
like john gasts american progress p 411 the goddess of liberty forms the central image.
here she holds a sword and a flag with a single star symbolizing alabamas new status as an independent republic.
alabama department of archives and history.
meanwhile the union government floundered.
president buchanan declared secession illegal but in line with his states rights outlook claimed that the federal government lacked authority to restore the union by force.
buchanans timidity prompted south carolinas new government to demand the surrender of fort sumter a federal garrison in charleston harbor and to cut off its supplies.
the president again backed down refusing to use the navy to supply the fort.
the crittenden compromise instead the outgoing president urged congress to find a compromise.
the plan proposed by senator john j crittenden of kentucky received the most support.
the crittenden compromise had two parts.
the first which congress approved called for a constitutional amendment to protect slavery from federal interference in any state where it already existed.
crittendens second provision called for the westward extension of the missouri compromise line 3630 north latitude to the california border.
the provision would ban slavery north of the line and allow bound labor to the south including any territories hereafter acquired raising the prospect of expansion into cuba or central america.
congressional republicans rejected crittendens second proposal on strict instructions from presidentelect lincoln.
with good reason lincoln feared it chapter 14 map 14 5 two societies at war 1861 1865 potomac r grant the closing virginia campaign 1864 1865 lee confederate defense line beginning in may 1864 general ulysses s grant launched an all out campaign against richmond trying to lure general robert e lee into open battle.
lee avoided a major test of strength.
instead he retreated to defensive positions and inflicted heavy casualties on union attackers at the wilderness spotsylvania court house north anna and cold harbor 1 4.
from june 1864 to april 1865 the two armies faced each other across defensive fortifications outside richmond and petersburg 5.
grant finally broke this ten month siege by a flanking maneuver at five forks 6.
lees surrender followed shortly.
confederate victory 1 the wilderness union victory id p ra railroads sequence of battles chancellorsville may 5 7 1864 orange an r court house fredericksburg ra spotsylvania may 8 19 1864 p pa han noc kr.
north anna may 23 26 1864 n jame s r e w s cold harbor june 1 3 richmond ttox r poma ap sayler s creek april 6 1865 appomattox court house lee surrenders to grant april 9 1865 his opposition to emancipation.
like mcclellan the democratic delegates rejected emancipation and condemned lincolns repression of domestic dissent particularly the suspension of habeas corpus and the use of military courts to prosecute civilians.
however they split into two camps over war policy.
war democrats vowed to continue fighting until the rebellion ended while peace democrats called for a cessation of hostilities and a constitutional convention to negotiate a peace settlement.
although personally a war democrat mcclellan promised if elected to recommend to congress an immediate armistice and a peace convention.
hearing this news confederate vice president alexander stephens celebrated the first ray of real light i have seen since the war began he predicted that if atlanta and richmond held out lincoln would be defeated and mcclellan would eventually accept an independent confederacy.
the fall of atlanta and lincolns victory stephenss hopes collapsed on september 2 1864 as atlanta fell to shermans army.
in a stunning move the union general pulled his troops from the trenches swept around the city and destroyed its rail links to the south.
fearing that sherman would encircle his army confederate general john b hood abandoned the city.
atlanta is ours and fairly won sherman telegraphed lincoln sparking hundred gun salutes and wild republican amelia court house petersburg campaign june 1864 april 1865 40 miles 40 kilometers 6 five forks april 1 1865 celebration.
we are gaining strength lincoln warned confederate leaders and may if need be maintain the contest indefinitely a deep pessimism settled over the confederacy.
mary chesnut a plantation mistress and generals wife wrote in her diary i felt as if all were dead within me forever and foresaw the end of the confederacy we are going to be wiped off the earth recognizing the dramatically changed military situation mcclellan repudiated the democratic peace platform.
the national union party went on the offensive attacking mcclellans inconsistency and labeling peace democrats as copperheads poisonous snakes who were hatching treasonous plots.
a man must go for the union at all hazards declared a republican legislator in pennsylvania if he would entitle himself to be considered a loyal man lincoln won a clear cut victory in november.
the president received 55 percent of the popular vote and won 212 of 233 electoral votes.
republicans and national unionists captured 145 of the 185 seats in the house of representatives and increased their senate majority to 42 of 52 seats.
many republicans owed their victory to the votes of union troops who wanted to crush the rebellion and end slavery.
legal emancipation was already under way at the edges of the south.
in 1864 maryland and missouri amended their constitutions to end slavery and the part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 william tecumseh sherman a man of nervous energy sherman smoked cigars and talked continuously.
when seated he crossed and uncrossed his legs incessantly and a journalist described his fingers as constantly twitching his red whiskers his coat buttons playing a tattoo on the table or running through his hair on the battlefield sherman was a decisive general who commanded the loyalty of his troops.
a photographer captured this image of sherman in 1865 following his devastating march through georgia and the carolinas.
library of congress.
three confederate states occupied by the union army tennessee arkansas and louisiana followed suit.
still abolitionists worried that the emancipation proclamation based legally on the presidents wartime powers would lose its force at the end of the war.
urged on by lincoln and the national equal rights league in january 1865 the republican congress approved the thirteenth amendment ending slavery and sent it to the states for ratification.
slavery was nearly dead.
william tecumseh sherman hard war warrior thanks to william tecumseh sherman the confederacy was nearly dead as well.
as a young military officer stationed in the south sherman sympathized with the planter class and felt that slavery upheld social stability.
however sherman believed in the union.
secession meant anarchy he told his southern friends in early 1861 if war comes.
i must fight your people whom i best love serving under grant sherman distinguished himself at shiloh and vicksburg.
taking command of the army of the tennessee he developed the philosophy and tactics of hard war when one nation is at war with another all the people of one are enemies of the other sherman declared.
when confederate guerrillas fired on a boat carrying unionist civilians near randolph tennessee sherman sent a regiment to destroy the town asserting we are justified in treating all inhabitants as combatants after capturing atlanta sherman advocated a bold strategy.
instead of pursuing the retreating confederate army northward into tennessee he proposed to move south live off the land and cut a swath through to the sea to persuade lincoln and grant to approve his unconventional plan sherman argued that his march would be a demonstration to the world foreign and domestic that we have a power jefferson davis cannot resist the union general lived up to his pledge.
we are not only fighting hostile armies sherman wrote but a hostile people and must make old and young rich and poor feel the hard hand of war he left atlanta in flames and during his 300 mile march to the sea map 14 6 his army consumed or demolished everything in its path.
a union veteran wrote we destroyed all we could not eat stole their niggers burned their cotton gins spilled their sorghum burned twisted their r roads and raised hell generally although shermans army usually did not harm noncombatants who kept to their peaceful business the havoc so demoralized confederate soldiers that many deserted their units and returned home american voices p 472.
when sherman reached savannah in mid december the citys 10 000 defenders left without a fight.
georgias african americans treated sherman as a savior.
they flock to me old and young he wrote.
t hey pray and shout and mix up my name with moses.
as well as abram linkom the great messiah of dis jubilee to provide for the hundreds of blacks now following his army sherman issued special field order no.
15 which set aside 400 000 acres of prime rice growing land for the exclusive use of freedmen.
by june 1865 about 40 000 blacks were cultivating sherman lands many freedmen believed that the lands were to be theirs forever belated payment for generations of unpaid labor all the land belongs to the yankees now and they gwine divide it out among de coloured people to see more of shermans writing along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
chapter review summary an uncounted casualty of the war many men who died in the war were husbands and fathers leaving tens of thousands of widows and even more children to grieve over their loss.
dressed in mourning clothes this unidentified sad faced young girl holds an image of her dead father a cavalryman holding a sword and wearing a regulation dress hat.
library of congress.
in this chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place after reviewing the compromises over slavery at the constitutional convention p 206 in the missouri compromise p 269 and in the compromise of 1850 p 429 write an essay analyzing why the opposing sides failed to compromise in 1861 more to explore union policy toward slavery and enslaved people change over the course of the war.
the photographs of the southern refugee family p 462 and grant planning a strategic maneuver p 468 remind us of a world in which people goods and soldiers moved either on foot or on horses and mules.
how did this limited mobility affect civilians slave and free and military forces during the civil war.
visual evidence start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
abraham lincoln elected president november 6 south carolina secedes december 20 lincoln inaugurated march 4 confederates fire on fort sumter april 12 virginia leaves union april 17 general butler declares refugee slaves contraband of war may confederates win battle of bull run july 21 first confiscation act august legal tender act authorizes greenbacks february union triumphs at shiloh april 6 7 confederacy introduces draft april congress passes homestead act and transcontinental railroad act may july union halts confederates at antietam september 17 preliminary emancipation proclamation september 22 lincoln signs emancipation proclamation january 1 union wins battles at gettysburg july 1 3 and vicksburg july 4 union initiates draft march sparking riots in new york city july ulysses s grant named union commander march grant advances on richmond may william tecumseh sherman takes atlanta september 2 lincoln reelected november 8 sherman marches through georgia november and december congress approves thirteenth amendment january 31 robert e lee surrenders april 9 lincoln assassinated april 14 thirteenth amendment ratified december 6 key turning points the emancipation proclamations 1862 1863 union victories at gettysburg and vicksburg 1863 and shermans taking of atlanta 1864 historians have seen all of these events as important turning points.
assume that one of these events did not happen.
what difference would it have made in the military and political struggle between the union and the confederacy.
reconstruction 1865 1877 c h a p t e r the struggle for national reconstruction presidential approaches from lincoln to johnson congress versus the president radical reconstruction woman suffrage denied the meaning of freedom the quest for land republican governments in the south building black communities the undoing of reconstruction the republicans unravel counterrevolution in the south reconstruction rolled back the political crisis of 1877 lasting legacies o n the last day of april 1866 black identify the big idea soldiers in memphis tennessee what goals did republican policyturned in their weapons as they makers ex confederates and freedmustered out of the union army.
the next people pursue during reconstrucday whites who resented the soldiers tion.
to what degree did each presence provoked a clash.
at a street celsucceed.
ebration where african americans shouted hurrah for abe lincoln a white policeman responded your old father abe lincoln is dead and damned the scuffle that followed precipitated three days of white violence and rape that left forty eight african americans dead and dozens more wounded.
mobs burned black homes and churches and destroyed all twelve of the citys black schools.
unionists were appalled.
they had won the civil war but where was the peace.
ex confederates murdered freedmen and flagrantly resisted federal control.
after the memphis attacks republicans in congress proposed a new measure that would protect african americans by defining and enforcing u s citizenship rights.
eventually this bill became the most significant law to emerge from reconstruction the fourteenth amendment to the constitution.
andrew johnson however the unionist democrat who became president after abraham lincolns assassination refused to sign the bill.
in may 1865 while congress was adjourned johnson had implemented his own reconstruction plan.
it extended amnesty to all southerners who took a loyalty oath except for a few high ranking confederates.
it also allowed states to reenter the union as soon as they revoked secession abolished slavery and relieved their new state governments of financial burdens by repudiating confederate debts.
a year later at the time of the memphis carnage all ex confederate states had met johnsons terms.
the president rejected any further intervention.
johnsons vetoes combined with ongoing violence in the south angered unionist voters.
in the political struggle that ensued congressional republicans seized the initiative from the president and enacted a sweeping program that became known as radical reconstruction.
one of its key achievements would have been unthinkable a few years earlier voting rights for african american men.
black southeners though had additional urgent priorities.
we have toiled nearly all our lives as slaves and have made these lands what they are a group of south carolina petitioners declared.
they pleaded for some provision by which we as freedmen can obtain a homestead though northern republicans and freedpeople agreed that black southerners must have physical safety and the right to vote former slaves also wanted economic independence.
northerners sought instead to revive cash crop plantations with wage labor.
reconstructions eventual failure stemmed from the conflicting goals of lawmakers freedpeople and relentlessly hostile ex confederates.
celebrating the fifteenth amendment 1870 this lithograph depicts a celebration in baltimore on may 15 1870 with perhaps 200 000 people attending the grand parade and orations marked passage of the fifteenth amendment which enfranchised men irrespective of race color or previous condition of servitude the heroes depicted at the top are martin delany the first black man to become an officer in the u s army abolitionist frederick douglass born in slavery on marylands eastern shore and mississippi senator hiram rhodes revels.
the images at the bottom carried the following captions liberty protects the marriage altar the ballot box is open to us and our representative sits in the national legislature such lithographs widely printed and sold capture the pride hope and optimism of reconstruction but the optimism was not to last.
library of congress.
part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 the struggle for national reconstruction congress clashed with president johnson in part because the framers of the constitution did not anticipate a civil war or provide for its aftermath.
had confederate states legally left the union when they seceded.
if so then their reentry required action by congress.
if not if even during secession they had retained u s statehood then restoring them might be an administrative matter best left to the president.
lack of clarity on this fundamental question made for explosive politics.
presidential approaches from lincoln to johnson as wartime president lincoln had offered a plan similar to johnsons.
it granted amnesty to most exconfederates and allowed each rebellious state to return to the union as soon as 10 percent of its voters had taken a loyalty oath and the compare and state had approved the thirteenth contrast amendment abolishing slavery.
how did lincoln and but even amid defeat confederate johnson approach reconstates rejected this ten percent struction differently.
plan an ominous sign for the future.
in july 1864 congress proposed a tougher substitute the wade davis bill that required an oath of allegiance by a majority of each states adult white men new governments formed only by those who had never taken up arms against the union and permanent disenfranchisement of confederate leaders.
lincoln defeated the wade davis bill with a pocket veto leaving it unsigned when congress adjourned.
at the same time he opened talks with key congressmen aiming for a compromise.
we will never know what would have happened had lincoln lived.
his assassination in april 1865 plunged the nation into political uncertainty.
as a special train bore the presidents flag draped coffin home to illinois thousands of americans lined the railroad tracks in mourning.
furious and grief stricken many unionists blamed all confederates for the acts of southern sympathizer john wilkes booth and his accomplices in the murder.
at the same time lincolns death left the presidency in the hands of andrew johnson a man utterly lacking in lincolns moral sense and political judgment.
johnson was a self styled common man from the hills of eastern tennessee.
trained as a tailor he built his political career on the support of farmers and laborers.
loyal to the union johnson had refused to leave the u s senate when tennessee seceded.
after federal forces captured nashville in 1862 lincoln appointed johnson as tennessees military governor.
in the election memphis riot 1866 whites in postwar memphis as in much of the south bitterly resented the presence in their city of former black soldiers mustered out of service with the u s army.
on april 30 1866 when some black veterans no longer protected by their uniforms celebrated the end of their army service by drinking violence broke out.
for three days whites burned black neighborhoods churches and schools raped several african american women and killed dozens of black residents.
two whites also died in the rioting which hardened northern public opinion and prompted calls for stronger measures to put down ex confederate resistance.
this tinted illustration is based on a lithograph that appeared in harpers weekly.
harpers weekly picture research consultants archives.
chapters and by the late 1910s counted a membership of 100 000 and the glorious cause for which they fought to cherish the ties of friendship among members of this association to endeavor to have used in all southern schools only such histories as are just and true.
the objects of this association are historical educational memorial benevolent and social to fulfill the duties of sacred charity to the survivors of the war and those dependent on them to collect and preserve material for a truthful history of the war to protect historic places of the confederacy to record the part taken by the southern women.
in patient endurance of hardship and patriotic devotion during the struggle to perpetuate the memory of our confederate heroes 3 mcneel marble co advertisement in confederate veteran magazine 1905 to the daughters of the confederacy in regard to that confederate monument which your chapter 16 conquering a continent 1854 1890 little plume and yellow kidney photographer edward s curtis took this photograph of the piegan blackfeet leader little plume and his son yellow kidney.
curtiss extensive collection of photographs of native americans remains a valuable resource for historians.
however curtis altered his images to make his native subjects seem more authentic though indians made widespread use of nonnative furniture clothes and other consumer goods such as singer sewing machines curtis removed those from the frame.
he also retouched photographs to remove items such as belts and watches.
note the circular shadow here against the lodge wall near little plumes right arm the original photograph included a clock.
library of congress.
savages long after americans forgot the massacres of cheyenne women and children at sand creek and of piegan people on the marias river prints of the battle of little big horn hung in barrooms across the country.
william f buffalo bill cody in his traveling wild west performances enacted a revenge killing of a cheyenne man named yellow hand in a tableau cody called first scalp for custer notwithstanding that the tableau featured a white man scalping a cheyenne cody depicted it as a triumph for civilization.
little big horn proved to be the last military victory of plains indians against the u s army.
pursued relentlessly after custers death and finding fewer and fewer bison to sustain them sioux parents watched their children starve through a bitter winter.
slowly families trickled into the agencies and accommodated themselves to reservation life map 16 6.
the next year the nez perces fleeing for the explain canadian border also surrendered.
consequences the final holdouts fought in the how did grants peace southwest with chiricahua apache policy fail to consider the leader geronimo.
like many oth needs of native americans ers geronimo had accepted res in the west and what ervation life but found conditions were its results.
unendurable.
describing the desolate land the tribe had been allotted one apache said it had nothing but cactus rattlesnakes heat rocks and insects.
many many of our people died of starvation when geronimo took up arms in protest the army recruited other apaches to track him and his band into the hills in september 1886 he surrendered for the last time.
the chiricahua apaches never returned to their homeland.
the united states had completed its military conquest of the west.
part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 standing rock agency cheyenne river agency great sioux reservation missouri r.
spotted tail agency red cloud agency standing rock agency cheyenne river agency great sioux reservation pine ridge agency rosebud agency missouri r.
standing rock reservation sisseton reservation cheyenne river reservation crow creek reservation lower brul reservation pine ridge rosebud reservation reservation wounded knee present day state boundaries are shown.
yankton reservation missouri r.
santee reservation map 16 6 the sioux reservations in south dakota 1868 1889 in 1868 when they bent to the demand that they move onto the reservation the sioux thought they had gained secure rights to a substantial part of their ancestral hunting grounds.
but harsh conditions on reservations led to continuing military conflicts.
landhungry whites exerted continuous local pressure and officials in washington repeatedly changed the terms of sioux land holdings always eroding native claims.
strategies of survival though the warpath closed many native peoples continued secretly to practice traditional customs.
away from the disapproving eyes of trace change agents and teachers they passed over time on their languages histories and in what ways did the traditional arts and medicine to outlook of native peoples younger generations.
frustrated change in the era after missionaries often concluded that armed resistance had little could be accomplished ended.
because bonds of kinship and custom were so strong.
parents also hated to relinquish their children to off reservation boarding schools.
thus more and more indian schools ended up on or near reservations white teachers had to accept their pupils continued participation in the rhythms of indian community life.
selectively most native peoples adopted some white ways.
many parents urged their sons and daughters to study hard learn english and develop skills to help them succeed in the new world they confronted.
even sitting bull announced in 1885 that he wanted his children to be educated like the white children are some indian students grew up to be lawyers doctors and advocates for their people including writers and artists who interpreted native experiences for national audiences.
one of the most famous was a santee sioux boy named ohiyesa who became dr charles eastman.
posted to the pine ridge reservation in south dakota eastman practiced medicine side by side with traditional healers whom he respected and wrote popular books under his sioux name.
he remembered that when he left for boarding school his father had said we have now entered upon this life and there is no going back.
remember my boy it is the same as if i sent you on your first war path.
i shall expect you to conquer nothing exemplified this syncretism or cultural blending better than the ghost dance movement of the late 1880s and early 1890s which fostered native peoples hope that they could through sacred dances resurrect the bison and call a great storm to drive whites back across the atlantic.
the ghost dance drew on christian elements as well as native ones.
as the movement spread from reservation to reservation paiutes arapahos sioux native peoples developed new forms of pan indian identity and cooperation.
white responses to the ghost dance showed continued misunderstanding and lethal exertion of authority.
in 1890 when a group of lakota sioux ghost dancers left their south dakota reservation they were pursued by the u s army who feared that further spread of the religion would provoke war.
on december 29 at wounded knee the 7th cavalry caught up with fleeing lakotas and killed at least 150 perhaps as many as 300 like other massacres this one could have been avoided.
the deaths at wounded knee stand as a final indictment of decades of relentless u s expansion white ignorance and greed chaotic and conflicting policies and bloody mistakes.
chapter 16 chapter 22.
the apa arose in part because protestants found their dominance challenged.
millions of americans especially in the industrial working class were now catholics or jews.
overall in 1916 protestants still constituted about 60 percent of americans affiliated with a religious body.
but they faced formidable rivals the number of practicing catholics in 1916 15 7 million was greater than the number of baptists methodists and presbyterians combined.
some protestants responded to the urban immigrant challenge by evangelizing among the unchurched.
they provided reading rooms day nurseries vocational classes and other services.
the goal of renewing religious faith through dedication to justice and social welfare became known as the social gospel.
its goals were epitomized by charles sheldons novel in his steps 1896 which told the story of a congregation identify causes who resolved to live by christs precepts for one year.
if church members were all doing as jesus would do sheldon asked could it remain true that armies of men would walk the streets for jobs and hundreds of them curse the church and thousands of them find in the saloon their best friend the salvation army which arrived from great britain in 1879 also spread a gospel message among the urban poor offering assistance that ranged from soup kitchens to shelters for former prostitutes.
when the salvation army on the streets this theater poster for the popular play on the bowery 1894 written by theater agent robert neilson stephens shows how many americans perceived the salvation army.
here salvation army workers in new york city offer the organizations newspaper war cry to a man who brushes them off rudely.
the man is steve brodie a celebrity who was recruited to portray himself onstage.
a former east river lifesaving champion who became a saloon owner in new yorks bowery district brodie had won fame in 1886 by claiming to have jumped from the brooklyn bridge and survived.
it was later claimed that he faked the stunt but doing a brodie became popular slang for taking a big risk.
while many americans admired the salvation army others particularly men of working class origins like brodie rejected its appeals.
library of congress.
america c o m pa r e d christianity in the united states and japan during the 1893 chicago worlds columbian exhibition a parliament of religions brought together representatives of prominent faiths for discussion.
english speaking protestants dominated the program but several asian representatives included kinzo hirai a lay buddhist from japan.
in his speech hirai reviewed japans experiences with the united states since commodore matthew c perry opened the country in 1853 i do not understand why the christian lands have ignored the rights and advantages of forty million souls of japan for forty years.
one of the excuses offered by foreign nations is that our country is not yet civilized.
is it the principle of civilized law that the rights and profits of the so called uncivilized or the weaker should be sacrificed.
as i understand it the spirit and necessity of law is to protect the rights and profits of the weaker against the aggression of the stronger.
from the religious source the claim is made that the japanese are idolaters and heathen.
a dmitting for the sake of argument that we are idolaters and heathen is it christian morality to trample upon the rights and advantages of a non christian nation coloring all their natural happiness with the dark stain of injustice.
you send your missionaries to japan and they advise us to be moral and believe christianity.
we like to be moral we know that christianity is good and we are very thankful for this kindness.
but at the same time our people are rather perplexed.
for when we think that the treaty stipulated in the time of feudalism when we were yet in our youth is still clung to by the powerful nations of christendom when we find that every year a good many western vessels of seal fishery are smuggled into our seas when legal cases are always decided by the foreign authorities in japan unfavorably to us when some years ago a japanese was not allowed to enter a university on the pacific coast of america because of his being of a different race when a few months ago the school board in san francisco enacted a regulation that no japanese should be allowed to enter the public school there when all else failed down and outers knew they could count on the salvation army whose bell ringers became a familiar sight on city streets.
the group borrowed upto date marketing techniques and used the latest business slang in urging its christian soldiers to hustle the salvation army succeeded in part because it managed to bridge an emerging divide between social gospel reformers and protestants who were taking a last year the japanese were driven out in wholesale from one of the territories of the united states when our business men in san francisco were compelled by some union not to employ japanese assistants and laborers but the americans when there are some in the same city who speak on the platform against those of us who are already here when there are many who go in procession hoisting lanterns marked japs must go when the japanese in the hawaiian islands were deprived of their suffrage when we see some western people in japan who erect before the entrance to their houses a special post upon which is the notice no japanese is allowed to enter here just like a board upon which is written no dogs allowed when we are in such a situation notwithstanding the kindness of the western nations from one point of view who send their missionaries to us that we unintelligent heathens are embarrassed and hesitate to swallow the sweet and warm liquid of the heaven of christianity will not be unreasonable.
source the worlds parliament of religions ed.
john henry barrows chicago parliament publishing co 1893 444 450.
analyzing the evidence 1 what is hirais attitude toward american christians.
2 of what events is hirai aware that are taking place in the united states.
how does this shape his view of christian missions in japan.
3 how might american delegates to the parliament especially protestant missionaries have responded to hirai.
different theological path.
disturbed by what they saw as rising secularism conservative ministers and their allies held a series of bible conferences at niagara falls between 1876 and 1897 the resulting niagara creed reaffirmed the literal truth of the bible and the certain damnation of those not born again in christ.
by the 1910s a network of churches and bible institutes had emerged from these conferences.
they called their part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 billy sunday with his bible one of the most popular protestant preachers of the early twentieth century billy sunday 1862 1935 was a former professional baseball player with an imposing physique and dynamic preaching style.
more willing than most of his predecessors to make direct political arguments sunday championed antiradicalism and prohibition stances that foreshadowed the protestant political crusades of the 1920s.
sundays most famous sermon was his antiliquor exhortation get on the water wagon library of congress.
movement fundamentalism based on their belief in the fundamental truth of the bible.
fundamentalists and their allies made particularly effective use of revival meetings.
unlike social gospel advocates revivalists said little about poverty or earthly justice focusing not on the matters of the world but on heavenly redemption.
the pioneer modern evangelist was dwight l moody a former chicago shoe salesman and ymca official who won fame in the 1870s.
eternal life could be had for the asking moody promised.
his listeners needed only to come forward and take take moodys successor billy sunday helped bring evangelism into the modern era.
more often than his predecessors sunday took political stances based on his protestant beliefs.
condemning the booze traffic was his greatest cause.
sunday also denounced unrestricted immigration and labor radicalism.
if i had my way with these ornery wild eyed socialists he once threatened i would stand them up before a firing squad sunday supported some progressive reform causes he opposed child labor for example and advocated voting rights for women.
but in other ways his views anticipated the nativism and antiradicalism that would dominate american politics after world war i billy sunday like other noted men of his era broke free of victorian practices and asserted his leadership in a masculinized american culture.
not only was he a commanding presence on the stage but before his conversion he had been a hard drinking outfielder for the chicago white stockings.
to advertise his revivals sunday often organized local men into baseball teams then put on his own uniform and played for both sides.
through such feats and the fiery sermons that followed sunday offered a model of spiritual inspiration manly strength and political engagement.
his revivals were thoroughly modern marketed shrewdly they provided mass entertainment and the chance to meet a pro baseball player.
like other cultural developments of the industrializing era billy sundays popularity showed how americans often adjusted to modernity they adapted older beliefs and values enabling them to endure in new forms.
summary industrialization and new consumer practices created foundations for modern american culture.
while middle class families sought to preserve the victorian domestic ideal a variety of factors transformed family life.
families had fewer children and a substantial majority of young people achieved more education than their parents had obtained.
across class and gender lines americans enjoyed athletics and the outdoors fostering the rise of environmentalism.
among an array of womens reform movements the womans christian temperance union sought chapter contains several depictions of domestic spaces and also of women in public.
after studying these images how would you describe the ideal roles that americans of this era believed women should fulfill.
did the ideal differ based on social and economic class.
compare these images to the photographs of women in this chapter 20.
their demands for stronger government measures especially to curb corporate power culminated in citywide protests in 1899 during a strike against the hated streetcar company.
that year more than eight thousand workers participated in the citys annual labor day parade.
as they passed the mayors reviewing stand the bands fell silent and the unions furled their flags in a solemn protest against the mayors failure to support their cause.
to recapture support from working class clevelanders democrats made a dramatic change in 1901 nominating tom johnson for mayor.
johnson a reform minded businessman advocated municipal ownership of utilities and a tax system in which monopoly and privilege bore the main burdens.
johnson once thanked clevelands city appraisers for raising taxes on his own mansion.
johnsons comfortable victory transformed democrats into clevelands leading reform party.
while the new mayor did not fulfill the whole agenda of the central labor union and its allies he became an advocate of publicly owned utilities and one of the nations most famous and innovative reformers.
like johnson other mayors began to oust machines and launch ambitious programs of reform.
some modeled their municipal governments on those of glasgow scotland dsseldorf germany and other european cities on the cutting edge of innovation.
in boston mayor josiah quincy built public baths gyms swimming pools and playgrounds and provided free public concerts.
like other mayors he battled streetcar companies to bring down fares.
the scope of such projects varied.
in 1912 san francisco managed to open one small municipally owned streetcar line to compete with private companies.
milwaukee wisconsin on the other hand elected socialists who experimented with a sweeping array of measures including publicly subsidized medical care and housing.
republican hazen pingree place events mayor of detroit from 1890 to in context 1897 was a particularly noted how did reformers try reformer who worked for better to address the limits of streets and public transportation.
machine government.
during the depression pingree to what extent did they opened a network of vacant succeed.
city owned lots as community vegetable gardens.
though some people ridiculed pingrees potato patches the gardens helped feed thousands of detroits working people during the harsh depression years.
by 1901 a coalition of reformers who campaigned against new yorks tammany hall began to borrow ideas from pingree and other mayors.
in the wealthier wards of new york they promised to reduce crime and save taxpayer dollars.
in working class neighborhoods they vowed to provide affordable housing and municipal ownership of gas and electricity.
they defeated tammanys candidates and though they did not fulfill all of their promises they did provide more funding for overcrowded public schools.
reformers also experimented with new ways of organizing municipal government itself.
after a devastating hurricane in 1900 killed an estimated six thousand people in galveston texas and destroyed much of the city rebuilders adopted a commission system that became a nationwide model for efficient government.
leaders of the national municipal league advised cities to elect small councils and hire professional city managers who would direct operations like a corporate executive.
the league had difficulty persuading politicians to adopt its business oriented model it won its greatest victories in young small cities like phoenix arizona where the professional classes held political power.
other cities chose instead to enhance democratic participation.
as part of the oregon system which called for direct voting on key political questions portland voters participated in 129 municipal referendum votes between 1905 and 1913 crucibles of progressive reform the challenges posed by urban life presented rich opportunities for experimentation and reform.
as happened in cleveland with tom johnsons election as mayor working class radicals and middle class reformers often mounted simultaneous challenges to political machines and these combined pressures led to dramatic change.
many reformers pointed to the plight of the urban poor especially children.
thus it is not surprising that progressivism an overlapping set of movements to combat the ills of industrialization chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place in chapter.
jane addams twenty years at hull house 1910.
an inspiring must read by a great american reformer.
george chauncey gay new york 1994.
a groundbreaking study of the rise of urban gay subcultures.
kathy peiss cheap amusements 1986.
explores urban working class dating and the world of young working class women.
harold platt the electric city 1991.
a study of how electricity shaped the urban industrial society and economy.
ruth rosen the lost sisterhood 1982.
a poignant account of progressive era antiprostitution campaigns and their tragic impact on sex workers.
david von drehle triangle the fire that changed america 2003.
the most recent account of the fire and its consequences.
chapter 22 and 1950s chapter 21 roosevelt was elected as new yorks governor.
in this job he pushed through civil service reform and a tax on corporations.
seeking to neutralize this progressive and rather unpredictable political star republican bosses chose roosevelt as mckinleys running mate in 1900 hoping the vice presidency would be a political dead end.
instead they suddenly found roosevelt in the white house.
the new president who called for vigorous reform represented a major shift for the republicans.
antitrust legislation roosevelt blended reform with the needs of private enterprise but on occasion he challenged corporations in new ways.
during a bitter 1902 coal strike for example he threatened to nationalize the big coal companies if their owners refused to negotiate with the miners union.
the owners hastily came to the table.
roosevelt also sought better enforcement of the interstate commerce act and sherman antitrust act.
he pushed through the elkins act 1903 which prohibited discriminatory railway rates that favored powerful customers.
that same year he created the bureau of corporations empowered to investigate business practices and bolster the justice departments capacity to mount antitrust suits.
the department had already filed such a suit against the northern securities company arguing that this combination of northwestern railroads had created a monopoly in violation of the sherman antitrust act.
in a landmark decision in 1904 the supreme court ordered northern securities dissolved.
that year calling for every american to get what he called a square deal roosevelt handily defeated democratic candidate alton b parker.
now president in his own right roosevelt stepped up his attack on trusts.
he regarded large scale enterprise as the natural tendency of modern industry but he hoped to chapter 20 whose government.
politics populists and progressives 1880 1917 the republicans resist roosevelt august 7 1912 this cartoon appeared in the political humor journal puck six weeks after the republican convention nominated taft and two days after the new progressive party nominated theodore roosevelt.
the baptismal choir consists of men such as gifford pinchot who helped roosevelt form the new party.
elephant refuses to be baptized in teddyism though preacher roosevelt insists salvation is free president william howard taft dressed in brown with a hat pulls on the elephants tail.
library of congress.
the american exponent of a world wide movement for juster social conditions in a nod to roosevelts combative stance party followers called themselves bull mooses roosevelt was not the only rebel on the ballot the major parties also faced a challenge from charismatic socialist eugene v debs.
in the 1890s debs had founded the american railway union aru a broadbased group that included both skilled and unskilled workers.
in 1894 amid the upheavals of depression and popular protest the aru had boycotted luxury pullman sleeping cars in support of a strike by workers at the pullman company.
railroad managers claiming the strike obstructed the u s mail persuaded grover clevelands administration to intervene against the union.
the strike failed and debs served time in prison along with other aru leaders.
the experience radicalized him and in 1901 he launched the socialist party of america.
debs translated socialism into an american idiom emphasizing the democratic process as a means to defeat capitalism.
by the early 1910s his party had secured a minor but persistent role in politics.
both the progressive and socialist parties drew strength from the west a region with vigorous urban reform movements and a legacy of farmer labor activism.
watching the rise of the progressives and socialists democrats were keen to build on dramatic gains they had made in the 1910 midterm election.
among their younger leaders was virginia born woodrow wilson who as new jerseys governor had compiled an impressive reform record including passage of a direct primary workers compensation and utility regulation.
in 1912 he won the democrats compare and nomination.
wilson possessed to contrast a fault the moral certainty that why did the election of characterized many elite progres 1912 feature four candisives.
he had much in common dates and how did their with roosevelt.
the old time of platforms differ.
individual competition is probably gone by he admitted agreeing for more federal measures to restrict big business.
but his goals were less sweeping than roosevelts and only gradually did he hammer out a reform program calling it the new freedom.
if america is not to have free enterprise wilson warned then she can have freedom of no sort whatever he claimed roosevelts program represented collectivism whereas the new freedom would preserve political and economic liberty.
with four candidates in the field taft roosevelt wilson and debs the 1912 campaign generated intense excitement.
democrats continued to have an enormous blind spot their opposition to african american rights.
but republicans despite plentiful opportunities had also conspicuously failed to end segregation or pass antilynching laws.
though african american leaders had high hopes for the progressive party they were crushed when the new party refused to seat southern black delegates or take a stand for racial equality.
w e b du bois considered voting for debs calling the socialists the only party which openly recognized negro manhood but he ultimately endorsed wilson.
across the north in a startling shift thousands of african american men and women worked and voted for wilson hoping democrats reform american voices theodore roosevelt from anti populist to new nationalist theodore roosevelt published the first piece below in a leading journal in 1897 at the time he was serving as police commissioner of new york city.
the second document is a famous speech he delivered in 1910 when he had retired from the presidency but was planning a bid for the 1912 republican nomination.
how not to help our poorer brother 1897 in the 1890s roosevelt a rising republican star forcefully denounced populism and other radical movements.
the comments below were part of an exchange with populists 1896 vice presidential nominee tom watson of georgia.
there are plenty of ugly things about wealth and its possessors in the present age and i suppose there have been in all ages.
there are many rich people who so utterly lack patriotism or show such sordid and selfish traits of character.
that all right minded men must look upon them with angry contempt but on the whole the thrifty are apt to be better citizens than the thriftless and the worst capitalist cannot harm laboring men as they are harmed by demagogues.
the first lesson to teach the poor man is that as a whole the wealth of the community is distinctly beneficial to him that he is better off in the long run because other men are well off and that the surest way to destroy what measure of prosperity he may have is to paralyze industry and the well being of those men who have achieved success.
it may become necessary to interfere even more than we have done with the right of private contract and to shackle cunning as we have shackled force.
all i insist upon is that we must be sure of our ground before trying to get any legislation and that we must not expect too much from this legislation.
the worst foe of the poor man is the labor leader whether philanthropist or politician who tried to teach him that he is a victim of conspiracy and injustice when in reality he is merely working out his fate with blood and sweat as the immense majority of men who are worthy of the name always have done and always will have to do.
something can be done by good laws more can be done by honest administration of the laws but most of all can be done by frowning resolutely upon the preachers of vague discontent and by upholding the true doctrine of self reliance self help and self mastery.
this doctrine sets forth many things.
among them is that though a man can occasionally be helped when he stumbles yet that it is useless to try to carry him when he will not or cannot walk and worse than useless to try to bring down the work and reward of the thrifty and intelligent to the level of the capacity of the weak the shiftless and the idle.
if an american is to amount to anything he must rely upon himself and not upon the state.
it is both foolish and wicked to teach the average man who is not well off that some wrong or injustice has been done him and that he should hope for redress elsewhere than in his own industry honesty and intelligence.
new nationalism speech august 31 1910 roosevelt delivered this speech to a gathering of union veterans at osawatomie kansas a site associated with abolitionist john brown chapter 20 c h a p t e r chapters main ideas.
1 reformers in the progressive era came from differ ent backgrounds and represented several distinct interests.
what were some of those backgrounds and interests.
how did their goals differ.
2 how did the economic crisis of the 1890s shape american politics.
3 compare the reform legislation passed during theodore roosevelts presidency with that of wilsons term.
how were these goals and achievements shaped by the broader agenda of the party that held power republicans in roosevelts case and democrats in wilsons.
look at the events on the thematic timeline on page 543 historians often call the decades from the 1880s to the 1910s the progressive era.
given the limitations and new problems that emerged during this time as well as the achievements of progressive policymaking do you think the name is warranted.
what other names might we suggest for this era.
thematic understanding part 6 chapter 18.
josiah strong for example predicted that with the globe fully occupied a competition of races would ensue with victory based on survival of the fittest fear of ruthless competition drove the united states like european nations to invest in the latest weapons.
policymakers saw that european powers were amassing steel plated battleships and carving up africa and asia among themselves.
in his book the influence of sea power upon history 1890 u s naval officer alfred mahan urged the united states to enter the fray observing that naval power had been essential to past empires.
as early as 1886 congress ordered construction of two steel hulled battleships the uss texas and uss maine in 1890 it appropriated funds for three more a program that expanded over the next two decades.
during grover clevelands second term 1893 1897 his secretary of state richard olney turned to direct confrontation.
he warned europe to stay away from latin america which he saw as the united statess rightful sphere of influence.
without consulting the nation of venezuela olney suddenly demanded in 1895 that britain resolve a long standing border dispute between venezuela and britains neighboring colony british guiana.
invoking the monroe doctrine which stated that the western hemisphere was offlimits to further european colonization olney warned that the united states would brook no challenge to its interests.
startled britain agreed to arbitrate.
u s power was on the rise.
the war of 1898 events in the caribbean presented the united states with far greater opportunities.
in 1895 cuban patriots mounted a major guerrilla war against spain which had lost most of its other new world territories.
the spanish commander responded by rounding up cuban civilians into concentration camps where as many as 200 000 died of starvation exposure chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place read again the documents from representing indians in chapters 15 and 20 and consider how attitudes toward african more to explore chapter 22 other writers also explored the dark side of the human psyche.
in such dramas as desire under the elms 1924 playwright eugene oneill depicted characters driven by raw ungovernable sexual impulses.
oneill first made his mark with the emperor jones 1920 a popular broadway drama about a black dictator driven from power by his people.
appealing to americans fascination with haiti the play offered an ambiguous message its black protagonist was played not by the customary white actors made up in blackface but by african americans who won acclaim for their performances.
w e b du bois called it a splendid tragedy but others were dissatisfied with the plays primitivism one actor who played emperor jones altered the script to omit offensive racial epithets.
the white crowds who made the emperor jones a hit like those who flocked to harlems jazz clubs indulged a problematic fascination with primitive sexuality.
in a decade of conflict between traditional and modern worldviews many writers exposed what they saw as the hypocrisy of small town and rural life american voices p.
the most savage critic of conformity was sinclair lewis whose novel babbitt 1922 depicted the disillusionment of an ordinary small town salesman.
babbitt was widely denounced as un american elmer gantry 1927 a satire about a greedy evangelical minister on the make provoked even greater outrage.
but critics found lewiss work superb and in 1930 he became the first american to win the nobel prize for literature.
even more famous was f scott fitzgeralds the great gatsby 1925 which offered a scathing indictment of americans mindless pursuit of pleasure and material wealth.
from boom to bust spurred by rapid expansion during the war american business thrived in the 1920s.
corporations expanded more and more into overseas markets while at home a national consumer culture emphasized leisure and fun.
but some sectors of the economy notably agriculture never recovered from a sharp recession in the wake of world war i meanwhile close observers worried over the rapid economic growth and easy credit that fueled the roaring twenties.
their fears proved well founded the roar ended in the great depression.
the postwar economy immediately after world war i the united states experienced a series of economic shocks.
they began with rampant inflation as prices jumped by one third in cultural conflict bubble and bust 1919 1932 1919 alone.
then came a two year recession that raised unemployment to 10 percent.
finally the economy began to grow smoothly and more americans began to benefit.
between 1922 and 1929 national per capita income rose an impressive 24 percent.
large scale corporations continued to replace small business in many sectors of the economy.
by 1929 through successive waves of consolidation the two hundred largest businesses had come to control almost half of the countrys nonbanking corporate wealth.
the greatest number of mergers occurred in rising industries such as chemicals with dupont in the lead and electrical appliances general electric.
at the same time mergers between wall street banks enhanced new york citys position as the financial center of the nation and increasingly the world.
aided by washingtons dollar diplomats u s companies exercised growing global power.
seeking cheaper livestock giant american meat packers opened plants in argentina the united fruit company developed plantations in costa rica honduras and guatemala general electric set up production facilities in latin america asia and australia.
despite the boom the u s economy had areas of significant weakness throughout the 1920s.
agriculture which still employed one fourth of all american workers never fully recovered from the postwar recession.
once europes economy revived its farmers flooded world markets with grain and other farm products causing agricultural prices to fall.
other industries including coal and textiles languished for similar reasons.
as a consequence many rural americans shared little of the decades prosperity.
the bottom 40 percent of american families earned an average annual income of only 725 about 9 100 today.
many especially rural tenants and sharecroppers languished in poverty and malnutrition.
consumer culture in middle class homes americans of the 1920s sat down to a breakfast of kelloggs corn flakes before getting into ford model ts to work or shop at safeway.
on weekends they might head to the local theater to see the newest charlie chaplin film.
by 1929 electric refrigerators and vacuum cleaners came into use in affluent homes 40 percent of american households owned a radio.
the advertising industry reached new levels of ambition and sophistication entering what one historian calls the era of the aggressive hard sell the 1920s gave birth for example to fashion modeling and style consulting.
sell them their dreams one radio announcer urged advertisers in 1923.
people american voices urban writers describe small town america in the early twentieth century the united states was becoming an urban society.
by 1920 life outside the metropolis seemed sufficiently remarkable to warrant sociological investigation or at least city people thought so.
presented here are three views of rural and small town america all published during the 1920s.
though cities had become the wellspring of american intellectual life urban writers juxtaposed their own experiences with those of people they thought of as living in middletown u s a sinclair lewis main street in his novel main street 1920 sinclair lewis portrayed the fictional midwestern town of gopher prairie.
in the excerpts below lewiss narrator describes the reactions of young urban carol kennicott wife of the towns new doctor and bea sorenson a swedish american farm girl.
when carol had walked for thirty two minutes she had completely covered the town east and west north and south and she stood at the corner of main street and washington avenue and despaired.
main street with its two story brick shops its storyand a half wooden residences its muddy expanse from concrete walk to walk its huddle of fords and lumberwagons was too small to absorb her.
the broad straight unenticing gashes of the streets let in the grasping prairie on every side.
she realized the vastness and the emptiness of the land.
the skeleton iron windmill on the farm a few blocks away at the north end of main street was like the ribs of a dead cow.
she thought of the coming of the northern winter when the unprotected houses would crouch together in terror of storms galloping out of that wild waste.
they were so small and weak the little brown houses.
they were shelters for sparrows.
she wanted to run fleeing from the encroaching prairie demanding the security of a great city.
her dreams of creating a beautiful town were ludicrous.
oozing out from every drab wall she felt a forbidding spirit which she could never conquer.
she trailed down the street on one side back on the other glancing into the cross streets.
it was a private seeing main street tour.
she was within ten minutes beholding not only the heart of a place called gopher prairie but ten thousand towns from albany to san diego.
dyers drug store a corner building of regular and unreal blocks of artificial stone.
inside the store a greasy marble soda fountain with an electric lamp of red and green and curdled yellow mosaic shade.
pawed over heaps of toothbrushes and combs and packages of shaving soap.
shelves of soap cartons teething rings garden seeds and patent medicines in yellow packages nostrums for consumption for womens diseases notorious mixtures of opium and alcohol in the very shop to which her husband sent patients for the filling of prescriptions.
the train which brought carol to gopher prairie also brought miss bea sorenson.
miss bea was a stalwart corn colored laughing young woman and she was bored by farm work.
she desired the excitements of city life and the way to enjoy city life was she had decided to go get a yob as a hired girl in gopher prairie.
bea had never before been in a town larger than scandia crossing which has sixty seven inhabitants.
as she marched up the street she was meditating that it didnt hardly seem like it was possible there could be so many folks all in one place at the same time.
it would take years to get acquainted with them all.
and swell people too.
a fine big gentleman in a new pink shirt with a diamond and not no washed out blue denim working shirt.
a lovely lady in a longery dress but it must be an awful hard dress to wash.
and the stores.
a drug store with a soda fountain that was just huge awful long and all lovely marble.
and the soda spouts they were silver and they came right out of the bottom of the lamp stand.
behind the fountain there were glass shelves and bottles of new kinds of soft drinks that nobody ever heard of.
suppose a fella took you there.
anzia yezierska bread givers a child of jewish immigrants from eastern europe anzia yezierska grew up on the lower east side of new york city.
in her autobiographical novel bread givers 1925 yezierska described her arrival in the ohio town where she attended college.
before this new york was all of america to me.
but now i came to a town of quiet streets shaded with green trees.
no crowds no tenements.
no hurrying noise to beat the race of the hours.
only a leisured quietness whispered in the air peace.
each house had its own green grass in front its own free space all around and it faced the street with the calm security of being owned for generations and not rented by the month from a landlord.
in the early twilight it was like a picture out of fairyland to see people sitting on their porches lazily swinging in their hammocks or watering their own growing flowers.
so these are the real americans i thought thrilled by the lean straight bearing of the passers by.
they had none of that terrible fight for bread and rent that i always saw in the new york peoples eyes.
all the young people i had ever seen were shut up in factories.
but here were young girls and young men enjoying life free from the worry for a living.
the spick and span cleanliness of these people.
it smelled from them the soap and the bathing.
their fingernails so white and pink.
what a feast of happenings each day of college was to those other students.
societies dances letters from home packages of food midnight spreads and even birthday parties.
i never knew that there were people glad enough of life to celebrate the day they were born.
source from bread givers by anzia yezierska.
copyright 1970 by louise levitas henriksen.
reprinted by permission of persea books inc new york.
all rights reserved.
robert s lynd and helen merrell lynd locally are bought on time payment and a working man earning 35 00 a week frequently plans to use one weeks pay each month as payment for his car.
the automobile has apparently unsettled the habit of careful saving for some families.
ill go without food before ill see us give up the car said one woman emphatically.
many families feel that an automobile is justified as an agency holding the family group together.
but the fact that 348 boys and 382 girls in the three upper years of the high school placed use of the automobile fifth and fourth respectively in a list of twelve possible sources of disagreement between them and their parents suggests that this may be an increasing decentralizing agent.
if the automobile touches the rest of middletowns living at many points it has revolutionized its leisure.
making leisure time enjoyment a regularly expected part of every day and week rather than an occasional event.
the frequency of movie attendance of high school boys and girls is about equal business class families tend to go more often than do working class families and children of both groups attend more often without their parents than do all the individuals or combinations of family members put together.
it is probable that time formerly spent in lodges saloons and unions is now being spent in part at the movies at least occasionally with other members of the family.
like the automobile and radio the movies break up leisure time into an individual family or small group affair.
source excerpt from middletown a study in american culture by robert s lynd and helen m lynd.
copyright 1929 by harcourt inc and renewed 1957 by robert s and helen m lynd.
reprinted by permission of houghton mifflin harcourt publishing company.
all rights reserved.
middletown in 1929 sociologists robert s lynd and helen merrell lynd published middletown a study of life in a small midwestern city.
middletown was not a single community but a composite of several communities studied by the lynds.
the first real automobile appeared in middletown in 1900.
at the close of 1923 there were 6 221 passenger cars in the city one for every 6 1 persons or roughly two for every three families.
as at the turn of the century business class people began to feel apologetic if they did not have a telephone so ownership of an automobile has now reached the point of being an accepted essential of normal living.
according to an officer of a middletown automobile financing company 75 to 90 percent of the cars purchased questions for analysis 1 what attitudes toward the small town and big city does main street represent.
why do you think lewis includes views as different as carols and beas.
2 how does the urban experience of yezierskas narrator shape her reaction to life in an ohio town.
how might small town residents have reacted to her description of them as the real americans.
how might lewis have responded to yezierskas description.
3 how do the two novelists lewis and yezierska differ from the sociologists the lynds in the issues they emphasize and in their tone and point of view.
what features of small town life does each text emphasize.
part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 american companies abroad united fruit was one of the many american companies that found opportunities for investment in south america in the 1920s and that introduced tropical foods to the united states.
the company used elaborate and informative color advertisements to sell its products.
bananas were sufficiently exotic that the ads explained to consumers how to tell when bananas were ripe and how to store them never place them in the ice box.
john w hartman center duke university special collections library.
dont buy things to have things.
they buy hope hope of what your merchandise will do for them in practice participation in consumer culture was as contested as the eras politics.
it was no accident that white mobs in the tulsa race riot plundered radios and phonograph players from prosperous african american homes the message was that whites deserved such items and blacks did not.
but neither prosperity nor poverty was limited by race.
surrounded by exhortations to indulge in luxuries millions of working class americans barely squeaked by with wives and mothers often working to pay for basic necessities.
in times of crisis some families sold their furniture starting with pianos and phonographs and continuing if necessary to dining tables and beds.
in the los angeles suburb of south gate white working class men secured jobs in the steel and automobile industries but prices were high and families often found it difficult to make ends meet.
self help was the watchword as families bartered with neighbors and used their yards to raise vegetables rabbits and chickens.
the lure of consumer culture created friction.
wives resented husbands who spent all their discretionary cash at the ballpark.
generational conflicts emerged especially when wage earning children challenged the expectation that their pay should go all to mother in st louis a czech born woman was exasperated when her son and daughter stopped contributing to rent and food and pooled their wages to buy a car.
in los angeles one fifteen year old girl spent her summer earning 2 a day at a local factory.
planning to enroll in business school she spent 75 on dressy shoes and a black coat with a red fox collar her brother reported that mom is angry at her for squandering so much money chapter review from new orleans jazz appealed to elite and popular audiences alike.
black artists and intellectuals of the harlem renaissance including many inspired by panafrican ideas explored the complexities of african american life.
business thrived and a booming consumer culture exemplified by the radio the automobile and c h a p t e r hollywood films created new forms of leisure influencing daily life and challenging older sexual norms.
however the risky speculation and easy credit of the 1920s undermined the foundations of the economy.
after the 1929 crash these factors along with a range of interconnected global conditions plunged the united states into the great depression.
r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events adkins v childrens hospital p 707 welfare capitalism p 708 red scare p 708 palmer raids p 709 sheppard towner federal maternity and infancy act p 709 womens international league for peace and freedom p 710 associated state p 710 teapot dome p 710 dollar diplomacy p 711 prohibition p 712 american civil liberties union p 713 key people scopes trial p 713 national origins act p 713 ku klux klan p 714 harlem renaissance p 718 jazz p 718 universal negro improvement association p 719 pan africanism p 720 lost generation p 720 consumer credit p 725 hollywood p 726 flapper p 726 soft power p 726 a mitchell palmer p 708 nicola sacco and bartolomeo vanzetti p 709 henry ford p 714 leo frank p 714 zora neale hurston p 718 louis armstrong p 719 marcus garvey p 719 adolph zukor p 726 review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter 23 managing the great depression forging the new deal 1929 1939 table 23 1 american banks and bank failures 1920 1940 year total number of banks total assets billion bank failures 30 909 53 1 25 568 72 3 22 242 70 1 2 294 14 771 51 4 4 004 15 913 55 9 15 076 79 7 source historical statistics of the united states colonial times to 1970 washington dc u s government printing office 1975 1019 1038 1039.
agriculture and manufacturing roosevelt and the new deal congress next turned to agriculture and manufacturing.
in those sectors a seeming paradox was evident the depression led to overproduction in agriculture and underproduction in manufacturing.
reversing both problematic trends was critical.
the agricultural adjustment act aaa began direct governmental regulation of the farm economy for the first time.
to solve the problem of overproduction which lowered prices the aaa provided cash subsidies to farmers who cut production of seven major commodities wheat cotton corn hogs rice tobacco and dairy products.
policymakers hoped that farm prices would rise as production fell.
by dumping cash in farmers hands the aaa briefly stabilized the farm economy.
but the acts benefits were not evenly distributed.
subsidies went primarily to the owners of large and medium sized farms who often cut production by reducing the amount of land they rented to tenants and sharecroppers.
in mississippi one plantation owner received 26 000 from the federal government while thousands of black sharecroppers living in the same county received only a few dollars in relief payments.
in manufacturing the new deal attacked declining production with the national industrial recovery act.
a new government agency the national recovery administration nra set up separate self governing private associations in six hundred industries.
each industry ranging from large corporations producing coal cotton textiles and steel to small businesses making pet food and costume jewelry regulated itself by agreeing on prices and production quotas.
because large companies usually ran these associations the nra solidified their power at the expense of smaller enterprises and consumer interests.
the aaa and the nra were designed to rescue the nations productive industries and stabilize the economy.
the measures had positive effects in some regions but most historians agree that overall they did little to end the depression.
unemployment relief the roosevelt administration next addressed the massive unemployment problem.
by 1933 local governments and private charities had exhausted their resources and were looking to washington for assistance.
although roosevelt wanted to avoid a budget deficit he asked congress to provide relief for millions of unemployed americans.
in may congress established the federal emergency relief administration fera.
directed by harry hopkins a hard driving social worker from new york the fera provided federal funds for state relief programs.
roosevelt and hopkins had strong reservations about the dole the nickname for government welfare payments.
as hopkins put it i dont think anybody can go year after year month after month accepting relief without affecting his character to support the traditional values of individualism the new deal put people to work.
early in 1933 congress established the public works administration pwa a construction program and several months later roosevelt created the civil works administration cwa and named hopkins its head.
within thirty days hopkins had put 2 6 million men and women to work at its peak in 1934 the cwa provided jobs for 4 million americans repairing bridges building highways and constructing public buildings.
a stopgap measure to get the country through the winter of 1933 1934 the cwa lapsed in the spring when republican opposition compelled new dealers to abandon it.
a longer term program the civilian conservation corps ccc mobilized american voices ordinary people respond to the new deal franklin roosevelts fireside chats and his relief programs prompted thousands of ordinary americans to write directly to the president and his wife eleanor.
taken together their letters offer a vivid portrait of depression era america that includes popular support for and opposition to the new deal.
mrs m h a mrs m h a worked in the county court house in eureka california.
june 14 1934 dear mrs roosevelt i know you are overburdened with requests for help and if my plea cannot be recognized ill understand it is because you have so many others all of them worthy.
my husband and i are a young couple of very simple almost poor families.
we married eight years ago on the proverbial shoe string but with a wealth of love.
we managed to build our home and furnish it comfortably.
then came the depression.
my work has continued and my salary alone has just been sufficient to make our monthly payments on the house and keep our bills paid.
but with the exception of two and one half months work with the u s coast and geodetic survey under the c w a.
civil works administration my husband has not had work since august 1932 my salary could continue to keep us going but i am to have a baby.
i can get a leave of absence from my job for a year.
but cant you wont you do something so my husband can have a job at least during that year.
as i said before if it were only ourselves or if there were something we could do about it we would never ask for help.
we have always stood on our own feet and been proud and happy.
but you are a mother and youll understand this crisis.
very sincerely yours mrs m h a unsigned letter this unsigned letter came from a factory worker in paris texas.
november 23 1936 dear president n ow that we have had a land slide in the election of 1936 and done just what was best for our country.
i do believe you will strain a point to help the ones who helped you mostly that is the working class of people i am not smart or i would be in a different line of work better up in ever way yet i will know you are the one only president that ever helped a working class of people.
i am a white man american age 47 married wife 2children in high school am a finishing room foreman i mean a working foreman am in a furniture factory here in paris texas where thaire is 175 to 200 working when the nra national recovery administration came in i was proud to see my fellow workmen rec 30 per hour in place of 8 cents to 20 cents per hour.
i cant see for my life president why a man must toil work his life out in such factories 10 long hours ever day except sunday for a small sum of 15 cents to 35 cents per hour pay the high cost of honest deason living expences.
please see if something can be done to help this one class of working people the factories are a man killer not venelated or kept up just a bunch of republickins grafters 90 100 of them please help us some way i pray to god for relief.
i am a christian.
and a truthful man have not told you wrong am for you to the end.
not signed r a r a was sixty nine years old and an architect and builder in lincoln nebraska.
may 19 34 dear mrs roosevelt in the presidents inaugral address delivered from the capitol steps the afternoon of his inaugration he made mention of the forgotten man and i with thousands of others am wondering if the folk who was borned here in america some 60 or 70 years a go are this forgotten man the president had in mind if we are this forgotten man then we are still forgotten.
we who have tried to be diligent in our support of this most wonderful nation of ours boath social and other wise we in our younger days tried to do our duty without complaining.
and now a great calamity has come upon us and seemingly no cause of our own it has swept away what little savings we had accumulated and we are left in a condition that is imposible for us to correct for two very prominent reasons if no more.
first we have grown to what is termed old age this befalls every man.
we are confronted on every hand with the young generation taking our places this of corse is what we have looked forward to in training our children.
but with the extra ordinary crisese which left us helpless and placed us in the position that our fathers did not have to contend with.
we have been honorable citizens all along our journey calamity and old age has forced its self upon us please do not send us to the poor farm but instead allow us the small pension of 40 00 per month.
mrs roosevelt i am asking a personal favor of you as it seems to be the only means through which i may be able to reach the president some evening very soon as you and mr roosevelt are having dinner together privately will you ask him to read this.
and we american citizens will ever remember your kindness.
yours very truly.
r a m a m a was a woman who held a low level salaried position in a corporation.
jan 18 1937 dear mrs roosevelt i.
was simply astounded to think that anyone could be nitwit enough to wish to be included in the so called social security act if they could possibly avoid it.
call it by any name you wish it in my opinion and that of many people i know it is nothing but downright stealing.
i am not an economic royalist just an ordinary white collar worker at 1600 per year about 23 600 in 2009.
please show this to the president and ask him to remember the wishes of the forgotten man that is the one who dared to vote against him.
we expect to be tramped on but we do wish the stepping would be a little less hard.
security at the price of freedom is never desired by intelligent people.
m a m a h m a h was a widow who ran a small farm in columbus indiana.
december 14 1937 mrs roosevelt i suppose from your point of view the work relief old age pensions slum clearance and all the rest seems like a perfect remedy for all the ills of this country but i would like for you to see the results as the other half see them.
we have always had a shiftless never do well class of people whose one and only aim in life is to live without work.
i have been rubbing elbows with this class for nearly sixty years and have tried to help some of the most promising and have seen others try to help them but it cant be done.
we cannot help those who will not try to help themselves and if they do try a square deal is all they need.
let each one paddle their own canoe or sink.
i live alone on a farm and have not raised any crops for the last two years as there was no help to be had.
i am feeding the stock and have been cutting the wood to keep my home fires burning.
there are several reliefers around here now who have been kicked off relief but they refuse to work unless they can get relief hours and wages but they are so worthless no one can afford to hire them.
they are just a fair sample of the class of people on whom so much of our hard earned tax money is being squandered and on whom so much sympathy is being wasted.
you people who have plenty of this worlds goods and whose money comes easy have no idea of the heart breaking toil and self denial which is the lot of the working people who are trying to make an honest living and then to have to shoulder all these unjust burdens seems like the last straw.
no one should have the right to vote theirself a living at the expense of the tax payers.
m a h sources in order robert s mcelvaine down out in the great depression chapel hill university of north carolina press 1983 54 55 gerald markowitz and david rosner eds slaves of the depression workers letters about life on the job ithaca ny cornell university press 1987 21 robert s mcelvaine down out in the great depression chapel hill university of north carolina press 1983 97 147 143 questions for analysis 1 how do you explain the personal almost intimate tone of these letters to the roosevelts.
2 how have specific new deal programs helped or hurt the authors of these letters.
3 what are the basic values of the authors.
do the values of those who support the new deal differ from the values of those who oppose it.
part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 selling the nra in chinatown to mobilize support for its program the national recovery administration nra distributed millions of posters to businesses and families urging them to display its symbol the blue eagle in shops factories and homes.
here constance king and mae chinn of the chinese ymca affix a poster and a chinese translation to a shop in san francisco that is complying with the nra codes.
bettmann corbis.
250 000 young men to do reforestation and conservation work.
over the course of the 1930s the ccc boys built thousands of bridges roads trails and other structures in state and national parks bolstering the national infrastructure map 23 2.
housing crisis millions of americans also faced the devastating prospect of losing their homes.
the economic expansion of the 1920s had produced the largest inflationary housing bubble in american history to that point a scenario in which home prices rose wildly fueled by excessive borrowing.
in the early 1930s as home prices collapsed and banks closed home owners were dragged down with them.
more than half a million americans lost their homes between 1930 and 1932 and in cities such as cleveland and indianapolis half of all home mortgage holders faced possible foreclosure.
in response congress created the home owners loan corporation holc to refinance home mortgages.
in just two years the holc helped more than a million americans retain their homes.
the federal housing act of 1934 would extend this program under a new agency the federal housing administration fha.
together the holc the fha chapter 25.
when an exhausted congress recessed in june 1933 at the end of the hundred days it had enacted roosevelts agenda banking reform recovery programs for agriculture and industry public works and unemployment relief.
few presidents had won the passage of so many measures in so short a time.
the new federal agencies were far from perfect and had their critics on both the radical left and the conservative right.
but the vigorous actions taken by roosevelt and congress had halted the downward economic spiral of the hoover years stabilized the financial sector and sent a message of hope from the nations political leaders.
for all that however the new deal did not break the grip of the depression.
the new deal under attack as new dealers waited anxiously for the economy to revive roosevelt turned his attention to the reform of wall street where reckless speculation and overleveraged buying of stocks had helped trigger the financial panic of 1929 in 1934 congress established the securities and exchange commission sec to regulate the stock market.
the commission had broad powers to determine how stocks and bonds were sold to the public to set rules for margin credit transactions and to prevent stock sales by those with inside information about corporate plans.
the banking act of 1935 part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 authorized the president to appoint a new board of governors of the federal reserve system placing control of interest rates and other money market policies in a federal agency rather than in the hands of private bankers.
critics on the right such measures exposed the new deal to attack from economic conservatives also known as the political right.
a man of wealth roosevelt saw himself as the savior of american capitalism declaring simply to preserve we had to reform many bankers and business executives disagreed.
to them fdr became that man a traitor to his class.
in 1934 republican business leaders joined with conservative democrats in the liberty league to fight what they called the reckless spending and socialist reforms of the new deal.
herbert hoover condemned the nra as a state controlled or state directed social or economic system that declared the former president was tyranny not liberalism the national association of compare and manufacturers nam was even contrast more important than the liberty how did critics on the right league in opposing the new deal and left represent differas the nams influence stretched ent kinds of challenges to far into the post world war ii roosevelt and the new decades.
sparked by a new generdeal.
ation of business leaders who believed that a publicity campaign was needed to serve the purposes of business salvation the nam produced radio programs motion pictures billboards and direct mail in the late 1930s.
in response to what many conservatives perceived as roosevelts antibusiness policies the nam promoted free enterprise and unfettered capitalism.
after world war ii the nam emerged as a staunch critic of liberalism and forged alliances with influential conservative politicians such as barry goldwater and ronald reagan.
for its part the supreme court repudiated several cornerstones of the early new deal.
in may 1935 in schechter v united states the court unanimously ruled the national industrial recovery act unconstitutional because it delegated congresss lawmaking power to the executive branch and extended federal authority to intrastate in contrast to interstate commerce.
roosevelt protested but watched helplessly as the court struck down more new deal legislation the agricultural adjustment act the railroad retirement act and a debt relief law known as the frazier lemke act.
critics on the populist left if business leaders and the supreme court thought that the new deal had gone too far other americans believed it had not gone far enough.
among these were public figures who in the tradition of american populism sought to place government on the side of ordinary citizens against father coughlin one of the foremost critics of the new deal was the radio priest father charles e coughlin.
coughlin believed that roosevelt and the democratic party had not gone far enough in their efforts to ensure the social welfare of all citizens.
for instance he and his organization the national union for social justice urged roosevelt to nationalize the banks.
coughlin whose radio audience reached 30 million at the height of his popularity was one of the most recognizable religious leaders in the country.
unfortunately his remarks in the early 1930s were often laced with anti semitism anti jewish sentiment.
bettmann corbis.
chapter 23 managing the great depression forging the new deal 1929 1939 reshaped the use of natural resources especially water in the united states.
immigration enacted in 1924 during the 1920s their numbers swelled to about 50 000 many of whom worked as laborers on large corporate owned farms.
as the depression cut wages filipino immigration slowed to a trickle and it was virtually cut off by the tydings mcduffie act of 1934 the act granted independence to the philippines which since 1898 had been an american colony classified all filipinos in the united states as aliens and restricted immigration from the philippines to fifty people per year.
the dust bowl among the most hard pressed citizens during the depression were farmers fleeing the dust bowl of the great plains.
between 1930 and 1941 a severe drought afflicted the semiarid states of oklahoma texas new mexico colorado arkansas and kansas.
farmers in these areas had stripped the land of its native vegetation which destroyed the delicate ecology of the plains.
to grow wheat and other crops they had identify causes pushed agriculture beyond the why did the natural envinatural limits of the soil making ronment receive so much their land vulnerable in times of attention under new deal drought to wind erosion of the programs and with what topsoil map 23 4.
when the result.
winds came huge clouds of thick dust rolled over the land turning the day into night.
this ecological disaster prompted a mass exodus.
at least 350 000 okies so called whether or not they were from oklahoma loaded their belongings into cars and trucks and headed to california.
john steinbecks novel the grapes of wrath 1939 immortalized them and new deal photographer dorothea langes haunting images of california migrant camps made them the public face of the depressions human toll.
reshaping the environment attention to natural resources was a dominant theme of the new deal and the shaping of the landscape was among its most visible legacies.
franklin roosevelt and interior secretary harold ickes saw themselves as conservationists in the tradition of fdrs cousin theodore roosevelt.
in an era before environmentalism fdr practiced what he called the gospel of conservation the president cared primarily about making the land and other natural resources such as trees and water better serve human needs.
national policy stressed scientific land management and ecological balance.
preserving wildlife and wilderness was of secondary importance.
under roosevelt the federal government both responded to environmental crises and map 23 4 the dust bowl and federal building projects in the west 1930 1941 n w e co lu m b i a r.
s r a u s weather bureau scientist called the drought of the 1930s the worst in the climatological history of the country conditions were especially severe in the southern plains where farming on marginal land threatened the environment even before the drought struck.
as farm families migrated west on u s route 66 the federal government began a series of massive building projects that provided flood control irrigation electric power and transportation facilities to residents of the states of the far west.
canada co lo do ra pacific ocean area of dust bowl area of severe wind erosion area of dust storm may 1933 margin of semiarid west 20 annual rainfall each dot represents 5 000 acres in marginal cropland 1924 1929 major migration route gulf of mexico mexico 500 miles 500 kilometers part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 u s department of agriculture lent their expertise to establishing sound farming practices in the plains.
the human face of the great depression migrant mother by dorothea lange is one of the most famous documentary photographs of the 1930s.
on assignment for the resettlement administration lange spent only ten minutes in a pea pickers camp in nipomo california.
there she captured this image though not the name of the woman whose despair and resignation she so powerfully recorded.
in the 1970s the woman was identified as florence thompson a native cherokee from oklahoma who disagreed with langes recollections of the circumstances of the taking of the photograph.
thompson and her family had left nipomo however by the time the publication of this image sparked a large relief effort directed at the camps migrant workers.
library of congress.
roosevelt and ickes believed that poor land practices made for poor people.
under their direction government agencies tackled the dust bowls human causes.
agents from the newly created soil conservation service for instance taught farmers to prevent soil erosion by tilling hillsides along the contours of the land.
they also encouraged and sometimes paid farmers to take certain commercial crops out of production and plant soil preserving grasses instead.
one of the u s forest services most widely publicized programs was the shelterbelts the planting of 220 million trees running north along the 99th meridian from abilene texas to the canadian border.
planted as a windbreak the trees also prevented soil erosion.
a variety of government agencies from the ccc to the tennessee valley authority the most extensive new deal environmental undertaking was the tennessee valley authority tva which roosevelt saw as the first step in modernizing the south.
funded by congress in 1933 the tva integrated flood control reforestation electricity generation and agricultural and industrial development.
the dams and their hydroelectric plants provided cheap electric power for homes and factories as well as ample recreational opportunities for the valleys residents.
the massive project won praise around the world map 23 5.
the tva was an integral part of the roosevelt administrations effort to keep farmers on the land by enhancing the quality of rural life.
the rural electrification administration rea established in 1935 was also central to that goal.
fewer than one tenth of the nations 6 8 million farms had electricity.
the rea addressed this problem by promoting nonprofit farm cooperatives that offered loans to farmers to install power lines.
by 1940 40 percent of the nations farms had electricity a decade later 90 percent did.
electricity brought relief from the drudgery and isolation of farm life.
electric irons vacuum cleaners and washing machines eased womens burdens and radios brightened the lives of the entire family.
along with the automobile and the movies electricity broke down the barriers between urban and rural life.
grand coulee as the nations least populated but fastest growing region the west benefitted enormously from the new deals attention to the environment.
with the largest number of state and federal parks in the country the west gained countless trails bridges cabins and other recreational facilities laying the groundwork for the post world war ii expansion of western tourism.
on the colorado river boulder dam later renamed hoover dam was completed in 1935 with public works administration funds the dam generated power for the regions growing cities such as las vegas los angeles and phoenix.
the largest project in the west however took shape in an obscure corner of washington state where the pwa and the bureau of reclamation built the grand coulee dam on the columbia river.
when it was completed in 1941 grand coulee was the largest electricity producing structure in the world and its 150 mile lake provided irrigation for the states major crops apples cherries pears potatoes and wheat.
inspired by the dam and the modernizing spirit of the managing the great depression forging the new deal 1929 1939 cairo paducah duck r.
s knoxville e tennessee g oak ridge nashville m t berland r.
c um asheville watts bar florence.
chattanooga r huntsville decatur te nn e alabama u south carolina atlanta n w l georgia mississippi birmingham b ee muscle shoals tupelo north carolina e memphis ss virginia.
h r r inc ton cl hols bristol bowling green r arkansas west virginia kentucky sippi the tennessee valley authority was one of the new deals most far reaching environmental projects.
between 1933 and 1952 the tva built twenty dams and improved five others taming the flood prone tennessee river and its main tributaries.
the cheap hydroelectric power generated by the dams brought electricity to industries as well as hundreds of thousands of area residents and artificial lakes provided extensive recreational facilities.
widely praised at the time the tva came under attack in the 1970s for its practice of strip mining and the pollution caused by its power plants and chemical factories.
illinois missouri mi ss is the tennessee valley authority 1933 1952 id map 23 5 r chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
smoot hawley tariff 1931 1937 scottsboro case trials and appeals bonus army marches on washington d c franklin delano roosevelt elected president fdrs inaugural address and first fireside chats emergency banking act begins the hundred days fdr takes u s off the gold standard civilian conservation corps ccc created agricultural adjustment act aaa national industrial recovery act nira tennessee valley authority tva established townsend clubs promote old age revolving pension plan securities and exchange commission sec created southern tenant farmers union stfu founded indian reorganization act senator huey long promotes share our wealth society father charles coughlin founds national union for social justice supreme court voids nira in schechter v united states national labor relations wagner act social security act creates old age pension system works progress administration wpa created rural electrification administration rea established supreme court voids agricultural adjustment act congress of industrial organizations cio formed landslide reelection of fdr marks peak of new deal power fdrs supreme court plan fails 1937 1938 roosevelt recession raises unemployment key turning points identify two critical turning points between 1934 and 1937 when the new deal faced specific challenges.
the world at war 1937 1945 c h a p t e r the road to war the rise of fascism war approaches the attack on pearl harbor organizing for victory financing the war mobilizing the american fighting force workers and the war effort politics in wartime life on the home front for the duration migration and the wartime city japanese removal fighting and winning the war wartime aims and tensions the war in europe the war in the pacific the atomic bomb and the end of the war the toll of the war t he second world war was the identify the big idea defining international event of the how did world war ii transform twentieth century.
battles raged the united states domestically and across six of the worlds seven continents change its relationship with the and all of its oceans.
it killed more than world.
50 million people and wounded hundreds of millions more.
when it was over the industrial economies and much of the infrastructure of europe and east asia lay in ruins.
waged with both technologically advanced weapons and massive armies the war involved every industrialized power in europe north america and asia as well as dozens of other nations many of them colonies of the industrialized countries.
the military conflict began on two continents in asia with japans 1937 invasion of china across the sea of japan and in europe with the 1939 blitzkrieg lightning war conducted by germany in poland.
it ended in 1945 after american planes dropped two atomic bombs the product of stunning yet ominous scientific breakthroughs on the japanese cities of hiroshima and nagasaki.
in between these demonstrations of technological prowess and devastating power huge armies confronted and destroyed one another in the fields of france the forests and steppes of russia the river valleys of china the volcanic islands of the pacific and the deserts of north africa.
armed defense of democratic existence is now being gallantly waged in four continents president franklin delano roosevelt told the nation in january 1941 after remaining neutral for several years the united states would commit to that armed defense both fdr and british prime minister winston churchill came to see the war as a defense of democratic values from the threat posed by german italian and japanese fascism.
for them the brutal conflict was the good war when the grim reality of the jewish holocaust came to light u s participation in the war seemed even more just.
but as much as it represented a struggle between democracy and fascism it was also inescapably a war to maintain british french and dutch control of colonies in africa india the middle east and southeast asia.
by 1945 democracy in the industrialized world had been preserved and a new euro american alliance had taken hold the future of the vast european colonial empires however remained unresolved.
on the u s domestic front world war ii ended the great depression hastened profound social changes and expanded the scope and authority of the federal government.
racial politics and gender roles shifted under the weight of wartime migration and labor shortages.
the pace of urbanization increased as millions of americans uprooted themselves and moved hundreds or thousands of miles to join the military or to take a war job.
a stronger more robust federal government the product of a long hard fought war would remain in place to fight an even longer more expensive and potentially more dangerous cold war in the ensuing years.
these developments which accelerated transformations already under way would have repercussions far into the postwar decades.
black mechanics in tuskegee alabama world war ii was a total war fought on seven continents by hundreds of millions of people and massive national armies.
though a late arrival to the conflict the united states played a critical role in defeating the axis powers.
here african american soldiers in tuskegee alabama make engine adjustments for a training flight.
jeff ethell color archives.
part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 the road to war the great depression disrupted economic life around the world and brought the collapse of traditional political institutions.
in response an antidemocratic movement known as fascism which had originated in italy during the 1920s developed in germany spain and japan.
by the mid 1930s these nations had instituted authoritarian militaristic governments led by powerful dictators benito mussolini in italy adolf hitler in nazi germany francisco franco in spain and after 1940 hideki tojo in japan.
as early as 1936 president roosevelt warned that other peoples had sold their heritage of freedom and urged americans to work for the survival of democracy both at home and abroad.
constrained by strong isolationist sentiment by 1940 fdr was cautiously leading the nation toward war against the fascist powers.
the rise of fascism world war ii had its roots in the settlement of world war i germany struggled under the harsh terms of the treaty of versailles and japan and italy had their desire for overseas empires thwarted by the treaty makers.
faced with the expansive ambitions and deep resentments of those countries the league of nations the collective security system established at versailles proved unable to maintain the existing international order.
fascism as instituted in germany by hitler combined a centralized authoritarian state a doctrine of aryan racial supremacy and intense nationalism in a call for the spiritual reawakening of the german people.
fascist leaders worldwide disparaged parliamentary government independent labor movements and individual rights.
they opposed both the economic collectivism of the soviet union where in theory the state managed the economy to ensure social equality and the competitive capitalist economies of the united states and western europe.
fascist movements arose around the world in the 1930s but managed to achieve power in only a handful of countries.
those countries were at the center of global war making in the 1930s.
japan and italy the first challenge came from japan.
to become an industrial power japan required raw materials and overseas maridentify causes kets.
like the western european what motivated japanese powers and the united states italian and german expanbefore it japan embraced an sionism.
expansionary foreign policy in pursuit of colonial possessions and overseas influence.
in 1931 its troops occupied manchuria an industrialized province in northern china and in 1937 the japanese launched a full scale invasion of china.
in both instances the league of nations condemned japans actions but did nothing to stop them.
japans defiance of the league encouraged a fascist leader half a world away italys benito mussolini who had come to power in 1922 il duce the leader as mussolini was known had long denounced the versailles treaty which denied italys colonial claims in africa and the middle east after world war i as in japan the italian fascists desired overseas colonies for raw materials markets and national prestige.
in 1935 mussolini invaded ethiopia one of the few remaining independent countries in africa.
ethiopian emperor haile selassie appealed to the league of nations but the leagues verbal condemnation and limited sanctions its only real leverage did not stop italy from taking control of ethiopia in 1936 hitlers germany germany however posed the gravest threat to the existing world order.
huge world war i reparation payments economic depression fear of communism labor unrest and rising unemployment fueled the ascent of adolf hitler and his national socialist nazi party.
when hitler became chancellor of germany in 1933 the reichstag the german legislature granted him dictatorial powers to deal with the economic crisis.
hitler promptly outlawed other political parties arrested many of his political rivals and declared himself fhrer leader.
under nazi control the reichstag invested all legislative power in hitlers hands.
hitlers goal was nothing short of european domination and world power as he had made clear in his 1925 book mein kampf my struggle.
the book outlined his plans to overturn the territorial settlements of the versailles treaty unite germans living throughout central europe in a great german fatherland and annex large areas of eastern europe.
the inferior races who lived in these regions jews gypsies and slavs would be removed or subordinated to the german master race these territories would provide germany with what hitler called lebensraum a new region of settlement and farming and a source of natural resources.
a virulent anti semite hitler had long blamed jews for germanys problems.
once in power he began a sustained and brutal persecution of jews which expanded into a campaign of extermination in the early 1940s.
in 1935 hitler began to rearm germany in violation of the versailles treaty.
no one stopped him.
in chapter 24 and private employers to end anti mexican discrimination.
mexican american workers themselves often in congress of industrial organizations cio unions such as the cannery workers and shipyard workers also led efforts to enforce the fepcs equal employment mandate.
exploitation persisted however.
to meet wartime labor demands the u s government brought tens of thousands of mexican contract laborers into the united states under the bracero program.
paid little and treated poorly the braceros who took their name from the spanish brazo arm highlighted the oppressive conditions of farm labor in the united states.
after the war the federal government continued to participate in labor exploitation bringing hundreds of thousands of mexicans into the country to perform low wage agricultural work.
future mexican american civil rights leaders dolores huerta and cesar chavez began to fight this labor system in the 1940s.
organized labor during the war unions solidified their position as the most powerful national voice for american workers and extended gains made during the new deal.
by 1945 almost 15 million workers belonged to a union up from 9 million in 1939 representatives of the major unions made a no strike pledge for the duration of the war and roosevelt rewarded them by creating the national war labor board nwlb composed of representatives of labor management and the public.
the nwlb established wages hours and working conditions and had the authority to seize manufacturing plants that did not comply.
the boards maintenance of membership policy which encouraged workers in major defense industries to join unions also helped organized labor grow.
despite these arrangements unions endured government constraints and faced a sometimes hostile congress.
frustrated with limits on wage increases and the no strike pledge in 1943 more than half a million united mine workers went out on strike demanding a higher wage increase than that recommended by the nwlb.
congress responded by passing over roosevelts veto the smith connally labor act of 1943 which allowed the president to prohibit strikes in defense industries and forbade political contributions by unions.
congressional hostility would continue to hamper the union movement in the postwar years.
although organized labor would emerge from world war ii more powerful than at any time in u s history its business and corporate opponents too would emerge from the war with new strength.
the world at war 1937 1945 politics in wartime in his 1944 state of the union address fdr called for a second bill of rights one that would guarantee all americans access to education and jobs adequate food and clothing and decent housing and medical care.
like his four freedoms speech this was a call to extend the new deal by broadening the rights to individual security and welfare guaranteed by the government.
the answer to his call however would have to wait for the wars conclusion.
congress created new government benefits only for military veterans known as gis short for government issue.
the servicemens readjustment act 1944 an extraordinarily influential program popularly known as the gi bill of rights provided education job training medical care pensions and mortgage loans for men and women who had served in the armed forces chapter 21.
as blacks and whites competed for jobs and housing racial conflicts broke out in more than a hundred cities in 1943 detroit saw the worst violence.
in june 1943 a riot incited by southern born whites and polish americans against african americans left thirty four people dead and hundreds injured.
racial conflict struck the west as well.
in los angeles male hispanic teenagers formed pachuco youth gangs.
many dressed in zoot suits broad brimmed felt hats thigh length jackets with wide lapels and padded shoulders pegged trousers and clunky shoes.
pachucas young women favored long coats huarache sandals and pompadour hairdos.
other working class teenagers in los angeles and elsewhere took up the zoot suit style to underline their rejection of middle class values.
to many adults the zoot suit symbolized juvenile delinquency.
rumors circulating in los angeles in june 1943 that a pachuco gang had beaten an anglo white sailor set off a fourday riot in which hundreds of anglo servicemen roamed through mexican american neighborhoods and attacked zoot suiters taking special pleasure in slashing their pegged pants.
in a stinging display of bias los angeles police officers arrested only mexican american youth and the city council passed an ordinance outlawing the wearing of the zoot suit.
gay and lesbian communities wartime migration to urban centers created new opportunities for gay men and women to establish communities.
religious thinking like a historian mobilizing the home front the u s office of war information owi promoted everything from food rationing to car pooling during world war ii and the u s treasury encouraged millions of americans to buy war bonds.
more than 20 million victory gardens were planted by ordinary americans.
by 1944 they were producing more than 40 percent of all vegetables grown in the united states.
through these and other measures those on the home front were encouraged to see themselves as part of the war effort.
1 u s government advertisement from the minneapolis star journal 1943 of us after our boy takes over on the farm.
for after ten years we get four dollars back for every three we have invested 3 poster from the u s office of price administration 1943 john w hartman center for sales advertising and marketing history duke university.
2 copy from war advertising council u s.
treasury department advertisement 1943 farmer well theres something we really want now more than anything else.
and i guess everybody does.
its victory in this war.
we had started saving for a new milking machine and a deep well pump that we will be needing in a few years.
were still going to have that milking machine and that pump and a lot of other new improvements after the war.
when our son comes home from the fighting front hell help us pick them out.
and well have the cash to pay for them.
with the money we are saving now in war bonds.
and we are going to hang on to as many war bonds as possible to take care united states office of price administration northwestern university library.
4 h club exhibiting victory garden posters c 1943.
4 h club boys and girls id 0016623 special collections research center north carolina state university libraries raleigh north carolina.
5 oral histories about life during the war.
tessie hickam wilson a young woman from oklahoma.
it was a hard time but we felt like we were doing our part and all the people we knew were doing their part.
we had rationing.
sugar coffee gasoline and meat were some of the items that were hard to come by.
we had ration books every so often and we had to use them sparingly.
we bought savings bonds to help in the war effort.
we also had radios and record players and when we could afford it we went to the movies.
and even though there were hard times we did what we could in the war effort and i will always be glad i was part of it.
write v mail.
i had brother brothers in law in the service.
we wed write v mail to them.
it was called v mail.
victory mail.
we couldnt put their address on because they were moved around a lot and we didnt want the enemy to know.
there were a lot of secrets.
they would say zip your lip was the was the word of the days then.
zip your lip because we didnt want the enemy to get information.
sources 2 digital collections duke university libraries 4 national park service rosie the riveter women working during world war ii and the library of congress veterans history project.
virginia j bondra a student and clothing worker from ohio.
the only newsreel footage we saw was in the theaters when we went to a movie.
and we used to bring scrap metal or cans and wed get in the movies free.
they needed scrap metal and they the usa needed scrap fat.
my mother used to scrap fat you know in a can.
shed save it and wed bring it to a certain place.
sugar was rationed.
each member of the family would get one pound of sugar a week.
and i always had time to bake because we had sugar.
different things were rationed.
we couldnt buy nylons because it was needed.
for parachutes.
so wed wed my older sisters would paint their legs with a certain makeup that came out in place of nylons.
it was makeup for legs.
they painted a eyebrow pencil line down the back of their leg so it would look like real nylons.
and we would analyzing the evidence 1 examine sources 1 2 and 3 who created these sources and what does this suggest about the context and purpose of these documents.
can you tell from their content who the intended audience was.
2 study the photograph source 4.
who is depicted and how were they posed.
what does this suggest about the victory garden program as well as war efforts on the home front more broadly.
3 how do the oral histories in source 5 add to your understanding of home front involvement in the war effort.
does their testimony force you to question the other documents in any way and if so how.
putting it all together analyze some of the ways the u s government encouraged ordinary citizens to participate in the war effort and evaluate the objectives and results of these efforts.
part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 zoot suit youth in los angeles during a four day riot in june 1943 servicemen in los angeles attacked young latino men wearing distinctive zoot suits which were widely viewed as emblems of gang membership and a delinquent youth culture.
the police response was to arrest scores of zoot suiters.
here a group of handcuffed young latino men is about to board a los angeles county sheriffs bus to make a court appearance.
note the wide legged pants that taper at the ankle a hallmark of the zoot suit.
the so called zoot suit riot was evidence of cracks in wartime unity on the home front.
library of congress.
morality and social conventions against gays and lesbians kept the majority of them silent and their sexuality hidden.
during the war however cities such as new york san francisco los angeles chicago and even kansas city buffalo and dallas developed vibrant gay neighborhoods sustained in part by a sudden influx of migrants and the relatively open wartime atmosphere.
these communities became centers of the gay rights movement of the 1960s and 1970s chapter 24 the world at war 1937 1945 alaska soviet union mongolia n manchuria e w beijing.
korea s japan.
tokyo china pac i f i c o c e a n india taiwan.
hong kong bataan jan apr.
1942 french thailand indochina.
bangkok burma new guinea so lo m java gilbert is.
coral sea australia coral sea may 7 8 1942 ind i a n o c e an pearl harbor dec 7 1941 marshall is.
caroline is.
malaya sumatra borneo singapore falls feb 15 1942 guam hawaii wake i mariana is.
philippine is.
midway june 3 6 1942 guadalcanal aug 7 1942 feb 7 1943 area under japanese control 1942 allied powers neutral nations allied response major battle 1 000 miles 500 1 000 kilometers map 24 4 world war ii in the pacific 1941 1942 after the attacks on pearl harbor in december 1941 the japanese rapidly extended their domination in the pacific.
the japanese flag soon flew as far east as the marshall and gilbert islands and as far south as the solomon islands and parts of new guinea.
japan also controlled the philippines much of southeast asia and parts of china including hong kong.
by mid 1942 american naval victories at the coral sea and midway stopped further japanese expansion.
sea chapters main ideas.
1 world war ii has popularly been called the good 3 how did world war ii affect the federal govern 2 overall what effects positive or negative did thematic understanding review the war do you agree with this assessment.
why do you think it earned that nickname.
world war ii have on social change in the united states particularly among women and minority groups.
making connections events listed under america in the world on the thematic timeline on page 671 how did world war ii change the relationship between the united states and the rest of the world in the first half of the twentieth century.
recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.
for the united states the period between world war i 1914 1918 and world war ii 1937 1945 was a prolonged series of conflicts and crises both domestically and internationally.
what connections can be drawn between world war i the great depression and world war ii.
did this long conflict draw the united states and europe closer together or drive them further apart.
how did american attitudes toward involvement in european affairs change over this period.
across time and place more to explore ments regulating of the economy and its taxing power.
visual evidence compare the photographs of soldiers and those contributing to the war effort.
how do these images help us understand a major event like world war ii from different perspectives.
how would their proximity to battle affect peoples experience of war.
start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter review ask yourself why this chapters 27 and 28 part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 mass consumption and the middle class thematic understanding more than ever the postwar american economy was driven by mass consumption and the accompanying process of suburbanization.
rising wages increasing access to higher education and the availability of suburban home ownership raised living standards and allowed more americans than ever to afford consumer goods.
suburbanization transformed the nations cities and the sunbelt led the nation in population growth.
but the new prosperity had mixed results.
cities declined and new racial and ethnic ghettos formed.
suburbanization and mass consumption raised concerns that the nations rivers streams air and open land were being damaged and an environmental movement arose in response.
and prosperity itself proved short lived.
by the 1970s deindustrialization had eroded much of the nations once prosperous industrial base.
a defining characteristic of the postwar decades was the growth of the american middle class.
that growth was predicated on numerous demographic changes.
home ownership increased as did college enrollments.
women worked more outside the home and spurred a new feminism.
children enjoyed more purchasing power and a teen culture arose on television in popular music and in film.
the family became politicized too and by the late 1970s liberals and conservatives were divided over how best to address the nations family life.
all these developments are discussed in chapter 25 soviet union was an oriental despotism and that communism was merely the fig leaf justifying soviet aggression.
a year after writing this cable dubbed the long telegram he published an influential foreign affairs article arguing that the wests only recourse was to meet the soviets with unalterable counter force at every point where they show signs of encroaching upon the interests of a peaceful and stable world kennan called for long term patient but firm and vigilant containment of russian expansive tendencies containment the key word came to define americas evolving strategic stance toward the soviet union.
to see a longer excerpt of the long telegram along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
kennan believed that the soviet system was inherently unstable and would eventually collapse.
containment would work he reasoned as long as the united states and its allies opposed soviet expansion in all parts of the world.
kennans attentive readers included stalin himself who quickly obtained a copy of the classified long telegram.
the soviet leader saw the united states as an imperialist aggressor determined to replace great britain as the worlds dominant capitalist power.
just as kennan thought that the soviet system was despotic and unsustainable stalin believed that the west suffered from its own fatal weaknesses.
neither side completely understood or trusted the other and each projected its worst fears onto the other.
in fact britains influence in the world was declining.
exhausted by the war facing enormous budget deficits and a collapsing economy at home and confronted with a determined independence movement in india led by mohandas gandhi and growing nationalist movements throughout its empire britain was waning as a global power.
the reins of world leadership are fast slipping from britains competent but now very weak hands read a u s state department report.
these reins will be picked up either by the united states or by russia the united states was wedded to the notion dating to the wilson administration that communism and capitalism were incompatible on the world stage.
with britain faltering american officials saw little choice but to fill its shoes.
it did not take long for the reality of britains decline to resonate across the atlantic.
in february 1947 london informed truman that it could no longer afford to support the anticommunists in the greek civil war.
truman worried that a communist victory in greece would lead to soviet domination of the eastern cold war america 1945 1963 mediterranean and embolden communist parties in france and italy.
in response the president announced what became known as the truman doctrine.
in a speech on march 12 he asserted an american responsibility to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures to that end truman proposed largescale assistance for greece and turkey then involved in a dispute with the soviet union over the dardanelles a strait connecting the aegean sea and the sea of marmara.
if we falter in our leadership we may endanger the peace of the world truman declared thinking like a historian p 810.
despite the open endedness of this military commitment congress quickly approved trumans request for 300 million in aid to greece and 100 million for turkey.
soviet expansionism was part of a larger story.
europe was sliding into economic chaos.
already devastated by the war in 1947 the continent suffered the worst winter in memory.
people were starving credit was nonexistent wages were stagnant and the consumer market had collapsed.
for both humanitarian and practical reasons trumans advisors believed something had to be done.
a global depression might ensue if the european economy the largest foreign market for american goods did not recover.
worse unemployed and dispirited western europeans might fill the ranks of the communist party threatening political stability and the legitimacy of the united states.
secretary of state george c marshall came up with a remarkable proposal a massive infusion of american capital to rebuild the european economy.
speaking at the harvard university commencement in june 1947 marshall urged the nations of europe to work out a comprehensive recovery program based on u s aid.
this pledge of financial assistance required congressional approval but the plan ran into opposition in washington.
republicans castigated the marshall plan as a huge international wpa but in the midst of the congressional stalemate on february 25 1948 stalin supported a communist led coup in czechoslovakia.
congress rallied and voted overwhelmingly in 1948 to approve the marshall plan.
over the next four years the united states contributed nearly 13 billion to a highly successful recovery effort that benefitted both western place events europe and the united states.
in context european industrial production why did the united states enact the marshall plan increased by 64 percent and the and how did the program appeal of communist parties illustrate americas new waned in the west.
markets for role in the world.
american goods grew stronger thinking like a historian the global cold war until 1950 the u s policy of containment was confined to economic measures such as financial assistance to greece and turkey and the marshall plan and focused on europe.
that changed between 1950 and 1954 in those years containment became militarized and its scope was expanded to include asia and latin america.
what had begun as a limited policy to contain soviet influence in war torn europe had by the mid 1950s become a global campaign against communism and social revolution.
1 president harry s truman address before joint session of congress march 12 1947 known as the truman doctrine this speech outlined trumans plan to give large scale assistance to greece and turkey as part of a broader anticommunist policy.
to ensure the peaceful development of nations free from coercion the united states has taken a leading part in establishing the united nations.
the united nations is designed to make possible lasting freedom and independence for all its members.
we shall not realize our objectives however unless we are willing to help free peoples to maintain their free institutions and their national integrity against aggressive movements that seek to impose upon them totalitarian regimes.
at the present moment in world history nearly every nation must choose between alternative ways of life.
the choice is too often not a free one.
one way of life is based upon the will of the majority and is distinguished by free institutions representative government free elections guarantees of individual liberty freedom of speech and religion and freedom from political oppression.
the second way of life is based upon the will of a minority forcibly imposed upon the majority.
it relies upon terror and oppression a controlled press and radio fixed elections and the suppression of personal freedoms.
i believe that it must be the policy of the united states to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.
i believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own destinies in their own way.
i believe that our help should be primarily through economic and financial aid which is essential to economic stability and orderly political processes.
2 syngman rhee president of south korea criticizing u s policy in 1950 the korean war 1950 1953 represented the militarization of the truman doctrine.
a few days ago one american friend said that if the u s gave weapons to south korea she feared that south korea would invade north korea.
this is a useless worry of some americans who do not know south korea.
our present war is not a cold war but a real shooting war.
our troops will take all possible counter measures.
in south korea the u s has one foot in south korea and one foot outside so that in case of an unfavorable situation it could pull out of the country.
i daresay that if the u s wants to aid our country it should not be only lipservice.
3 secretary of state dean achesons testimony before the senate armed forces and foreign relations committee 1951 the attack on korea was.
a challenge to the whole system of collective security not only in the far east but everywhere in the world.
it was a threat to all nations newly arrived at independence.
this was a test which would decide whether our collective security system would survive or would crumble.
it would determine whether other nations would be intimidated by this show of force.
as a people we condemn aggression of any kind.
we reject appeasement of any kind.
if we stood with our arms folded while korea was swallowed up it would have meant abandoning our principles and it would have meant the defeat of the collective security system on which our own safety ultimately depends.
4 shigeru yoshida prime minister of japan speech before the japanese diet parliament july 14 1950 it is heartening.
that america and so many members of the united nations have gone to the rescue of an invaded country regardless of the heavy sacrifices involved.
in case a war breaks out on an extensive scale how would japans security be preserved since we are disarmed.
this has been hotly discussed.
however the measures taken by the united nations have done much to stabilize our peoples minds.
5 john foster dulles secretary of state 1953 1959 june 30 1954 radio and television address to the american people.
in 1951 jacobo arbenz was elected president of guatemala.
arbenz pursued reform policies that threatened large landholders including the united fruit company.
in 1954 the united states cia engineered a coup that overthrew arbenz and replaced him with carlos castillo armas a colonel in the guatemalan military.
tonight i should like to speak with you about guatemala.
it is the scene of dramatic events.
they expose the evil purpose of the kremlin to destroy the inter american system and they test the ability of the american states to maintain the peaceful integrity of the hemisphere.
for several years international communism has been probing here and there for nesting places in the americas.
it finally chose guatemala as a spot which it could turn into an official base from which to breed subversion which would extend to other american republics.
this intrusion of soviet despotism was of course a direct challenge to our monroe doctrine the first and most fundamental of our foreign policies.
6 guillermo toriello guatemalan foreign minister speech to delegates at the tenth inter american conference of the organization of american states in caracas venezuela march 5 1954 what is the real and effective reason for describing our government as communist.
from what sources comes the accusation that we threaten continental solidarity and security.
why do they united states wish to intervene in guatemala.
the answers are simple and evident.
the plan of national liberation being carried out with firmness by my government has necessarily affected the privileges of the foreign enterprises that are impeding the progress and the economic development of the country.
with construction of publically owned ports and docks we are putting an end to the monopoly of the united fruit company.
they wanted to find a ready expedient to maintain the economic dependence of the american republics and suppress the legitimate desires of their peoples cataloguing as communism every manifestation of nationalism or economic independence any desire for social progress any intellectual curiosity and any interest in progressive and liberal reforms.
7 herblock cartoon from the washington post february 11 1962 many latin american countries were beset by a wide gap between a small wealthy elite and the mass of ordinary much poorer citizens.
american officials worried that this made social revolution an attractive alternative for those at the bottom.
a 1962 herblock cartoon by the herb block foundation.
sources 1 the avalon project at avalon law yale edu 2 reinhard drifte japans involvement in the korean war in the korean war in history ed.
james cotton and ian neary atlantic highlands nj humanities press international 1989 43 3 glenn d paige the korean decision new york the free press 1968 175 176 4 drifte 122 5 jonathan l fried et al eds guatemala in rebellion unfinished history new york grove press 1983 78 6 stephen c schlesinger and stephen kinzer bitter fruit the untold story of the american coup in guatemala garden city ny doubleday 1982 143 144.
analyzing the evidence 1 in source 1 truman presents the choice facing the world in stark terms totalitarianism or democracy.
why would he frame matters in this way in 1947.
how did truman anticipate the militarization of american foreign policy.
2 analyze the audience purpose and point of view presented in the documents dealing with the war in korea sources 2 4.
what does acheson mean by collective security.
why is yoshida thankful for the un intervention.
what can you infer about u s involvement in world affairs during the postwar period based on these documents.
3 in document 6 how does toriello characterize accusations that the elected guatemalan government is communist.
what are his accusations of the united states.
4 how does source 7 express one of the obstacles to democracy in developing nations.
putting it all together using these documents and based on what you have learned in class and in this chapter 26 and social security and he increased the minimum wage from 75 cents an hour to 1.
like truman eisenhower accepted some government responsibility for the economic security of individuals part of a broad consensus in american politics in these years.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 america under eisenhower the global power realities that had called forth containment guided eisenhowers foreign policy.
new developments however altered the tone of the cold war.
stalins death in march 1953 precipitated an intraparty struggle in the soviet union that lasted until 1956 when nikita khrushchev emerged as stalins successor.
khrushchev soon startled communists around the world by denouncing stalin and detailing his crimes and blunders.
he also surprised many americans by calling for peaceful coexistence with the west and by dealing more flexibly with dissent in the communist world.
but the new soviet leader had his limits and when hungarians rose up in 1956 to demand independence from moscow khrushchev crushed the incipient revolution.
with no end to the cold war in sight eisenhower focused on limiting the cost of containment.
the president hoped to economize by relying on a nuclear arsenal and deemphasizing expensive conventional forces.
under this new look defense policy the eisenhower administration stepped up production of the hydrogen bomb and developed long range bombing capabilities.
the soviets however matched the united states weapon for weapon.
by 1958 both nations had intercontinental ballistic missiles.
when an american nuclear submarine launched an atomic tipped polaris missile in 1960 soviet engineers raced to produce an equivalent weapon.
this arms race was another critical feature of the cold war.
american officials believed the best deterrent to soviet aggression was the threat of an all out nuclear response by the united states which was dubbed massive retaliation by secretary of state dulles.
to see a longer excerpt of the dulles document along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
although confident in the international arena eisenhower started out as a novice in domestic affairs.
doing his best to set a less confrontational tone after the rancorous truman years he was reluctant to speak out against joe mccarthy and he was not a leader on civil rights.
democrats meanwhile maintained a strong presence in congress but proved weak in presidential elections in the 1950s.
in the two presidential contests of the decade 1952 and 1956 eisenhower defeated the admired but politically ineffectual liberal adlai stevenson.
in the 1952 election stevenson was hampered by the unpopularity of the truman administration.
the deadlocked korean war and a series of scandals that republicans dubbed the mess in washington combined to give the war hero general an easy victory.
in 1956 ike won an even more impressive victory over stevenson an eloquent and sophisticated spokesman for liberalism but no match for eisenhowers popularity with the public.
during eisenhowers presidency new political forces on both the right and the left had begun to stir.
but they had not yet fully transformed the party system itself.
particularly at the national level democrats and republicans seemed in broad agreement about the realities of the cold war and the demands of a modern industrial economy and welfare state.
indeed respected commentators in the 1950s declared the end of ideology and wondered if the great political clashes that had wracked the 1930s were gone forever.
below the apparent calm of national party politics however lay profound differences among americans over the direction of the nation.
those differences were most pronounced regarding the civil rights of african americans.
but a host of other issues had begun to emerge as controversial subjects that would soon starkly divide the country and in the 1960s bring an end to the brief and fragile cold war consensus.
containment in the postcolonial world as the cold war took shape the world scene was changing at a furious pace.
new nations were emerging across asia africa and the middle east created in the wake of powerful anticolonial movements whose origins dated to before world war ii.
between 1947 and 1962 the british french dutch and belgian empires all but disintegrated in a momentous collapse of european global reach.
fdr had favored the idea of national self determination often to the fury of his british and french allies.
he expected emerging democracies to be new partners in an american led freemarket world system.
but colonial revolts produced many independent or socialist minded regimes in the so called third world as well.
third world was a term that came into usage after world war ii to describe developing or ex colonial nations in asia africa latin america and the middle east that were not aligned with the western capitalist countries led by the united states or the socialist states of eastern europe led by the soviet union.
the truman and eisenhower administrations often treated third world countries as pawns of the soviet union to be opposed at all costs.
chapter 30.
in 1954 the cia also engineered a coup in guatemala against the democratically elected president jacobo arbenz guzmn who had seized land owned by the american owned united fruit company.
arbenz offered to pay united fruit the declared value of the land but the company rejected the offer and turned to the u s government.
eisenhower specifically approved those cia efforts and expanded the agencys mandate from gathering intelligence to intervening in the affairs of sovereign states.
vietnam but when covert operations and coups failed or proved impractical the american approach to emerging nations could entangle the united states in deeper more intractable conflicts.
one example was already unfolding on a distant stage in a small country unknown to most americans vietnam.
in august 1945 at the close of world war ii the japanese occupiers of vietnam surrendered to china in the north and britain in the south.
the vietminh the nationalist movement that had led the resistance against the japanese and the french prior to 1940 seized control in the north.
but their leader ho chi minh was a communist and this single fact outweighed american and british commitment to self determination.
when france moved to restore its control over the country the united states and britain sided with their european ally.
president truman rejected hos plea to support the vietnamese struggle for nationhood and france rejected hos offer of a negotiated independence.
shortly after france returned in late 1946 the vietminh resumed their war of national liberation.
eisenhower picked up where identify causes truman left off.
if the french how did the cold war failed eisenhower argued all between the united states non communist governments in and the soviet union the region would fall like domiaffect disparate regions noes.
this so called domino such as the middle east theory which represented an and southeast asia.
extension of the containment doctrine guided u s policy in southeast asia for the next twenty years.
the united states eventually provided most of the financing for the french war but money was not enough to defeat the determined vietminh who were fighting for the liberation of their country.
after a fifty six day siege in early 1954 the french were defeated at the huge fortress of dien bien phu.
the result was the 1954 geneva accords which partitioned vietnam temporarily at the 17th parallel and called for elections within two years to unify the strife torn nation.
the united states rejected the geneva accords and set about undermining them.
with the help of the cia a pro american government took power in south vietnam in june 1954 ngo dinh diem an anticommunist catholic who had been residing in the united states returned to vietnam as premier.
the next year in a rigged election diem became president of an independent south vietnam.
facing certain defeat by the popular ho chi minh diem called off the scheduled reunification elections.
as the last french soldiers left in march 1956 the eisenhower administration propped up diem with an average of 200 million a year in aid and a contingent of 675 american military advisors.
this support was just the beginning.
the middle east if vietnam was still of minor concern the same could not be said of the middle east an area rich in oil and political complexity.
the most volatile area was palestine populated by arabs but also historically the ancient land of israel and coveted by the zionist movement as a jewish national homeland.
after world war ii many survivors of the nazi extermination camps resettled in palestine which was still controlled by britain under a world war i mandate.
on november 29 1947 the un general assembly voted to partition palestine between jewish and arab sectors.
when the british mandate ended in 1948 zionist leaders proclaimed the state of israel.
a coalition of arab nations known as the arab league invaded but israel survived.
many palestinians fled or were driven from their homes during the fighting.
the arab defeat left these people permanently stranded in refugee camps.
president truman recognized the new state immediately which won him crucial support from jewish voters in the 1948 election but alienated the arab world.
southeast of palestine egypt began to assert its presence in the region.
having gained independence from britain several decades earlier egypt remained a monarchy until 1952 when gamal abdel nasser led a military coup that established a constitutional republic.
chapters main ideas.
1 what factors led to the cold war.
2 what was the domestic impact of the anticommu nist crusade of the late 1940s and 1950s.
3 why did the united states become involved in vietnam.
review the events listed under politics and power and identity on the thematic timelines on pages 671 and 803 radicalism played a significant role in american history between 1890 and 1945 what radical politics took root in the united states during this time and how did the government the business community and different social groups respond to that radicalism.
thematic understanding chapters by answering these questions.
time and place how was americas cold war foreign policy an extension of principles and policies from earlier eras and in what ways was it a break with those traditions.
was the cold war inevitable.
why or why not.
1 across visual evidence look at the map of the military industrial complex map 25 3 on page 817 more to explore chapter 26 estimated 180 000 people fled cuba for the united states.
the cuban refugee community grew so quickly that it turned miami into a cosmopolitan bilingual city almost overnight.
unlike other urban migrants miamis cubans quickly prospered in large part because they had arrived with money and middle class skills.
spanish speaking immigrants whether mexican puerto rican or cuban created huge barrios in major american cities where bilingualism flourished the catholic church shaped religious life and families sought to join the economic mainstream.
though distinct from one another these spanish speaking communities remained largely segregated from white or anglo neighborhoods and suburbs as well as from african american districts.
summary we have explored how at the same time it became mired in the cold war the united states entered an unparalleled era of prosperity in which a new middle class came into being.
indeed the cold war was one of the engines of prosperity.
the postwar economy was chapter 27 walking into freedom land the civil rights movement 1941 1973 american could work for city or state government and the best jobs in the private sector were reserved for whites.
black workers labored in the back cleaning cooking stocking shelves and loading trucks for the lowest wages.
rural african americans labored in a sharecropping system that kept them stuck in poverty often prevented them from obtaining an education and offered virtually no avenue of escape.
politically less than 20 percent of eligible black voters were allowed to vote the result of poll taxes literacy tests intimidation fraud and the white primary elections in which only whites could vote.
this near total disenfranchisement gave whites power disproportionate to their numbers black people were one third of the residents of mississippi south carolina and georgia but had virtually no political voice in those states.
in the north racial segregation in everyday life was less acute but equally tangible.
northern segregation took the form of a spatial system in which whites increasingly lived in suburbs or on the outskirts of cities while african americans were concentrated in declining downtown neighborhoods.
the result was what many called ghettos all black districts characterized by high rents low wages and inadequate city services.
employment discrimination and lack of adequate training left many african americans without any means of support.
few jobs other than the most menial were open to african americans journalists accountants engineers and other highly educated men from all black colleges and universities often labored as railroad porters or cooks because jobs commensurate with their skills remained for whites only.
these conditions produced a self perpetuating cycle that kept far too many black citizens trapped on the social margins.
to be certain african americans found greater freedom in the north and west than in the south.
they could vote participate in politics and at least after the early 1960s enjoy equal access to public accommodations.
but we err in thinking that racial segregation was only a southern problem or that poverty and racial discrimination were not also deeply entrenched in the north and west.
in northern cities such as detroit chicago and philadelphia for instance white home owners in the 1950s used various tactics from police harassment to thrown bricks burning crosses bombs and mob violence to keep african americans from living near them.
moreover as we saw in chapters by answering these questions.
why is the decade of the 1960s often referred to as the second reconstruction.
think broadly about the century between the end of the civil war in 1865 and the passage of the voting rights act of 1965 what are the key turning points in african american history in that long period.
across time and place more to explore examine the photograph of a confrontation at north little rock high school on page 881 how does this photograph reveal the role that the media played in the civil rights struggle.
can you find similar evidence in other photographs from this chapter.
visual evidence start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter 28 uncivil wars liberal crisis and conservative rebirth 1961 1972 use of drugs especially marijuana and the hallucinogen popularly known as lsd or acid which was celebrated in popular music in the second half of the 1960s.
for a brief time adherents of the counterculture believed that a new age was dawning.
in 1967 the worlds first human be in drew 20 000 people to golden gate park in san francisco.
that summer called the summer of love san franciscos haightashbury new yorks east village chicagos uptown neighborhoods and the sunset strip in los angeles swelled with young dropouts drifters and teenage runaways whom the media dubbed flower children although most young people had little interest in allout revolt media coverage made it seem as though all of american youth was rejecting the nations social and cultural norms.
days of rage 1968 1972 by 1968 a sense of crisis gripped the country.
riots in the cities campus unrest and a nose thumbing counterculture escalated into a general youth rebellion that seemed on the verge of tearing america apart.
calling 1968 the watershed year for a generation sds founder tom hayden wrote that it started with legendary events then raised hopes only to end by immersing innocence in tragedy it was perhaps the most shocking year in all the postwar decades.
violent clashes both in vietnam and back home in the united states combined with political assassinations to produce a palpable sense of despair and hopelessness america compared p 920.
war abroad tragedy at home president johnson had gambled in 1965 on a quick victory in vietnam before the political cost of escalation came due.
but there was no quick victory.
north vietnamese and vietcong forces fought on the south vietnamese government repeatedly collapsed and american casualties mounted.
by early 1968 the death rate of u s troops had reached several hundred a week.
johnson and his generals kept insisting that there was light at the end of the tunnel facts on the ground showed otherwise.
the tet offensive on january 30 1968 the vietcong unleashed a massive well coordinated assault in south vietnam.
timed to coincide with tet the vietnamese new year the offensive struck thirty six provincial capitals and five of the trace change six major cities including saigon over time where the vietcong nearly over what changed between ran the u s embassy.
in strictly 1965 and 1968 and how military terms the tet offensive did these developments was a failure with very heavy affect national political vietcong losses.
but psychologi life.
cally the effect was devastating.
television brought into american homes shocking live images the american embassy under siege and the saigon police chief placing a pistol to the head of a vietcong suspect and executing him.
the tet offensive made a mockery of official pronouncements that the united states was winning the war.
how could an enemy on the run manage such a large scale complex and coordinated attack.
just before tet a gallup poll found that 56 percent of americans considered themselves hawks supporters of the war while only 28 percent identified with the doves war opponents.
three months later doves outnumbered hawks 42 to 41 percent.
without embracing the peace movement many americans simply concluded that the war was unwinnable.
the tet offensive undermined johnson and discredited his war policies.
when the 1968 presidential primary season got under way in march antiwar senators eugene mccarthy of minnesota and robert kennedy of new york jfks brother challenged johnson for the democratic nomination.
discouraged perhaps even physically exhausted on march 31 johnson stunned the nation by announcing that he would not seek reelection.
political assassinations americans had barely adjusted to the news that a sitting president would not stand for reelection when on april 4 james earl ray shot and killed martin luther king jr in memphis.
riots erupted in more than a hundred cities.
the worst of them in baltimore chicago and washington d c left dozens dead and hundreds of millions of dollars in property damaged or destroyed.
the violence on the streets of saigon had found an eerie parallel on the streets of the united states.
one city that did not erupt was indianapolis.
there robert kennedy in town campaigning in the indiana primary gave a quiet somber speech to the black community on the night of kings assassination.
americans could continue to move toward greater polarization kennedy said black people amongst blacks white amongst whites or we can replace that violence.
with an effort to understand compassion and love kennedy sympathized with african america c o m pa r e d the global protests of 1968 nineteen sixty eight was a year of youthful protest political unrest and violence across the globe.
the year of massive antiwar protests at the democratic national convention in chicago as well as the assassinations of martin luther king jr and robert kennedy saw equal or greater turmoil around the world.
half of italys universities were occupied a massive student strike in france turned into a violent confrontation with police prodemocracy students in mexico city led huge protests that drew police gunfire and protests and street battles with police took place in prague berlin tokyo rome and london.
ren bourrigaud french student my most vivid memory of may 68.
the new found ability for everyone to speak to speak of anything with anyone.
in that month of talking during may you learnt more than in the whole of your five years of studying.
source ronald fraser 1968 a student generation in revolt new york pantheon books 1988 9 the two thousand words manifesto june 27 1968 prague czechoslovakia throughout the spring and summer of 1968 the government of czechoslovakia under new communist leadership pursued reforms pushed by students and other protesters.
in august the soviet union invaded and put an end to the new openness.
this spring a great opportunity was given to us once again as it was at the end of the war world war ii.
again we have the chance to take into our own hands our common cause which for working purposes we will call socialism and give it a form more appropriate to our once good reputation and to the fairly good opinion we used to have of ourselves.
sergio aguayo it was in a symbolic way the clash of a new mexico and an old mexico.
antonio azuela you have a middle class with eyes closed and a group of students saying this was not a democracy.
and this is not working.
marcela fernandez de violante and so we were together hundred and hundreds and hundreds.
we had these big big meetings at the campus crowded crowded.
and people singing que vivan los estudiantes.
ta ri ra ra ra ra.
marcela fernandez de violante we were very young very naive.
but for the first time you had this notion that this country was going to be changed by the power of our convictions.
miguel breseda you would get in a bus and give a speech and inform the people.
because newspaper wouldnt publish anything.
and people would give you money they would congratulate you and they would say we are with you young people.
source produced by radio diaries radiodiaries org and originally broadcast on nprs all things considered.
to hear the entire documentary visit radiodiaries org.
used by permission of radio diaries.
source jaromr navrtil the prague spring 1968 a national security archive documents reader budapest central european university press 1998 181 interview with participants in 1968 protests in mexico city during the summer of 1968 hundreds of thousands of students protested against mexicos authoritarian national government and brutal police repression.
americans outrage at whites but he begged them not to strike back in retribution.
impromptu and heartfelt kennedys speech was a plea to follow kings nonviolent example even as the nation descended into greater violence.
questions for analysis 1 why did free speech figure so prominently in the protests of the 1960s.
2 what do all of these activists seem to be struggling for or against.
how do their struggles seem similar to or different from those occurring simultaneously in the united states.
but two months later having emerged as the frontrunner for the democratic presidential nomination kennedy too would be gone.
on june 5 as he was celebrating his victory in the california primary over eugene mccarthy kennedy was shot dead by a young chapter 28 uncivil wars liberal crisis and conservative rebirth 1961 1972 sought dtente a lessening of tensions with the soviet union and a new openness with china.
in a series of meetings between 1970 and 1972 nixon and soviet premier leonid brezhnev resolved tensions over cuba and berlin and signed the first strategic arms limitation treaty salt i the latter a symbolic step toward ending the cold war arms race.
heavily influenced by his national security advisor the harvard professor henry kissinger nixon believed that he could break the cold war impasse that had kept the united states from productive dialogue with the soviet union.
then in 1972 nixon visited china becoming the first sitting u s president to do so.
in a televised weeklong trip the president pledged better relations with china and declared that the two nations one capitalist the other communist could peacefully coexist.
this was the man who had risen to prominence in the 1950s by railing against the democrats for losing china and by hounding communists and fellow travelers.
indeed the presidents impeccable anticommunist credentials gave him the political cover to travel to beijing.
he remarked genially to mao those on the right can do what those on the left only talk about praised for his efforts to lessen cold war tensions nixon also had tactical objectives in mind.
he hoped that by befriending both the soviet union and china he could play one against the other and strike a better deal over vietnam at the ongoing peace talks in paris.
his second strategy however would prove less praiseworthy and cost more lives.
exit america in april 1972 in an attempt to strengthen his negotiating position nixon ordered b 52 bombing raids against north vietnam.
a month later he approved the mining of north vietnamese ports something johnson had never dared to do.
the north vietnamese were not isolated however supplies from china and the soviet union continued and the vietcong fought on.
with the 1972 presidential election approaching nixon sent kissinger back to the paris peace talks which had been initiated under johnson.
in a key concession kissinger accepted the presence of north vietnamese troops in south vietnam.
north vietnam then agreed to an interim arrangement whereby the south vietnamese government in saigon would stay in power while a special commission arranged a final settlement.
with kissingers announcement that peace is at hand nixon got the election lift he wanted but the agreement was then sabotaged by general nguyen van thieu the south vietnamese president.
so nixon in one final spasm of bloodletting unleashed the twoweek christmas bombing the most intense of the entire war.
on january 27 1973 the two sides signed the paris peace accords.
nixon hoped that with massive u s aid the thieu regime might survive.
but congress was in revolt.
it refused appropriations for bombing cambodia after august 15 1973 and gradually cut back aid to south vietnam.
in march 1975 north vietnamese forces launched a final offensive and on april 30 vietnam was reunited.
saigon the south vietnamese capital was renamed ho chi minh city after the founding father of the communist regime.
the collapse of south vietnam in 1975 produced a powerful and tragic historical irony an outcome little different from what would likely have resulted from the unification vote in 1954 chapters main ideas.
1 how do you explain the liberal resurgence in the first half of the 1960s.
2 what were the main elements of johnsons great society.
3 how did the debates over civil liberties particularly with respect to supreme court decisions under chief justice earl warren influence political life in the 1960s and 1970s.
making connections war.
how did the antiwar movement represent a break with cold war assumptions.
thematic understanding look at the events listed under america in the world on the thematic timeline on page 803 american global leadership is a major theme of part 8 how did the global role of the united states shift in the 1960s.
recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapter 29 the search for order in an era of limits 1973 1980 march for affirmative action following the supreme courts 1978 bakke decision americans grew even more divided over the policy of affirmative action.
for many people such as african americans and latinos affirmative action promised that groups who faced historical discrimination would have equal opportunity in jobs and education.
for many whites affirmative action looked like reverse discrimination and they fought its implementation.
ap wide world photos.
of discrimination.
first advanced by the kennedy administration in 1961 affirmative action received a boost under president lyndon johnson whose labor department fashioned a series of plans in the late 1960s to encourage government contractors to recruit underrepresented racial minorities.
women were added under the last of these plans when pressure from the womens movement highlighted the problem of sex discrimination.
by the early 1970s affirmative action had been refined by court rulings that identified acceptable procedures hiring and enrollment goals special recruitment and training programs and setasides specially reserved slots for both racial minority groups and women.
affirmative action however did not please many whites who felt that the deck was being stacked against them.
much of the dissent came from conservative groups that had opposed civil rights all along.
they charged affirmative action advocates with reverse discrimination legal challenges abounded as employees students and university applicants went to court to object to these new procedures.
some liberal groups sought a middle position.
in a widely publicized 1972 letter jewish organizations seared by the memory of quotas that once kept jewish students out of elite colleges came out against all racial quotas but nonetheless endorsed rectifying the imbalances resulting from past discrimination a major shift in affirmative action policy came in 1978 allan bakke a white man sued the university of california at davis medical school for rejecting him in favor trace change of less qualified minority group over time candidates.
headlines across the how did affirmative action country sparked anti affirmative evolve between 1961 and action protest marches on college 1978.
campuses and vigorous discussion on television and radio and in the white house.
ultimately the supreme court rejected the medical schools quota system which set aside 16 of 100 places for disadvantaged students.
the court ordered bakke admitted but indicated that a more flexible affirmative action plan in which race could be considered along with other factors would still pass constitutional muster.
bakke v university of california thus upheld affirmative action but by rejecting a quota system also called it into question.
future court rulings and state referenda in the 1990s and 2000s would further limit part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 the scope of affirmative action.
in particular california voters passed proposition 209 in 1996 prohibiting public institutions from using affirmative action to increase diversity in employment and education.
the womens movement and gay rights unlike the civil rights movement whose signal achievements came in the 1960s the womens and gay rights movements flourished in the 1970s.
with three influential wings radical liberal and third world the womens movement inspired both grassroots activism and legislative action across the nation.
for their part gay activists had further to go they needed to convince explain americans that same sex relaconsequences tionships were natural and that how did the idea of civil rights expand during the gay men and lesbians deserved 1970s.
the same protection of the law as all other citizens.
neither movement achieved all of its aims in this era but each laid a strong foundation for the future.
womens activism in the first half of the 1970s the womens liberation movement reached its historic peak.
taking a dizzying array of forms from lobbying legislatures to marching in the streets and establishing all female collectives womens liberation produced activism on the scale of the earlier black led civil rights movement.
womens centers as well as womenrun child care facilities began to spring up in cities and towns.
a feminist art and poetry movement flourished.
women challenged the admissions policies of all male colleges and universities opening such prestigious universities as yale and columbia and nearly bringing an end to male only institutions of higher education.
female scholars began to transform higher education by studying womens history by increasing the number of women on college and university faculties and by founding womens studies programs.
much of womens liberation activism focused on the female body.
inspired by the boston collective that first published our bodies ourselves a groundbreaking book on womens health the womens health movement founded dozens of medical clinics encouraged women to become physicians and educated millions of women about their bodies.
to reform antiabortion laws activists pushed for remedies in more than thirty state legislatures.
womens liberationists founded the antirape movement established rape crisis centers around the nation and lobbied state legislatures and congress to reform rape laws.
many of these endeavors and movements began as shoestring operations in living rooms and kitchens our bodies ourselves was first published as a 35 cent mimeographed booklet and the antirape movement began in small consciousness raising groups that met in churches and community centers.
by the end of the decade however all of these causes had national organizations and touched the lives of millions of american women.
equal rights amendment buoyed by this flourishing of activism the womens movement renewed the fight for an equal rights amendment era to the constitution.
first introduced in 1923 the era stated in its entirety equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or any state on the basis of sex vocal congressional women such as patsy mink democrat hawaii bella abzug phyllis schlafly phyllis schlafly leader of the organization stop era talks with reporters during a rally at the illinois state capitol on march 4 1975 at a time when the state legislature was considering whether to ratify the equal rights amendment.
schlafly described herself as a housewife and called her strenuous political career a hobby.
bettmann corbis.
chapter 29 the search for order in an era of limits 1973 1980 blue collar blues unemployment in the 1970s affected blue collar workers most with many factories closing and new construction at a standstill.
in many cities joblessness among construction workers stood between 20 and 30 percent.
in this 1976 photo an unemployed carpenter in cleveland ohio files for unemployment insurance.
the bluecollar blues caused by long unemployment lines high inflation and difficult economic times hit american workers hard in the late 1970s.
1976 settle the new york times company.
reprinted with permission.
reporters wrote of the blue collar blues associated with plant closings and the hard fought strikes of the decade.
a 1972 strike at the lordstown ohio general motors plant captivated the nation.
holding out not for higher wages but for better working conditions the plant had the most complex assembly line in the nation lordstown strikers spoke out against what they saw as an inhumane industrial system.
across the nation the number of union led strikes surged even as the number of americans in the labor movement continued to decline.
in lordstown and most other sites of good times the popular 1970s sitcom good times examined how the blue collar blues affected a working class black family struggling to make ends meet in tough economic times.
the shows theme song spoke of temporary layoffs.
easy credit ripoffs.
scratchin and surviving its actors many of them classically trained brought a realistic portrait of workingclass african american life to television.
bettmann corbis.
strikes and industrial conflict workers won a measure of public attention but typically gained little economic ground.
when americans turned on their televisions in the mid 1970s the most popular shows reflected the bluecollar blues of struggling families.
all in the family was joined by the waltons set during the great depression.
good times welcome back kotter and sanford and son dealt with poverty in the inner city.
the jeffersons featured an upwardly mobile black couple.
laverne and shirley focused on young working women part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 in the 1950s and one day at a time on working women in the 1970s making do after divorce.
the mostwatched television series of the decade 1977s eightpart roots explored the history of slavery and the survival of african american culture and family roots despite the oppressive labor system.
not since the 1930s had american culture paid such close attention to working class life.
the decade also saw the rise of musicians such as bruce springsteen johnny paycheck and john cougar mellencamp who became stars by turning the hardscrabble lives of people in small towns and workingclass communities into rock anthems that filled arenas.
springsteen wrote songs about characters who sweat it out in the streets of a runaway american dream and to the delight of his audience paycheck famously sang take this job and shove it meanwhile on the streets of harlem and the south bronx in new york young working class african american men experimenting with dance and musical forms invented break dancing and rap music styles that expressed both the hardship and the creativity of working class black life in the deindustrialized american city.
navigating the sexual revolution the economic downturn was not the only force that placed stress on american families in this era.
another such force was what many came to call the sexual revolution hardly revolutionary sexual attitudes in the 1970s were in many ways a logical evolution of developments in the first half of the twentieth century.
beginning in the 1910s americans increasingly viewed sex as a component of personal happiness distinct from reproduction.
attitudes toward sex grew even more lenient in the postwar decades a fact reflected in the kinsey studies of the 1940s and 1950s.
by the 1960s sex before marriage had grown more socially acceptable an especially profound change for women and frank discussions of sex in the media and popular culture had grown more common.
in that decade three developments dramatically accelerated this process the introduction of the birth control pill the rise of the baby boomer led counterculture and the influence of feminism.
first made available in the united states in explain 1960 the birth control pill gave consequences women an unprecedented degree what were three major of control over reproduction.
by consequences of the sexual 1965 more than 6 million amerirevolution of the 1960s can women were taking advantage and 1970s.
of this pharmaceutical advance.
rapid shifts in attitude accompanied the technological breakthrough.
middle class baby boomers embraced a sexual ethic of greater freedom and in many cases a more casual approach to sex outside marriage.
i just feel i am expressing myself the way i feel at that moment in the most natural way a female california college student explaining her sex life told a reporter in 1966 the rebellious counterculture encouraged this attitudinal shift by associating a puritanical view of sex with their parents generation.
finally womens rights activists reacted to the new emphasis on sexual freedom in at least two distinct ways.
many feminists felt that the sexual revolution was by and for men the emphasis on casual sex seemed to perpetuate male privilege the old double standard sexual harassment was all too common in the workplace and the proliferation of pornography continued to commercialize women as sex objects.
on the other hand they remained optimistic that the new sexual ethic could free women from those older moral constraints.
they called for a revolution in sexual values not simply behavior that would end exploitation and grant women the freedom to explore their sexuality on equal terms with men.
sex and popular culture in the 1970s popular culture was suffused with discussions of the sexual revolution.
mass market books with titles such as everything you always wanted to know about sex human sexual response and the sensuous man shot up the best seller list.
william masters and virginia johnson became the most famous sex researchers since alfred kinsey by studying couples in the act of lovemaking.
in 1972 english physician alex comfort published the joy of sex a guidebook for couples that became one of the most popular books of the decade.
comfort made certain to distinguish his writing from pornographic exploitation.
sex is the one place where we today can learn to treat people as people he wrote.
hollywood took advantage of the new sexual ethic by making films with explicit erotic content that pushed the boundaries of middle class taste.
films such as midnight cowboy 1969 carnal knowledge 1971 and shampoo 1974 the latter starring hollywoods leading ladies man warren beatty led the way.
throughout the decade and into the 1980s the motion picture association of america mpaa scrambled to keep its guide for parents the system of rating pictures g pg r and x and after 1984 pg 13 in tune with hollywoods advancing sexual revolution.
on television the popularity of social problem shows such as all in the family and the fear of losing chapter 30 declared bankruptcy and was forced to sell a majority stake to the italian company fiat.
if iacocca symbolized a resurgent corporate america high profile financial wheeler dealers also captured americans imagination.
one was ivan boesky a white collar criminal convicted of insider trading buying or selling stock based on information from corporate insiders.
i think greed is healthy boesky told a business school graduating class.
boesky inspired the fictional film character gordon gekko who proclaimed greed is good in 1987s wall street.
a new generation of wall street executives of which boesky was one example pioneered the leveraged buyout lbo.
in a typical lbo a financier used heavily leveraged borrowed capital to buy a company quickly restructured that company to make it appear spectacularly profitable and then sold it at a higher price.
to see a movie still from wall street along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
americans had not set aside the traditional work ethic but the reagan era public was fascinated with money and celebrity.
the documentary television show lifestyles of the rich and famous began its run in 1984.
one of the most enthralling of the eras money moguls was donald trump a real estate developer who craved publicity.
in 1983 the flamboyant trump built the equally flamboyant trump towers in new york city.
at the entrance of the 200 million apartment building stood two enormous bronze ts a display of self promotion reinforced by the media.
calling him the donald a nickname used by trumps first wife tv reporters and magazines commented relentlessly on his marriages divorces and glitzy lifestyle.
the computer revolution while trump grabbed headlines and made splashy real estate investments a handful of quieter less flashy entrepreneurs was busy changing the face of the american economy.
bill gates paul allen steve jobs and steve wozniak were four entrepreneurs who pioneered the computer revolution in the late 1970s and 1980s thinking like a historian p 990.
they took a technology that had been used exclusively for large scale enterprises the military and multinational corporations and made it accessible to individual consumers.
scientists had devised the first computers for military purposes during world war ii.
cold war military research subsequently funded the construction of large mainframe computers.
but government and private sector conservative america in the ascent 1980 1991 first generation computers were bulky cumbersome machines that had to be placed in large air conditioned rooms.
between the 1950s and the 1970s concluding with the development of the microprocessor in 1971 each generation of computers grew faster and smaller.
by the mid 1970s a few microchips the size of the letter o on this page provided as much processing power as a world war ii era computer.
the day of the personal computer pc had arrived.
working in the san francisco bay area jobs and wozniak founded apple computers in 1976 and within a year were producing small individual computers that could be easily used by a single person.
when apple enjoyed success other companies scrambled to get into the market.
international business machines ibm offered its first personal computer in 1981 but apple corporations 1984 macintosh computer later shortened to mac became the first understand runaway commercial success for a points of view personal computer.
in what ways did american meanwhile two former high society embrace economic school classmates gates age nine success and individualism teen and allen age twenty one in the 1980s.
had set a goal in the early 1970s of putting a personal computer on every desk and in every home they recognized that software was the key.
in 1975 they founded the microsoft corporation whose ms dos and windows operating systems soon dominated the software industry.
by 2000 the companys products ran nine out of every ten personal computers in the united states and a majority of those around the world.
gates and allen became billionaires and microsoft exploded into a huge company with 57 000 employees and annual revenues of 38 billion.
in three decades the computer had moved from a few military research centers to thousands of corporate offices and then to millions of peoples homes.
ironically in an age that celebrated free market capitalism government research and government funding had played an enormous role in the development of the most important technology since television.
the end of the cold war ronald reagan entered office determined to confront the soviet union diplomatically and militarily.
backed by republican and democratic hard liners alike reagan unleashed some of the harshest cold war rhetoric since the 1950s labeling the soviet union an evil thinking like a historian personal computing a technological revolution considered historically computers are a strikingly new phenomenon.
the ancestors of the first computers were developed in the 1940s using vacuum tubes and transistors.
integrated circuits were introduced in the 1950s and the first microprocessor in the 1970s.
prior to the decade of the 1980s only the federal government and large corporations and institutions used computers which were massive in size and expensive to purchase.
in the 1980s inventors and entrepreneurs developed the first personal computers which could fit on desks or tables and were soon within the price range of ordinary families.
the computers we know today date from that decade.
another enormous change came in the mid 1990s when the internet whose forerunner was a u s defense department computer network became widely available to the public for the first time.
1 moores law 1965 in 1965 the electronics engineer gordon moore calculated that the number of transistors on an integrated circuit doubled roughly every two years meaning that the power of computers was increasing at that rate.
the complexity for minimum component costs has increased at a rate of roughly a factor of two per year.
certainly over the short term this rate can be expected to continue if not increase.
that means by 1975 the number of components per integrated circuit for minimum cost will be 65 000 i believe that such a large circuit can be built on a single wafer.
2 scene from 2001 a space odyssey 1968 in this scene from an acclaimed science fiction film a space stations computer system named hal defends itself against an astronaut who is determined to shut down the computer.
dave bowman hello hal.
do you read me hal.
hal affirmative dave.
i read you.
db open the pod bay doors hal.
hal im sorry dave.
im afraid i cant do that.
db whats the problem.
hal i think you know what the problem is just as well as i do.
db what are you talking about hal.
hal this mission is too important for me to allow you to jeopardize it.
db i dont know what youre talking about hal.
hal i know that you and frank were planning to disconnect me and im afraid thats something i cannot allow to happen.
db where the hell did you get that idea hal.
hal dave although you took very thorough precautions in the pod against my hearing you i could see your lips move.
db alright hal.
ill go in through the emergency airlock.
hal without your space helmet dave.
youre going to find that rather difficult.
db hal i wont argue with you anymore.
open the door.
hal dave this conversation can serve no purpose anymore.
3 neil ardley world of tomorrow school work and play 1981 in this book written for teenagers neil ardley speculated about the future of computers.
imagine you are living in the future and are doing a project on halleys comet.
its quite some time since it last appeared in 1986 and you want to find out when it will again be seen from earth.
you also want to know the results of a space mission to the comet and find out what the comet is made of.
in the days when the last comet appeared you would have had to look up halleys comet in an encyclopedia or a book on astronomy.
if you didnt possess these books you would have gone to the library to get the information.
people still collect books as valuable antiques or for a hobby but you get virtually all the information you need from the viewscreen of your home computer.
the computer is linked to a library not a library of books but an electronic library where information on every subject is stored in computer memory banks.
computers will make the world of tomorrow a much safer place.
they will do away with cash so that you need 5 interview with steve jobs february 1 1985 apple founder steve jobs one of the pioneers of the personal computer discusses the future of computers and computer networks.
question why should a person buy a computer.
steve jobs there are different answers for different people.
in business that question is easy to answer you can really prepare documents much faster and at a higher quality level and you can do many things to increase office productivity.
a computer frees people from much of the menial work.
remember computers are tools.
tools help us do our work better.
in education computers are the first thing to come along since books that will sit there and interact with you endlessly without judgment.
question what will change.
steve jobs the most compelling reason for most people to buy a computer for the home in the future will be to link it into a nationwide communications network.
were just in the beginning stages of what will be a truly remarkable breakthrough for most people as remarkable as the telephone.
reese there was a war.
a few years from now.
nuclear war.
the whole thing.
all this his gesture includes the car the city the world.
everything is gone.
there were survivors.
nobody knew who started it.
pause it was the machines.
sarah i dont understand.
reese defense network computer.
hooked into everything.
trusted to run it all.
they say it got smart.
a new order of intelligence.
then it saw all people as a threat not just the ones on the other side.
decided our fate in a microsecond.
extermination.
4 scene from terminator 1984 a national defense computer network called skynet decides to exterminate humanity in the film terminator.
6 percentage of americans using the internet.
no longer fear being attacked for your money.
in addition you need not worry that your home will be burgled or your car stolen.
the computers in your home and car will guard them allowing only yourself to enter or someone with your permission.
sources 1 g e moore cramming more components onto integrated circuits electronics april 19 1965 114 2 2001 a space odyssey screenplay by stanley kubrick and arthur c clarke hawk films ltd and mgm studios 1967 3 neil ardley world of tomorrow school work and play new york franklin watts 1981 20 27 4 terminator screenplay by james cameron and gale anne hurd fifth draft pacific western productions inc march 11 1984 134 5 playboy february 1 1985 52 analyzing the evidence 1 compare sources 2 and 4 anxiety about the extraordinary power of computers has been a regular feature of science fiction both in writing and in film since the late 1950s.
what do the scenes from these two films tell us about the cultural reactions to computers early in their development.
2 how does source 3 offer a different vision of a future with computers.
why do you think cultural responses to computers tend to swing between extreme anxiety and equally extreme optimism.
3 how does steve jobss assessment of computers in source 5 compare with those in the other documents.
should we trust his judgment more because he is closer to their actual development.
why or why not.
putting it all together drawing on the history of personal computers discussed in this chapter as well as on the documents above write an essay in which you assess the origin of the personal computer.
what cultural reactions and predictions surrounded the computers birth.
what economic and social transformations did it have the potential to unleash.
you might also consider a comparison of the industrial revolution of the second half of the nineteenth century and the computer revolution of the late twentieth century.
are there parallels in how each development transformed american society.
part 9 global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present empire and vowing that it would end up on the ash heap of history in a remarkable turnaround however by his second term reagan had decided that this goal would be best achieved by actively cooperating with mikhail gorbachev the reform minded russian communist leader.
the downfall of the soviet union in 1991 ended the nearly fifty year long cold war but a new set of foreign challenges quickly emerged.
u s soviet relations in a new era when reagan assumed the presidency in 1981 he broke with his immediate predecessors richard nixon gerald ford and jimmy carter in cold war strategy.
nixon regarded himself as a realist in foreign affairs.
that meant above all advancing the national interest without regard to ideology.
nixons policy of dtente with the soviet union and china embodied this realist view.
president carter endorsed dtente and continued to push for relaxing cold war tensions.
this worked for a time but the soviet invasion of afghanistan empowered hard liners in the u s congress and forced carter to take a tougher line which he did with the olympic boycott and grain embargo.
this was the relationship reagan inherited in 1981 a decade of dtente that had produced a noticeable relaxation of tensions with the communist world followed by a year of tense standoffs over soviet advances into central asia which threatened u s interests in the middle east.
reagans cold war revival conservatives did not believe in dtente.
neither did they believe in the containment policy that had guided u s cold war strategy since 1947 reagan and his advisors wanted to defeat not merely contain the soviet union.
his administration pursued a two pronged strategy toward that end.
first it abandoned dtente and set about rearming america.
reagans military budgets authorized new weapons systems dramatically expanded military bases and significantly expanded the nations nuclear arsenal.
this buildup in american military strength reasoned secretary of defense caspar weinberger would force the soviets into an arms race that would strain their economy and cause domestic unrest.
one of the most controversial aspects of the buildup was reagans proposal for a strategic defense initiative popularly known as star wars a satellite based system that would theoretically destroy nuclear missiles in flight.
scientists doubted its viability and it was never built.
the reagan administration also proposed the strategic arms reduction talks start with the soviet union in which the united states put forward a plan calculated to increase american advantage in sea and air based nuclear systems over the soviets ground based system.
second the president supported cia initiatives to roll back soviet influence in the developing world by funding anticommunist movements in angola mozambique afghanistan and central america.
to accomplish this objective reagan supported repressive right wing regimes.
nowhere was this more conspicuous in the 1980s than in the central american countries of guatemala nicaragua and el salvador.
conditions were unique in each country but held to a pattern the united states sided with military dictatorships and oligarchies if democratically elected governments or left wing movements sought support from the soviet union.
in guatemala this approach produced a brutal military rule thousands of opponents of the government were executed or kidnapped.
in nicaragua reagan actively encouraged a coup against the left wing sandinista government which had overthrown the u s backed strongman anastasio somoza.
and in el salvador the u s backed government maintained secret death squads which murdered members of the opposition.
in each case reagan blocked soviet influence but the damage done to local communities and to the international reputation of the united states as in vietnam was great.
iran contra reagans determination to oppose leftwing movements in central america engulfed his administration in a major scandal during the presidents second term.
for years reagan had denounced iran as an outlaw state and a supporter of terrorism.
but in 1985 he wanted its help.
to win irans assistance in freeing two dozen american hostages held by hezbollah a pro iranian shiite group in lebanon the administration sold arms to iran without public or congressional knowledge.
while this secret arms deal was diplomatically and politically controversial the use of the resulting profits in nicaragua was explicitly illegal.
to overthrow the democratically elected sandinistas whom the president accused of threatening u s business interests reagan ordered the cia to assist an armed opposition group called the contras map 30 2.
although reagan praised the contras as freedom fighters congress worried that the president and other executive branch agencies were assuming warmaking powers that the constitution reserved to the legislature.
in 1984 congress banned the cia and all other government agencies from providing any military support to the contras.
chapter title suggests americans dilemmas in a global society.
energy and the environment at the dawn of the twenty first century few issues were more critical in the united states and across the globe than energy and the environment.
this wind farm is an example of the search for non fossil sources of new energy a search that is among the many challenges facing the globalized world of our century.
raphael gaillarde gamma rapho via getty images.
part 9 global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present america in the global economy on november 30 1999 more than 50 000 protesters took to the streets of seattle washington immobilizing a wide swath of the citys downtown.
police armed with pepper spray and arrayed in riot gear worked feverishly to clear the clogged streets get traffic moving and usher well dressed government ministers from around the world into a conference hall.
protesters jeered chanted and held hundreds of signs and banners aloft.
a radical contingent joined the otherwise peaceful march and a handful of them began breaking the windows of the chain stores they saw as symbols of global capitalism starbucks gap old navy.
what had aroused such passion in the so called battle of seattle.
globalization.
the vast majority of americans never surged into the streets as had the seattle protesters who tried to shut down this 1999 meeting of the world trade organization wto but no american by the late 1990s could deny that developments in the global economy reverberated at home.
in that decade americans rediscovered a longstanding truth the united states was not an island but was linked in countless different ways to a global economy and society.
economic prosperity in the post world war ii decades had obscured for americans this fundamental reality figure 31 1.
globalization saw the rapid spread of capitalism around the world huge increases in global trade and commerce and a diffusion of communications technology including the internet that linked the worlds wto demonstration seattle 1999 in november 1999 an estimated 50 000 to 100 000 people from many states and foreign nations staged an effective protest at a world trade organization wto meeting in seattle.
the goals of the protesters were diffuse many feared that the trend toward a system of free capitalist run trade would primarily benefit multinational corporations and would hurt both developing nations and the working classes in the industrialized world.
protests have continued at subsequent meetings of the wto and the world bank.
hector mata afp getty images.
chapter 31 confronting global and national dilemmas 1989 to the present and especially asia.
the athletic sportswear firm nike was a prime example.
by 2005 nike had established 700 factories worldwide that employed more than 650 000 workers most of whom received low wages endured harsh working conditions and had no health or pension benefits.
highly skilled jobs were outsourced as well.
financial deregulation one of the principal differences between this new era of globalization and previous eras has been the opening of national financial and currency markets to investment from around the world.
the united states and britain led the way.
both countries came under the sway of powerful political forces in the 1980s calling for the total deregulation of banks brokerage houses investment firms and financial markets letting the free market replace government oversight.
together the united states and britain led a quiet revolution in which investment markets around the world were gradually set free.
financial deregulation led to spectacular profits for investors but produced a more fragile crash prone global economy.
on the profit side financial industry profits in the united states rose from less than 10 percent of total business profits in the 1950s to more than 40 percent beginning in the 1990s.
but the costs were becoming clear as well the bankruptcy of the american savings and loan industry in the 1980s the lost decade in japan in the 1990s the near bankruptcy of russia in the late 1990s and of argentina in 2001 the 1997 asian financial crisis centered in thailand and indonesia and the collapse of nearly the entire global economy in 2008 p 1030.
these and other episodes dramatized the extraordinary risks that financial globalization has introduced.
revolutions in technology the technological advances of the 1980s and 1990s changed the character of everyday life for millions of americans linking them with a global information and media environment unprecedented in world history.
not since television was introduced to american homes in the years following world war ii had technology so profoundly changed the way people lived their lives.
personal computers cell phones and smartphones the internet and the world wide web and other electronic devices and systems altered internet versus newspapers between 2000 and 2010 dozens of large and medium sized newspapers went out of business their oncerobust readership drained away by the convenience of news available for free on the internet.
in 2009 the seattle post intelligencer newspaper ceased print publication and became an online only news source.
in this photo the papers news boxes sit empty an ominous sign of the struggling newspaper business in the early 2000s.
bettmann corbis.
part 9 global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present work leisure and access to knowledge in stunning ways.
like unimpeded trade these advances in communications and personal technologies enhanced globalization.
during the 1990s personal computers which had emerged in the late 1970s grew even more significant with the spread of the internet and the world wide web.
like the computer itself the internet was the product of military based research.
during the late 1960s the u s department of defense in conjunction with the massachusetts institute of technology began developing a decentralized computer network the advanced research projects agency network arpanet.
the internet which grew out of the arpanet was soon used by government scientists academic specialists and military contractors to exchange data information and electronic mail e mail.
by the 1980s the internet had spread to universities businesses and the general public.
the debut in 1991 of the graphics based world wide web a collection of servers that allowed access to millions of documents pictures and other materials enhanced the popular appeal and commercial possibilities of the internet.
by 2011 78 percent of all americans and more than two billion people worldwide used the internet to send messages and view information.
businesses used the world wide web to sell their products and services e commerce transactions totaled 114 billion in 2003 172 billion in 2005 and neared 500 billion in 2010 the web proved instantly democratic providing ordinary people with easy access to knowledge.
politics and partisanship in a new era standing at the podium at the 1992 republican national convention his supporters cheering by the thousands patrick buchanan did not mince words.
buchanan was a former speechwriter for president richard nixon and a white house aide to president ronald reagan and despite having lost the nomination for president he still hoped to shape the partys message to voters.
this election he told the audience including millions watching on television is about what we stand for as americans citing democratic support for abortion rights and the rights of lesbians and gay men buchanan claimed there was a religious war going on in our country for the soul of america it was he emphasized a culture war buchanans war was another name for a longstanding political struggle dating to the 1920s between religious traditionalists and secular liberals chapter 31 confronting global and national dilemmas 1989 to the present 23 billion to mexico a massive remittance flow that constituted mexicos third largest source of foreign exchange.
asian immigrants came largely from china the philippines south korea india and pakistan.
in addition 700 000 refugees came to the united states from southeast asia vietnam laos and cambodia after the vietnam war.
this immigration signaled more than new flows of people into the united states.
throughout much of its history the united states had oriented itself toward the atlantic.
indeed at the end of the nineteenth century american secretary of state john hay observed the mediterranean is the ocean of the past the atlantic the ocean of the present he added presciently the pacific is the ocean of the future by the last decades of the twentieth century hays future had arrived.
as immigration from asia increased as japan and china grew more influential economically and as more and more transnational trade crossed the pacific commentators on both sides of the ocean began speaking of the pacific rim as an important new region.
multiculturalism and its critics most new immigrants arrived under the terms of the 1965 law.
but those who entered without legal documentation stirred political controversy.
after twenty years under the new law there were three to five million immigrants without legal status.
in 1986 to remedy this situation congress passed the immigration reform and control act.
the law granted citizenship to many of those who had arrived illegally provided incentives for employers not to hire undocumented immigrants and increased surveillance along the border with mexico.
immigration critics persisted however.
in 1992 patrick buchanan then campaigning for the republican presidential nomination warned americans that their country was undergoing the greatest invasion in its history a migration of millions of illegal aliens a year from mexico many states took immigration matters into their own hands.
in 1994 for instance californians approved proposition 187 a ballot initiative that barred illegal aliens from public schools nonemergency care at public health clinics and all other state social services.
the proposed law declared that u s citizens have a right to the protection of their government from any person or persons entering this country unlawfully but after five years in federal court the controversial measure was ruled unconstitutional.
to see a longer excerpt of proposition 187 along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
debates over post 1965 immigration looked a great deal like conflicts in the early decades of the century.
then many native born white protestants worried that the largely jewish and catholic immigrants from southern and eastern europe along with african american migrants leaving the south could not assimilate and threatened the purity of the nation.
although the conflicts looked the same the cultural paradigm had shifted.
in the earlier era the melting pot a term borrowed from the title of a 1908 play became the metaphor for how american society would accommodate its newfound diversity.
some native born americans found solace in the meltingpot concept because it implied that a single american culture would predominate.
in the 1990s however a different concept multiculturalism emerged to define social diversity.
americans this concept suggested were not a single people into whom others melted rather they comprised a diverse set of ethnic and racial groups living and working together.
a shared set of public values held the multicultural society together even as different groups maintained unique practices and traditions.
critics however charged that multiculturalism perpetuated ethnic chauvinism and conferred preferential treatment on minority groups.
many government policies as well as a large number of private employers for instance continued to support affirmative action programs designed to bring african americans and latinos into public and private sector jobs and universities in larger numbers.
conservatives argued that such governmental programs were deeply flawed because they promoted reverse discrimination against white men and women and resulted in the selection and promotion of less qualified applicants for jobs and educational advancement.
california stood at the center of the debate.
in 1995 under pressure from republican governor pete wilson the regents of the university of california scrapped their twenty year old policy of affirmative action.
a year later california voters approved proposition 209 which outlawed affirmative action in state employment and public education.
at the height of the 1995 controversy president bill clinton delivered a major speech defending affirmative action.
he reminded americans that richard nixon a republican president had endorsed affirmative action and he concluded by saying the nation should mend it not end it however as in the bakke decision of the 1970s chapter 31 confronting global and national dilemmas 1989 to the present barack obama in 2008 barack obama became the first african american president in u s history.
and in 2012 he was reelected to a second term.
here president obama and first lady michelle obama walk along pennsylvania avenue during his second inauguration.
chip somodevilla getty images.
elected alongside obama passed the american recovery and reinvestment act an economic stimulus bill that provided 787 billion to state and local governments for schools hospitals and transportation projects roads bridges and rail one of the largest single packages of government spending in american history.
congress next passed the wall street reform and consumer protection act a complex law that added new regulations limiting the financial industry and new consumer protections.
political debate over both measures was heated.
critics on the left argued that obama and congress had been too cautious given the scale of the nations problems while those on the right decried both laws as irresponsible government interference in private investment.
political debate was fiercest however over obamas health insurance reform proposal.
obama encouraged congressional democrats to put forth their own proposals while he worked to find republican allies who might be persuaded to support the first major reform of the nations health care system since the introduction of medicare in 1965 none came forward.
moreover as debate dragged on a set of far right opposition groups known collectively as the tea party emerged.
giving voice to the extreme individualism and antigovernment sentiment traditionally associated with rightwing movements in the united states the tea party rallied americans against obamas health care bill.
despite the opposition the legislation officially called the patient protection and affordable care act passed and obama signed it into law on identify causes march 23 2010 however politi as the nations first african cal opposition and the powerful american president what lobbying of the private health kinds of unique challenges insurance industry ensured that did barack obama face the new law contained enough and how did these issues compromises that few could pre impact his presidency.
dict its long term impact.
following the legislative victories of his first two years in office president obama faced a divided congress.
democrats lost control of the house of representatives in 2010 and failed to regain it in 2012 with the legislative process stalled obama used executive authority to advance his broader cautiously liberal agenda.
in 2011 for instance the president repealed the militarys dont ask dont tell policy and ordered that gay men and lesbians be allowed to serve openly in the armed forces.
and he made two appointments to the supreme court sonia sotomayor in 2009 the first latina to serve on the high court and elena kagan in 2010 both sotomayor and kagan are committed liberals though they serve on a court that has shifted to the right under chief justice john roberts a george w bush appointee.
war and instability in the middle east even as he pursued an ambitious domestic agenda obama faced two wars in the middle east that he inherited from his predecessor.
determined to end american occupation of iraq the president began in 2010 to draw down part 9 global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present troops stationed there and the last convoy of u s soldiers departed in late 2011 the nine year war in iraq begun to find alleged weapons of mass destruction had followed a long and bloody arc to its end.
disengaging from afghanistan proved more difficult.
early in his first term the president ordered an additional 30 000 american troops to parts of the country where the taliban had regained control a surge he believed necessary to avoid further taliban victories.
securing long term political stability in this fractious nation however has eluded obama.
leaving with the least damage done was his only viable option and he pledged to withdraw all u s troops by 2014 meanwhile a host of events in the middle east deepened the regions volatility.
in late 2010 a series of multicountry demonstrations and protests dubbed the arab spring began to topple some of the regions autocratic rulers.
leaders in egypt tunisia libya and yemen were forced from power by mass movements calling for greater democracy.
these movements which the obama administration has cautiously supported continue to reverberate in more than a dozen nations in the middle east.
not long after the arab spring was under way in may 2011 u s special forces found and killed osama bin laden in pakistan where he had been hiding for many years.
obama received much praise for the tactics that led to the discovery of bin laden.
more controversial has been the presidents use of drone strikes to assassinate al qaeda leaders and other u s enemies in the region.
climate change american wars and other involvement in the middle east hinged on the regions centrality to global oil production.
oil is important in another sense however its role in climate change.
scientists have known for decades that the production of energy through the burning of carbon based substances especially petroleum and coal increases the presence of socalled greenhouse gases in the atmosphere warming the earth.
increasing temperatures will produce dramatically new weather patterns and rising sea levels developments that threaten agriculture the global distributions of plant and animal life and whole cities and regions at or near the current sea level.
how to halt or at least mitigate climate change has been one of the most pressing issues of the twenty first century.
arriving at a scientific consensus on climate change has proven easier than developing government policies to address it.
this has been especially true in the united states where oil company lobbyists defenders of free market capitalism and conservatives who deny global warming altogether have been instrumental in blocking action.
for instance the united states is not a signatory to the major international treaty the socalled kyoto protocol that is designed to reduce carbon emissions.
legislative proposals have not fared better.
cap and trade legislation so named because it places a cap on individual polluters emissions but allows those companies to trade for more emission allowances from low polluters has stalled in congress.
another proposal a tax on carbon emissions has likewise gained little political support.
there is little doubt however that global climate change and the role of the united states in both causing and mitigating it will remain among the most critical questions of the next decades.
electoral shifts it remains to be seen how the obama presidency will affect american politics.
from one vantage point obama looks like the beneficiary of an electoral shift in a liberal direction.
since 1992 democrats have won the popular vote in five of the last six presidential elections and in 2008 obama won a greater share of the popular vote nearly 53 percent than either clinton who won 43 percent in 1992 and 49 percent in 1996 or gore 48 percent in 2000.
in his bid for reelection in 2012 against republican nominee mitt romney obama won a lower percentage of the popular vote 51 percent but still won by a comfortable margin of nearly 5 million votes.
he won the support of 93 percent of african americans 71 percent of hispanics 73 percent of asian americans 55 percent of women and 60 percent of americans under the age of thirty.
his coalition was multiracial heavily female and young.
from another vantage point any electoral shift toward liberalism appears contingent and fragile.
even with democratic majorities in both houses of congress that rivaled franklin roosevelts in 1937 and lyndon johnsons in 1965 obama in 2009 2010 was not able to generate political momentum for the kind of legislative advances achieved by those presidential forerunners.
the history of obamas presidency and of the early twenty first century more broadly continues to unfold.
summary this.

chapter 3 parliament passed the first navigation act which sought to challenge the dutch hold on international commerce by confining colonial trade to english ships and ports.
thus by the middle of the seventeenth century several english colonies existed along the atlantic coast of north america.
established as part of an ad hoc process rather than arising under any coherent national plan they differed enormously in economic political and social structure.
the seeds had been planted in the chesapeake for the development of plantation societies based on unfree labor and in new england for settlements centered on small towns and family farms.
throughout the colonies many res suggested reading idents enjoyed freedoms they had not possessed at home especially access to land and the right to worship as they desired.
others found themselves confined to unfree labor for many years or an entire lifetime.
the next century would be a time of crisis and consolidation as the population expanded social conflicts intensified and britain moved to exert greater control over its flourishing north american colonies.
suggested reading books anderson victoria d new englands generation the great migration and the formation of society and culture in the seventeenth century 1991.
a careful study of emigration from england to new england.
banner stuart.
how the indians lost their land law and power on the frontier 2005.
argues that most indian land came into settlers hands by legal processes rather than conquest.
bonomi patricia.
under the cope of heaven religion society and politics in colonial america 1986.
traces the interrelationship of religion and politics and the rise of religious diversity in the colonies.
brown kathleen.
good wives nasty wenches and anxious patriarchs gender race and power in colonial virginia 1996.
a pioneering study of gender relations and their impact on virginia society.
cronon william.
changes in the land colonists and the ecology of new england 1983.
a path breaking examination of how english colonization affected the natural environment in new england.
gleach frederic w powhatans world and colonial virginia a conflict of cultures 1997.
a study of indian culture and the impact of european colonization upon it.
hill christopher.
the century of revolution 1961.
a survey stressing the causes and consequences of the english civil war.
horn james.
adapting to a new world english society in the seventeenth century chesapeake 1994.
a detailed examination of the lives of early settlers in england and later in virginia.
morgan edmund s the puritan family 1944.
an early examination of family life and gender relations in colonial america.
pestana carla g the english atlantic in an age of revolution 1640 1661 2001.
analyzes how the english civil war reverberated in the american colonies.
philbrick nathaniel.
mayflower 2006.
an account of one of the most celebrated voyages of the colonial era and the early history of the plymouth colony.
price david a love and hate in jamestown john smith pocahontas and the start of a new nation 2003.
presents the legend and reality of john smith pocahontas and early virginia.
taylor alan.
american colonies 2001.
a comprehensive survey of the history of north american colonies from their beginnings to 1763 winship michael.
making heretics militant protestantism and free grace in massachusetts 1636 1641 2002.
the most recent account of anne hutchinson and the antinomian controversy.
websites plymouth colony archive project virtual jamestown c hapter r eview review questions 1 compare and contrast englands settlement history in the americas to spains.
consider the treatment of indians the role of the church the significance of women and economic development.
2 for the english land was the basis of liberty.
explain the reasoning behind that concept and how it was markedly different from the indians conception of land.
3 many puritans claimed they came to north america seeking religious freedom but they were extremely intolerant of other beliefs.
in fact there was greater liberty of conscience back in their native england.
how do you explain this.
4 describe who chose to emigrate to north america from england in the seventeenth century and explain their reasons.
5 in what ways did the new england economy and government differ from those in the chesapeake colonies.
6 the english believed that unlike the spanish their motives for colonization were pure and that the growth of empire and freedom would always go hand in hand.
how did the expansion of the british empire affect the freedoms of native americans the irish and even many english citizens.
7 considering politics social tensions and debates over the meaning of liberty how do the events and aftermath of the english civil war demonstrate that the english colonies in north america were part of a larger atlantic community.
8 how did the tobacco economy draw the chesapeake colonies into the greater atlantic world.
freedom questions 1 with many degrees of freedom coexisting in seventeenth century north america a person might go from having no rights to possessing many in a lifetime.
use examples to demonstrate this fact.
2 to provide full freedoms for the higher social orders in both england and english north america lower social orders had to do without.
explain how and why this was so.
3 how did the concepts and goals of freedom differ for the following settlers newcomers to john smiths jamestown a puritan family in 1630s massachusetts and a catholic landowner in 1640s maryland.
4 explain how the puritans used their concept of moral liberty to justify their actions against others in the new world.
then discuss why some puritans other english settlers in the new world and those remaining in england might see these justifications as hypocritical.
5 review the debates over the true meaning of freedom and english liberty following the english civil war.
what would you say was the lasting significance of these debates.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e virginia company p 54 early colonial british settlements roanoke colony p 56 plantation p 56 colony date established founder governor major religion virginia virginia company john smith anglican plymouth english investors william bradford pilgrims puritan separatists massachusetts massachusetts bay company john winthrop puritan congregationalists maryland proprietary colony cecilius calvert protestant and catholic rhode island royal charter roger williams haven for all religions connecticut royal charter thomas hooker puritan congregationalists a discourse concerning western planting p 57 enclosure movement p 58 sponsor indentured servant p 60 john smith p 63 headright system p 64 house of burgesses p 64 uprising of 1622 p 65 tobacco colony p 66 dower rights p 67 puritans p 69 moral liberty p 70 john winthrop p 70 pilgrims p 70 mayflower compact p 71 great migration p 71 captivity narratives p 81 the sovereignty and goodness of god p 81 pequot war p 81 half way covenant p 84 english liberty p 84 act concerning religion p 88 c hapter 3 dutch west india company settles manhattan first navigation act issued by parliament english seize new netherland which becomes new york the fundamental constitutions of carolina first english settlers arrive in carolina lords of trade 1675 king philips war bacons rebellion william penn granted pennsylvania charter of liberty drafted by penn charter of liberties privileges drafted by ny assembly 1686 dominion of new england 1688 formed glorious revolution in england parliament enacts a bill of rights maryland uprising leislers rebellion toleration act passed by parliament plymouth colony absorbed into massachusetts 1691 salem witch trials yamasee and creek uprising is crushed walking purchase creating anglo america 1660 1750 global competition and the expansion of englands empire the mercantilist system the conquest of new netherland new york and the rights of englishmen and englishwomen new york and the indians the charter of liberties the founding of carolina the holy experiment quaker liberty land in pennsylvania origins of american slavery englishmen and africans slavery in history slavery in the west indies slavery and the law the rise of chesapeake slavery bacons rebellion land and labor in virginia the end of the rebellion and its consequences a slave society notions of freedom the maryland uprising leislers rebellion changes in new england the prosecution of witches the salem witch trials the growth of colonial america a diverse population attracting settlers the german migration religious diversity indian life in transition regional diversity the consumer revolution colonial cities colonial artisans an atlantic world social classes in the colonies the colonial elite anglicization the south carolina aristocracy poverty in the colonies the middle ranks women and the household economy north america at mid century colonies in crisis the glorious revolution the glorious revolution in america charles town harbor a watercolor painted around 1740 by the artist bishop roberts depicts the flourishing major port city of south carolina.
the ships all fly british flags since the navigation acts prevented foreign vessels from carrying the colonys main export rice.
south carolina was home to the wealthiest elite in britains mainland colonies and ships carried imported luxury goods for them from great britain.
f ocus q uestions how did the english empire in america expand in the mid seventeenth century.
how was slavery established in the western atlantic world.
what major social and political crises rocked the colonies in the late seventeenth century.
what were the directions of social and economic change in the eighteenthcentury colonies.
how did patterns of class and gender roles change in eighteenth century america.
a scene from king philips war included on a 1675 map of new england.
l o n the last quarter of the seventeenth century a series of crises rocked the european colonies of north america.
social and political tensions boiled over in sometimes ruthless conflicts between rich and poor free and slave settler and indian and members of different religious groups.
at the same time struggles within and between european empires echoed in the colonies.
aggrieved groups seized upon the language of freedom to advance their goals.
although each conflict had its own local causes taken together they added up to a general crisis of colonial society in the area that would become the united states.
the bloodiest and most bitter conflict occurred in southern new england where in 1675 an indian alliance launched attacks on farms and settlements that were encroaching on indian lands.
it was the most dramatic and violent warfare in the region in the entire seventeenth century.
new englanders described the wampanoag leader metacom known to the colonists as king philip as the uprisings mastermind although in fact most tribes fought under their own leaders.
by this time the white population considerably outnumbered the indians.
but the fate of the new england colonies hung in the balance for several months.
by 1676 indian forces had attacked nearly half of new englands ninety towns.
twelve in massachusetts were destroyed.
as refugees fled eastward the line of settlement was pushed back almost to the atlantic coast.
some how did the english empire in america expand in the mid seventeenth century.
1 000 settlers out of a population of 52 000 and 3 000 of new englands 20 000 indians perished in the fighting.
in mid 1676 the tide of battle turned and a ferocious counterattack broke the indians power once and for all.
although the uprising united numerous tribes others remained loyal to the colonists.
the role of the iroquois in providing essential military aid to the colonists helped to solidify their developing alliance with the government of new york.
together colonial and indian forces inflicted devastating punishment on the rebels.
metacom was captured and executed indian villages destroyed and captives including men women and children killed or sold into slavery in the west indies.
most of the survivors fled to canada or new york.
even the praying indians about 2 000 indians who had converted to christianity and lived in autonomous communities under puritan supervision suffered.
removed from their towns to deer island in boston harbor supposedly for their own protection many perished from disease and lack of food.
both sides committed atrocities in this merciless conflict but in its aftermath the image of indians as bloodthirsty savages became firmly entrenched in the new england mind.
in the long run king philips war produced a broadening of freedom for white new englanders by expanding their access to land.
but this freedom rested on the final dispossession of the regions indians.
g l o b a l c o m p e t i t i o n a n d t h e e x pa n s i o n of englands empire the mercantilist system as the new world became a battleground in european nations endless contests for wealth and power england moved to seize control of atlantic trade solidify its hold on north americas eastern coast and exert greater control over its empire.
by the middle of the seventeenth century it was apparent that the colonies could be an important source of wealth for the mother country.
according to the prevailing theory known as mercantilism the government should regulate economic activity so as to promote national power.
it should encourage manufacturing and commerce by special bounties monopolies and other measures.
above all trade should be controlled so that more gold and silver flowed into the country than left it.
that is exports of goods which generated revenue from abroad should exceed imports which required paying foreigners for their products.
in the mercantilist outlook the role of colonies was to serve the interests of the mother country by producing marketable raw materials and importing manufactured goods from home.
foreign trade declared an influential work written in 1664 by a london merchant formed the basis of englands treasure commerce not territorial plunder was the foundation of empire.
under oliver cromwell as noted in chapter barring further settlement on lands west of the appalachian mountains.
taxing the colonies in 1764 the sugar act introduced by prime minister george grenville reduced the existing tax on molasses imported into north america from the french west indies from six pence to three pence per gallon.
but the act also established a new machinery to end widespread smuggling by colonial merchants.
and to counteract the tendency of colonial juries to acquit merchants charged with violating trade regulations it strengthened the admiralty courts where accused smugglers could be judged without benefit of a jury trial.
thus colonists saw the measure not as a welcome reduction in taxation but as an attempt to get them to pay a levy they would otherwise have evaded.
at the same time a revenue act placed goods such as wool and hides which had previously been traded freely with holland france and southern what were the roots and significance of the stamp act controversy.
europe on the enumerated list meaning they had to be shipped through england.
together these measures threatened the profits of colonial merchants and seemed certain to aggravate an already serious economic recession resulting from the end of the seven years war.
they were accompanied by the currency act which reaffirmed the earlier ban on colonial assemblies issuing paper as legal tender that is money that individuals are required to accept in payment of debts.
the stamp act crisis the sugar act was an effort to strengthen the long established and longevaded navigation acts.
the stamp act of 1765 represented a new departure in imperial policy.
for the first time parliament attempted to raise money from direct taxes in the colonies rather than through the regulation of trade.
the act required that all sorts of printed material produced in the colonies newspapers books court documents commercial papers land deeds almanacs etc carry a stamp purchased from authorities.
its purpose was to help finance the operations of the empire including the cost of stationing british troops in north america without seeking revenue from colonial assemblies.
whereas the sugar act had mainly affected residents of colonial ports the stamp act managed to offend virtually every free colonist rich and poor farmers artisans and merchants.
it was especially resented by members of the public sphere who wrote published and read books and newspapers and followed political affairs.
the prospect of a british army permanently stationed on american soil also alarmed many colonists.
and by imposing the stamp tax without colonial consent parliament directly challenged the authority of local elites who through the assemblies they controlled had established their power over the raising and spending of money.
they were ready to defend this authority in the name of liberty.
opposition to the stamp act was the first great drama of the revolutionary era and the first major split between colonists and great britain over the meaning of freedom.
nearly all colonial political leaders opposed the act.
in voicing their grievances they invoked the rights of the freeborn englishman which they insisted colonists should also enjoy.
opponents of the act occasionally referred to the natural rights of all mankind.
more frequently however they drew on time honored british principles such as a communitys right not to be taxed except by its elected representatives.
liberty they insisted could not be secure where property was taken away without consent taxation and an engraving of james otis graces the cover of the boston almanack for 1770 he is flanked by the ancient gods hercules and minerva carrying a liberty cap.
representation at stake were clashing ideas of the british empire itself.
american leaders viewed the empire as an association of equals in which free settlers overseas enjoyed the same rights as britons at home.
colonists in other outposts of the empire such as india the west indies and canada echoed this outlook.
all in the name of liberty claimed the right to govern their own affairs.
british residents of calcutta india demanded the rights inherent in englishmen british merchants in quebec said that to allow french this teapot protesting the stamp act was produced in england and marketed in colonial america illustrating the close political and economic connections between the two.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 a woodcut depicting a crowd attempting to intimidate a new hampshire official charged with carrying out the stamp act.
they throw stones at his effigy while to the left a mock funeral begins.
the crisis begins laws to remain in force would reduce them to slavery the british government and its appointed representatives in america by contrast saw the empire as a system of unequal parts in which different principles governed different areas and all were subject to the authority of parliament.
to surrender the right to tax the colonies would set a dangerous precedent for the empire as a whole.
in an empire extended and diversified as that of great britain declared governor francis bernard of massachusetts in 1765 there must be a supreme legislature to which all other powers must be subordinate parliament bernard continued was the sanctuary of liberty a description with which many americans were beginning to disagree.
some opponents of the stamp act distinguished between internal taxes like the stamp duty which they claimed parliament had no right to impose and revenue legitimately raised through the regulation of trade.
but more and more colonists insisted that britain had no right to tax them at all since americans were unrepresented in the house of commons.
no taxation without representation became their rallying cry.
virginias house of burgesses approved four resolutions offered by the fiery orator patrick henry.
they insisted that the colonists enjoyed the same liberties privileges franchises and immunities as residents of the mother country and that the right to consent to taxation was a cornerstone of british freedom the house of burgesses rejected as too radical three other resolutions including henrys call for outright resistance to unlawful taxation but these were also reprinted in colonial newspapers.
in october 1765 the stamp act congress with twenty seven delegates from nine colonies including some of the most prominent men in america met in new york and endorsed virginias position.
its resolutions began by affirming the allegiance of all colonists to the crown of great britain and their due subordination to parliament.
but they went on to insist that the right to consent to taxation was essential to the freedom of a people soon merchants throughout the colonies agreed to boycott british goods until parliament repealed the stamp act.
this was the first major cooperative action among britains mainland colonies.
in a sense by seeking to impose uniformity on the colonies rather than dealing with them individually as in the past parliament had inadvertently united america.
liberty and resistance no word was more frequently invoked by critics of the stamp act than liberty throughout the colonies opponents of the new tax staged mock funerals in which libertys coffin was carried to a burial ground only to have the occupant miraculously revived at the last moment whereupon the assembled crowd repaired to a tavern to celebrate.
as the crisis continued what were the roots and significance of the stamp act controversy.
symbols of liberty proliferated.
the large elm tree in boston on which protesters had hanged an effigy of the stamp distributor andrew oliver to persuade him to resign his post came to be known as the liberty tree.
its image soon began to appear in prints and pamphlets throughout the colonies.
open air meetings were held beneath the tree and as a result the space came to be called liberty hall.
in new york city a pine mast erected in 1766 as a meeting place for opponents of the stamp act was called the liberty pole.
colonial leaders resolved to prevent the new laws implementation and by and large they succeeded.
even before the passage of the stamp act a committee of correspondence in boston communicated with other colonies to encourage opposition to the sugar and currency acts.
now such committees sprang up in other colonies exchanging ideas and information about resistance.
initiated by colonial elites the movement against the stamp act quickly drew in a far broader range of americans.
the act wrote john adams a boston lawyer who drafted a set of widely reprinted resolutions against the measure had inspired the people even to the lowest ranks to become more attentive to their liberties more inquisitive about them and more determined to defend them than they were ever before known political debate adams added pervaded the colonies our presses have groaned our pulpits have thundered our legislatures have resolved our towns have voted politics in the streets opponents of the stamp act however did not rely solely on debate.
even before the law went into effect crowds forced those chosen to administer it to resign and destroyed shipments of stamps.
in new york city processions involving hundreds of residents shouting liberty paraded through the streets nearly every night in late 1765 they were organized by the newly created sons of liberty a body led by talented and ambitious lesser merchants like alexander mcdougall isaac sears and john lamb.
fluent in dutch french and german lamb became the sons liaison to the citys numerous ethnic groups.
these self made men had earned fortunes as privateers plundering french shipping during the seven years war and complained new yorks lieutenant governor opposed every limitation of trade and duty on it while they enjoyed no standing among the colonys wealthy elite and carried little weight in municipal affairs they enjoyed a broad following among the citys craftsmen laborers and sailors.
the sons posted notices reading liberty property and no stamps and took the lead in enforcing the boycott of british imports.
their actions were viewed with increasing alarm by the aristocratic livingston and de lancey families who dominated new york politics.
as the assault on thomas hutchinsons house in boston demonstrated crowds could easily get out of hand.
in november 1765 a new york crowd reportedly a warning by the sons of liberty against using the stamps required by the stamp act which are shown on the left.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 the crisis begins composed of sailors blacks laborers and youths hurled stones at fort george at the tip of manhattan island.
they then proceeded to destroy the home of major thomas james a british officer who was said to have boasted that he would force the stamps down new yorkers throats.
stunned by the ferocity of american resistance and pressured by london merchants and manufacturers who did not wish to lose their american markets the british government retreated.
in 1766 parliament repealed the stamp act.
but this concession was accompanied by the declaratory act which rejected americans claims that only their elected representatives could levy taxes.
parliament proclaimed this measure possessed the power to pass laws for the colonies and people of america.
in all cases whatever since the debt ridden british government continued to need money raised in the colonies passage of the declaratory act promised further conflict.
the regulators the stamp act crisis was not the only example of violent social turmoil during the 1760s.
many colonies experienced contentious internal divisions as well.
as population moved westward the conflicting land claims of settlers speculators colonial governments and indians sparked fierce disputes.
rural areas had a long tradition of resistance by settlers and small farmers against the claims of land speculators and large proprietors.
as in the stamp act crisis liberty was their rallying cry but in this case liberty had less to do with imperial policy than secure possession of land.
beginning in the mid 1760s a group of wealthy residents of the south carolina backcountry calling themselves regulators protested the underrepresentation of western settlements in the colonys assembly and the legislators failure to establish local governments that could regularize land titles and suppress bands of outlaws.
the lack of courts in the area they claimed had led to a breakdown of law and order allowing an infernal gang of villains to commit shocking outrages on persons and property.
they added we are free men british subjects not born slaves a parallel movement in north carolina mobilized small farmers who refused to pay taxes kidnapped local officials assaulted the homes of land speculators merchants and lawyers and disrupted court proceedings.
here the complaint was not a lack of government but corrupt county authorities.
these local officials the regulators claimed threatened inexpensive access to land and the prosperity of ordinary settlers through high taxes and court fees.
demanding the democratization of local government the regulators condemned the rich and powerful the colonys elite who used their political authority to prosper at the expense of poor industrious farmers.
at their peak the regulators numbered around 8 000 armed farmers.
the region remained in turmoil until 1771 when in the battle of alamance the farmers were suppressed by the colonys militia.
the tenant uprising also in the mid 1760s tenants on the livingston philipse and cortland manors along the hudson river north of new york city stopped paying rent and began seizing land.
like opponents of the stamp act they called what were the roots and significance of the stamp act controversy.
themselves the sons of liberty.
the original sons however opposed their uprising and it was soon suppressed by british and colonial troops.
meanwhile small farmers in the green mountains took up arms to protect their holdings against intrusions by new york landlords.
the legal situation there was complex.
the area was part of new york but during the 1750s the governor of new hampshire had issued land grants to new england families pocketing a fortune in fees.
when new yorkers tried to enforce their own title to the area the settlers leader ethan allen insisted that land should belong to the person who worked it.
outsiders he claimed were trying to enslave a free people in the mid 1770s allen and his green mountain boys gained control of the region which later became the state of vermont.
the emerging rift between britain and america eventually superimposed itself on conflicts within the colonies.
but the social divisions revealed in the stamp act riots and backcountry uprisings made some members of the colonial elite fear that opposition to british measures might unleash turmoil at home.
as a result they were more reluctant to challenge british authority when the next imperial crisis arose.
the road to revolution the townshend crisis in 1767 the government in london decided to impose a new set of taxes on americans.
they were devised by the chancellor of the exchequer the cabinets chief financial minister charles townshend.
in opposing the stamp act some colonists including benjamin franklin then representing the pennsylvania assembly in london had seemed to suggest that they would not object if britain raised revenue by regulating trade.
taking them at their word townshend persuaded parliament to impose new taxes on goods imported into the colonies and to create a new board of customs commissioners to collect them and suppress smuggling.
he intended to use the new revenues to pay the salaries of american governors and judges thus freeing them from dependence on colonial assemblies.
although many merchants objected to the new enforcement procedures opposition to the townshend duties developed more slowly than in the case of the stamp act.
leaders in several colonies nonetheless decided in 1768 to reimpose the ban on importing british goods.
homespun virtue the boycott began in boston and soon spread to the southern colonies.
reliance on american rather than british goods on homespun clothing rather than imported finery became a symbol of american resistance.
it also reflected as the colonists saw it a virtuous spirit of self sacrifice as compared with the self indulgence and luxury many americans were coming to associate with britain.
women who spun and wove at home so as not to purchase british goods were hailed as daughters of liberty.
the idea of using homemade rather than imported goods especially appealed to chesapeake planters who found themselves owing increasing c h.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 the road to revolution amounts of money to british merchants.
nonimportation wrote george washington reflecting virginia planters concern about their growing burden of debt gave the extravagant man an opportunity to retrench his expenses by reducing the purchase of british luxuries without having to advertise to his neighbors that he might be in financial distress.
in this way washington continued virginians could maintain the liberty which we have derived from our ancestors while reducing their considerable debts.
virginias leaders also announced a temporary ban on the importation of slaves but smaller planters in the piedmont region away from the coast where the institution was expanding ignored this restriction.
urban artisans who welcomed an end to competition from imported british manufactured goods strongly supported the boycott.
philadelphia and new york merchants at first were reluctant to take part although they eventually agreed to go along.
nonimportation threatened their livelihoods and raised the prospect of unleashing further lower class turmoil.
as had happened during the stamp act crisis the streets of american cities filled with popular protests against the new duties.
extralegal local committees attempted to enforce the boycott of british goods.
the boston massacre boston once again became the focal point of conflict.
royal troops had been stationed in the city in 1768 after rioting that followed the british seizure of the ship liberty for violating trade regulations.
the sloop belonged to john hancock one of the citys most prominent merchants.
the soldiers who competed for jobs on bostons waterfront with the citys laborers became more and more unpopular.
on march 5 1770 a fight between a snowball throwing crowd of bostonians and british troops escalated into an armed confrontation that left five bostonians dead.
one of those who fell in what came to be called the boston massacre was crispus attucks a sailor of mixed indian african white ancestry.
attucks would later be remembered as the first martyr of the american revolution the commanding officer and eight soldiers were put on trial in massachusetts.
ably defended by john adams who viewed lower class crowd actions as a dangerous method of opposing british policies seven were found not guilty while two were convicted of manslaughter.
but paul revere a member of the boston sons of liberty and a silversmith and engraver helped to stir up indignation against the british army by producing a widely circulated and quite inaccurate print of the boston massacre depicting a line of british soldiers firing into an unarmed crowd.
by 1770 as merchants profits shriveled and many members of the colonial elite found they could not do without british goods the nonimportation movement was collapsing.
the value of british imports to the colonies declined by about one third during 1769 but then rebounded to its former level.
british merchants who wished to remove a possible source of future interruption of trade pressed for repeal of the townshend duties.
when the british ministry agreed leaving in place only a tax on tea and agreed to remove troops from boston american merchants quickly abandoned the boycott.
visions of freedom the boston massacre.
less than a month after the boston massacre of 1770 in which five colonists died paul revere produced this engraving of the event.
although it inaccurately depicts what was actually a disorganized brawl between residents of boston and british soldiers this image became one of the most influential pieces of political propaganda of the revolutionary era.
questions 1 how does revere depict the british and colonists in this encounter and who does he blame for the five colonists deaths.
2 what attitude toward british authorities is revere attempting to promote through this engraving.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 wilkes and the road to revolution liberty once again an immediate crisis had been resolved.
nonetheless many americans concluded that britain was succumbing to the same pattern of political corruption and decline of liberty that afflicted other countries.
the overlap of the townshend crisis with a controversy in britain over the treatment of john wilkes reinforced this sentiment.
a radical journalist known for scandalous writings about the king and ministry wilkes had been elected to parliament from london but was expelled from his seat.
wilkes and liberty became a popular rallying cry on both sides of the atlantic.
in addition rumors circulated in the colonies that the anglican church in england planned to send bishops to america.
among members of other protestant denominations the rumors strongly denied in london sparked fears that bishops would establish religious courts like those that had once persecuted dissenters.
the conviction that the british government had set itself on a course dangerous to liberty underpinned colonial resistance when the next crisis arose.
the william hogarths depiction of john wilkes holding a liberty cap.
wilkess publication north briton bitterly attacked the king and prime minister for which wilkes was arrested tried and acquitted by a london jury.
he became a popular symbol of freedom on both sides of the atlantic.
the bostonians paying the excise man a 1774 engraving shows colonists pouring tea down the throat of a tax collector who has been covered with tar and feathers.
a noose hangs menacingly from the liberty tree.
in the background is the boston tea party.
tea act the next crisis underscored how powerfully events in other parts of britains global empire affected the american colonies.
the east india company a giant trading monopoly effectively governed recently acquired british possessions in india.
numerous british merchants bankers and other individuals had invested heavily in its stock.
a classic speculative bubble ensued with the price of stock in the company rising sharply and then collapsing.
to rescue the company and its investors the british government decided to help it market its enormous holdings of chinese tea in north america.
tea once a preserve of the wealthy had by now become a drink consumed by all social classes in england and the colonies.
to further stimulate its sales and bail out the east india company the british government now headed by frederick lord north offered the company a series of rebates and tax exemptions.
these enabled it to dump low priced tea on the american market undercutting both established merchants and smugglers.
money raised through the taxation of imported tea would be used to help defray the costs of colonial government thus threatening once again the assemblies control over finance.
the tax on tea was not new.
but many colonists insisted that to pay it on this large new body of imports would acknowledge britains right to tax the colonies.
as tea shipments arrived resistance developed in the major ports.
on december 16 1773 a group of colonists disguised as indians boarded three ships at anchor in boston harbor and threw more than 300 chests of tea into the water.
the event became known as the boston tea party.
the loss to the east india company was around 10 000 the equivalent of more than 4 million today.
the intolerable acts the british government declared lord north must now demonstrate whether we have or have not any authority in that country its response to the boston tea party was swift and decisive.
parliament closed the port of what key events sharpened the divisions between britain and the colonists in the late 1760s and early 1770s.
boston to all trade until the tea was paid for.
it radically altered the massachusetts charter of 1691 by curtailing town meetings and authorizing the governor to appoint members to the council positions previously filled by election.
parliament also empowered military commanders to lodge soldiers in private homes.
these measures called the coercive or intolerable acts by americans united the colonies in opposition to what was widely seen as a direct threat to their political freedom.
at almost the same time parliament passed the quebec act.
this extended the southern boundary of that canadian province to the ohio river and granted legal toleration to the roman catholic church in canada.
with an eye to the growing tensions in colonies to the south the act sought to secure the allegiance of quebecs catholics by offering rights denied to their coreligionists in britain including practicing their faith freely and holding positions in the civil service.
the act not only threw into question land claims in the ohio country but persuaded many colonists that the government in london was conspiring to strengthen catholicism dreaded by most protestants in its american empire.
fears of religious and political tyranny mingled in the minds of many colonists.
especially in new england the cause of liberty became the cause of god.
a gathering of 1 000 residents of farmington connecticut in may 1774 adopted resolutions proclaiming that as the sons of freedom they would resist every attempt to take away our liberties and properties and to enslave us forever they accused the british ministry of being instigated by the devil the coming of independence the continental congress british actions had destroyed the legitimacy of the imperial government in the eyes of many colonists.
opposition to the intolerable acts now spread to small towns and rural areas that had not participated actively in previous resistance.
in september 1774 in the town of worcester massachusetts 4 600 militiamen from thirty seven towns half the adult male population of the entire county lined both sides of main street as the british appointed officials walked the gauntlet between them.
in the same month a convention of delegates from massachusetts towns approved a series of resolutions called the suffolk resolves for the county in which boston is located that urged americans to refuse obedience to the new laws withhold taxes and prepare for war.
to coordinate resistance to the intolerable acts a continental congress convened in philadelphia that month bringing together the most prominent political leaders of twelve mainland colonies georgia did not take part.
from massachusetts came the brace of adamses john and his the mitred minuet a british cartoon from 1774 shows four roman catholic bishops dancing around a copy of the quebec act.
on the left british officials lord bute lord north and lord mansfield look on while the devil oversees the proceedings.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 the coming of independence more radical cousin samuel.
virginias seven delegates included george washington richard henry lee and the renowned orator patrick henry.
henrys power as a speaker came from a unique style that combined moral appeals with blunt directness.
his manner one contemporary observed was vehement without transporting him beyond the power of self command.
his lightning consisted in quick successive flashes the distinctions between virginians pennsylvanians new yorkers and new englanders henry declared are no more.
i am not a virginian but an american in march 1775 henry concluded a speech urging a virginia convention to begin military preparations with a legendary credo give me liberty or give me death the continental association before it adjourned at the end of october 1774 with an agreement to reconvene the following may if colonial demands had not been met the congress endorsed the suffolk resolves and adopted the continental association which called for an almost complete halt to trade with great britain and the west indies at south carolinas insistence exports of rice to europe were exempted.
the association also encouraged domestic manufacturing and denounced every species of extravagance and dissipation congress authorized local committees of safety to oversee its mandates and to take action against enemies of american liberty including businessmen who tried to profit from the sudden scarcity of goods.
the committees of safety began the process of transferring effective political power from established governments whose authority derived from great britain to extralegal grassroots bodies reflecting the will of the people.
by early 1775 some 7 000 men were serving on local committees throughout the colonies a vast expansion of the political nation the committees became training grounds where small farmers city artisans propertyless laborers and others who had heretofore had little role in government discussed political issues and exercised political power.
in philadelphia the extralegal committees of the 1760s that oversaw the boycott of british goods had been composed almost entirely of prominent lawyers and merchants.
but younger merchants shopkeepers and artisans dominated the committee elected in november 1774 to enforce the continental association.
they were determined that resistance to british measures not be dropped as it had been in 1770 when the new york assembly refused to endorse the association local committees continued to enforce it anyway.
the sweets of liberty by 1775 talk of liberty pervaded the colonies.
the past few years had witnessed an endless parade of pamphlets with titles like a chariot of liberty and oration on the beauties of liberty the latter a sermon delivered in boston by joseph allen in 1772 became the most popular public address of the years before independence.
sober men spoke longingly of the sweets of liberty while sleeping americans dreamed of liberty.
one anonymous essayist reported a night vision of the word written in the suns rays.
commented a british emigrant who arrived in maryland early in 1775 they are all liberty mad what key events marked the move toward american independence.
the right to resist oppressive authority and the identification of liberty with the cause of god so deeply ingrained by the imperial struggles of the eighteenth century were now invoked against britain itself by colonists of all backgrounds.
the first mass meeting in the history of northampton county pennsylvania whose population was overwhelmingly of german ancestry gathered in 1774 by the following year a majority of the countys adult population had joined militia associations.
many german settlers whose close knit communities had earlier viewed with some suspicion the famous english liberty as a byword for selfish individualism now claimed all the rights and privileges of natural born subjects of his majesty as the crisis deepened americans increasingly based their claims not simply on the historical rights of englishmen but on the more abstract language of natural rights and universal freedom.
the first continental congress defended its actions by appealing to the principles of the english constitution the liberties of free and natural born subjects within the realm of england and the immutable law of nature john lockes theory of natural rights that existed prior to the establishment of government offered a powerful justification for colonial resistance.
americans declared thomas jefferson in a summary view of the rights of british america written in 1774 to instruct virginias delegates to the continental congress were a free people claiming their rights as derived from the laws of nature and not as the gift of their chief magistrate americans jefferson insisted still revered the king.
but he demanded that empire henceforth be seen as a collection of equal parts held together by loyalty to a constitutional monarch not a system in which one part ruled over the others.
the outbreak of war by the time the second continental congress convened in may 1775 war had broken out between british soldiers and armed citizens of massachusetts.
on april 19 a force of british soldiers marched from boston toward the nearby town of concord seeking to seize arms being stockpiled there.
riders from boston among them paul revere warned local leaders of the troops approach.
militiamen took up arms and tried to resist the british advance.
skirmishes between americans and british soldiers took place at lexington and again at concord.
by the time the british retreated to the safety of boston some fortynine americans and seventy three members of the royal army lay dead.
what the philosopher ralph waldo emerson would later call the shot heard round the world began the american war of independence.
it reverberated throughout the colonies.
when news of the skirmish reached lemuel roberts a poor new york farmer he felt his bosom glow with the call of liberty roberts set off for massachusetts to enlist in the army.
in may 1775 ethan allen and the green mountain boys together with militiamen from connecticut led by benedict arnold surrounded the battle of concord as depicted in a 1775 engraving by amos doolittle a new haven silversmith.
under musket fire from colonials the british retreat across concords north bridge.
in his poem concorde hymn 1837 ralph waldo emerson immortalized the moment by the rude bridge that arched the flood their flag to aprils breeze unfurled here once the embattled farmers stood and fired the shot heard round the world.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 in march 1776 james pike a soldier in the massachusetts militia carved this scene on his powder horn to commemorate the battles of lexington and concord.
at the center stands the liberty tree.
the coming of independence fort ticonderoga in new york and forced it to surrender.
the following winter henry knox george washingtons commander of artillery arranged for some of the ticonderoga cannon to be dragged hundreds of miles to the east to reinforce the siege of boston where british forces were ensconced.
on june 17 1775 two months after lexington and concord the british had dislodged colonial militiamen from breeds hill although only at a heavy cost in casualties.
the battle came to be named after the nearby bunker hill.
but the arrival of american cannon in march 1776 and their entrenchment above the city made the british position in boston untenable.
the british army under the command of sir william howe was forced to abandon the city.
before leaving howes forces cut down the original liberty tree.
meanwhile the second continental congress authorized the raising of an army printed money to pay for it and appointed george washington its commander.
washington who had gained considerable fighting experience during the seven years war was not only the colonies best known military officer but also a prominent virginian.
john adams who proposed his name recognized that having a southerner lead american forces would reinforce colonial unity.
in response britain declared the colonies in a state of rebellion dispatched thousands of troops and ordered the closing of all colonial ports.
independence.
by the end of 1775 the breach with britain seemed irreparable.
but many colonists shied away from the idea of independence.
pride in membership in the british empire was still strong and many political leaders especially in colonies that had experienced internal turmoil feared that a complete break with the mother country might unleash further conflict.
anarchy from below in their view was as much a danger as tyranny from above.
many advocates of independence one opponent warned would find it very agreeable to divide the property of the rich among the poor.
such fears affected how colonial leaders responded to the idea of independence.
the elites of massachusetts and virginia who felt supremely confident of their ability to retain authority at home tended to support a break with britain.
massachusetts had borne the brunt of the intolerable acts.
southern leaders not only were highly protective of their political liberty but also were outraged by a proclamation issued in november 1775 by the earl of dunmore the british governor and military commander in virginia offering freedom to any slave who escaped to his lines and bore arms for the king.
in new york and pennsylvania however the diversity of the population made it difficult to work out a consensus on how far to go in resisting british measures.
here opposition to previous british laws had unleashed demands by small farmers and urban artisans for a greater voice in political affairs.
as a result many established leaders drew back from further what key events marked the move toward american independence.
resistance.
joseph galloway a pennsylvania leader and delegate to the second continental congress who worked to devise a compromise between british and colonial positions warned that independence would be accompanied by constant disputes within america.
he even predicted a war between the northern and southern colonies.
americans galloway declared could only enjoy true liberty self government and security for their persons and property by remaining within the empire.
common sense as 1776 dawned america presented the unusual spectacle of colonists at war against the british empire but still pleading for their rights within it.
even as fighting raged congress in july 1775 had addressed the olive branch petition to george iii reaffirming americans loyalty to the crown and hoping for a permanent reconciliation ironically it was a recent emigrant from england not a colonist from a family long established on american soil who grasped the inner logic of the situation and offered a vision of the broad significance of american independence.
an english craftsman and minor government official thomas paine had emigrated to philadelphia late in 1774 he quickly became associated with a group of advocates of the american cause including john adams and dr benjamin rush a leading philadelphia physician.
it was rush who suggested to paine that he write a pamphlet supporting american independence.
its author listed only as an englishman common sense appeared in january 1776 the pamphlet began not with a recital of colonial grievances but with an attack on the so much boasted constitution of england and the principles of hereditary rule and monarchical government.
rather than being the most perfect system of government in the world paine wrote the english monarchy was headed by the royal brute of england and the english constitution was composed in large part of the base remains of two ancient tyrannies.
monarchical tyranny in the person of the king and aristocratical tyranny in the persons of the peers of more worth is one honest man to society and in the sight of god he continued than all the crowned ruffians that ever lived far preferable than monarchy would be a democratic system based on frequent elections with citizens rights protected by a written constitution.
turning to independence paine drew on the colonists experiences to make his case.
there is something absurd he wrote in supposing a continent to be perpetually governed by an island within the british empire americas prospects were limited liberated from the navigation acts and trading freely with the entire world its material eminence was certain.
paine tied the economic hopes of the new nation to the idea of commercial freedom.
with independence moreover the colonies could for the first time insulate themselves from involvement in the endless imperial wars of europe.
britain had dragged its american colonies into conflicts with countries like spain and france which never were.
our enemies as americans but as our being the subjects of great britain membership in the british empire paine insisted was a burden to the colonies not a benefit.
toward the close of the pamphlet paine moved beyond practical considerations to outline a breathtaking vision of the historical importance of the thomas paine advocate of american independence in a 1791 portrait.
the cover of common sense thomas paines influential pamphlet denouncing the idea of hereditary rule and calling for american independence.
voices of freedom from thomas paine common sense 1776 a recent emigrant from england thomas paine in january 1776 published common sense a highly influential pamphlet that in stirring language made the case for american independence.
day a year or an age posterity are virtually involved in the context and will be more or less affected even to the end of time by the proceedings now.
now is the seed time of continental union faith and honor.
i challenge the warmest advocate for reconciliation to show a single advantage that this continent can reap by being connected with great britain.
but in the following pages i offer nothing more than simple facts plain arguments and common sense.
male and female are the distinctions of nature good and bad the distinctions of heaven but how a race of men came into the world so exalted above the rest and distinguished like some new species is worth enquiring into and whether they are the means of happiness or of misery to mankind.
one of the strongest natural proofs of the folly of hereditary right in kings is that nature disapproves it otherwise she would not so frequently turn it into ridicule by giving mankind an ass for a lion.
the sun never shined on a cause of greater worth.
tis not the affair of a city a country a province or a kingdom but of a continent of at least one eighth part of the habitable globe.
tis not the concern of a the injuries and disadvantages which we sustain by that connection are without number.
any submission to or dependence on great britain tends directly to involve this continent in european wars and quarrels and set us at variance with nations who would otherwise seek our friendship and against whom we have neither anger nor complaint.
o ye that love mankind.
ye that dare oppose not only the tyranny but the tyrant stand forth.
every spot of the old world is overrun with oppression.
freedom hath been hunted round the globe.
asia and africa have long expelled her.
europe regards her like a stranger and england hath given her warning to depart.
receive the fugitive and prepare in time an asylum for mankind.
from james chalmers plain truth addressed to the inhabitants of america 1776 common sense inspired a wide ranging debate about whether american freedom would be more secure inside or outside the british empire.
james chalmers a maryland plantation owner made the case for the loyalists as those who opposed american independence were called.
as near to perfection as human kind can bear.
his scheme of independency would soon very soon give way to a government imposed on us by some cromwell of our armies.
a failure of commerce would preclude the numerous tribe of planters farmers and others from paying their debts.
a war will ensue between the creditors and their debtors which will eventually end in a if indignant at the doctrine contained in the general abolition of debts.
volumes were insufficient to describe the horror pamphlet entitled common sense i have expressed myself in the following observations with some ardor.
it is because i adore my country.
passion misery and desolation awaiting the people at large in the form of american independence.
in short i affirm that it would be most excellent policy in ately devoted to true liberty i glow with the purest those who wish for true liberty to submit by an flame of patriotism and have an abhorrence of independency which if effected would inevitably plunge our once preeminently envied country into advantageous reconciliation to the authority of great britain.
independence and slavery are synonymous terms.
ruin horror and desolation.
can a reasonable being for a moment believe that great britain whose political existence depends on our constitutional obedience who but yesterday made such prodigious efforts to save us from france will not exert herself as powerfully to preserve us from our frantic schemes of independency.
we remember with unfeigned gratitude the many benefits derived through our connections with great britain by whom but yesterday we were emancipated from slavery and death.
we venerate the constitution which with all its imperfections too often exaggerated we apprehend almost approaches questions 1 what does paine see as the global significance of the american struggle for independence.
2 why does chalmers equate independence with slavery.
3 how does the language used by the two writers differ and what does this tell us about their views of politics.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 the coming of independence american revolution.
the cause of america he proclaimed in stirring language is in great measure the cause of all mankind the new nation would become the home of freedom an asylum for mankind paines impact most of paines ideas were not original.
what made common sense unique was his mode of expressing them and the audience he addressed.
previous political writings had generally been directed toward the educated elite.
when i mention the public declared john randolph of virginia in 1774 i mean to include the rational part of it.
the ignorant vulgar are unfit.
to manage the reins of government just as evangelical ministers had shattered the trained clergys monopoly on religious preaching paine pioneered a new style of political writing one designed to expand dramatically the public sphere where political discussion took place.
he wrote clearly and directly and he avoided the complex language and latin phrases common in pamphlets aimed at educated readers.
common sense quickly became one of the most successful and influential pamphlets in the history of political writing selling by paines estimate some 150 000 copies.
paine directed that his share of the profits be used to buy supplies for the continental army.
in february 1776 the massachusetts political leader joseph hawley read common sense and remarked every sentiment has sunk into my well prepared heart the hearts of hawley and thousands of other americans had been prepared for paines arguments by the extended conflict over britains right to tax the colonies the outbreak of war in 1775 and the growing conviction that britain was a corrupt society where liberty was diminishing.
the intensification of fighting in the winter of 1775 1776 when americans unsuccessfully invaded canada while the british burned falmouth now portland maine and bombarded norfolk virginia gave added weight to the movement for independence.
in the spring of 1776 scores of american communities adopted resolutions calling for a separation from britain.
only six months elapsed between the appearance of common sense and the decision by the second continental congress to sever the colonies ties with great britain.
the declaration of independence on july 2 1776 the congress formally declared the united states an independent nation.
two days later it approved the declaration of independence written by thomas jefferson and revised by the congress before approval.
see the appendix for the full text.
most of the declaration consists of a lengthy list of grievances directed against king george iii ranging from quartering troops in colonial homes to imposing taxes without the colonists consent.
britains aim it declared was to establish absolute tyranny over the colonies.
one clause in jeffersons draft which condemned the inhumanity of the slave trade and criticized the king for overturning colonial laws that sought to restrict the importation of slaves was deleted by the congress at the insistence of georgia and south carolina.
the declarations enduring impact came not from the complaints against what key events marked the move toward american independence.
an early draft with corrections of the declaration of independence in thomas jeffersons handwriting.
note how the elimination of unnecessary words added to the documents power all men are created equal and independent became all men are created equal and inherent and inalienable rights became inalienable in the final version this would be changed to unalienable.
george iii but from jeffersons preamble especially the second paragraph which begins we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness by unalienable rights jefferson meant rights so basic so rooted in human nature itself or in what john locke had called the state of nature that no government could take them away.
jefferson then went on to justify the breach with britain.
government he wrote derives its powers from the consent of the governed when a government threatens its subjects natural rights the people have the authority to alter or to abolish it the declaration of independence is ultimately an assertion of the right of revolution.
the declaration and american freedom the declaration of independence changed forever the meaning of american freedom.
it completed the shift from the rights of englishmen to the rights of mankind as the object of american independence.
in jeffersons language the laws of nature and of natures god not the british constitution or the heritage of the freeborn englishman justified independence.
no longer a set of specific rights no longer a privilege to be enjoyed by a corporate body or people in certain social circumstances liberty had become a universal entitlement.
jeffersons argument natural rights the right to resist arbitrary authority etc drew on the writings of john locke who as explained in the previous chapter 1 remained intact in the new the 1781 cipher book a notebook for mathematics exercises of martha ryan a north carolina girl contains images of ships and a port town and the patriotic slogan liberty or death illustrating how women shared in the political culture of the revolutionary era.
6 the revolution within keep within compass a lateeighteenth century engraving illustrates the happiness of a virtuous woman if she remains within the world of the home and family and some of the troubles awaiting her if she ventures outside.
the woman appears in a space marked off by a compass an instrument for drawing a circle.
daughters of liberty nation.
the husband still held legal authority over the person property and choices of his wife.
the words to have and to hold appeared in deeds conveying land from one owner to another and in common marriage vows.
despite the expansion of democracy politics remained overwhelmingly a male realm.
for men political freedom meant the right to self government the power to consent to the individuals and political arrangements that ruled over them.
for women however the marriage contract superseded the social contract.
a womans relationship to the larger society was mediated through her relationship with her husband.
in both law and social reality women lacked the essential qualification of political participation the opportunity for autonomy based on ownership of property or control of ones own person.
since the common law included women within the legal status of their husbands women could not be said to have property in themselves in the same sense as men.
men took pride in qualities like independence and masculinity that distinguished them from women and still considered control over their families an element of freedom.
among the deprivations of slavery cited by a group of black male petitioners in 1774 was that it prevented their wives from submitting themselves to husbands in all things as the natural order of the universe required.
many women who entered public debate felt the need to apologize for their forthrightness.
a group of quaker women who petitioned congress during the war of independence protesting the mistreatment of men who would not take an oath of loyalty hoped the lawmakers would take no offense at the freedom of women most men considered women to be naturally submissive and irrational and therefore unfit for citizenship.
while public debate in the revolutionary era viewed mens rights as natural entitlements discussions of womens roles emphasized duty and obligations not individual liberty.
their rights were nonpolitical deriving from their roles as wives and mothers.
overall the republican citizen was by definition male.
in a notable case a massachusetts court returned to james martin confiscated property previously owned by his mother who had fled the state during the revolution with her loyalist husband.
like other states massachusetts seized the land of those who had supported the british.
but the court ruled it was unreasonable to expect a wife to exercise independent political judgment.
to rebel against the king was one thing but one could hardly ask mrs martin to rebel against her husband.
therefore the court reasoned she should not have been punished for taking the british side.
republican motherhood the revolution nonetheless did produce an improvement in status for many women.
according to the ideology of republican motherhood that emerged as a result of independence women played an indispensable role by training future citizens.
the foundation of national morality wrote john adams must be laid in private families even though republican motherhood ruled out direct female involvement in politics it encouraged the expansion of educational opportunities for women so that they could how did the revolution affect the status of women.
impart political wisdom to their children.
women wrote benjamin rush needed to have a suitable education to enable them to instruct their sons in the principles of liberty and government the idea of republican motherhood reinforced the trend already evident in the eighteenth century toward the idea of companionate marriage a voluntary union held together by affection and mutual dependency rather than male authority.
in her letter to john adams quoted above abigail adams recommended that men should willingly give up the harsh title of master for the more tender and endearing one of friend the structure of family life itself was altered by the revolution.
in colonial america those living within the household often included indentured servants apprentices and slaves.
after independence southern slaves remained rhetorically at least members of the owners family in the north however with the rapid decline of various forms of indentured servitude and apprenticeship a more modern definition of the household as consisting of parents and their children took hold.
hired workers whether domestic servants or farm laborers were not considered part of the family.
like slaves some free women adapted the rhetoric of the revolution to their own situation.
ann baker carson later recalled how she became estranged from the tyrannical husband she had married at age sixteen.
i was an american she wrote.
a land of liberty had given me birth.
i felt myself his equal she left the marriage rather than continue as a female slave but unlike the case of actual slaves the subordination of women did not become a major source of public debate until long after american independence.
the arduous struggle for portrait of john and elizabeth lloyd cadwalader and their daughter anne.
this 1772 portrait of a prominent philadelphia businessman and his family by the american artist charles willson peale illustrates the emerging ideal of the companionate marriage which is based on affection rather than male authority.
liberty the revolution changed the lives of virtually every american.
as a result of the long struggle against british rule the public sphere and with it the two pages from a little pretty pocketbook intended for the instruction and amusement of little master tommy and pretty miss polly 1787 which taught virtuous behavior to young children.
the revolution stimulated interest in improving female education.
6 the revolution within daughters of liberty america triumphant and britannia in distress.
an elaborate allegory representing american independence as a triumph of liberty from an almanac published in boston in 1781 an accompanying key explains the symbolism 1 america on the right holds an olive branch of peace and invites all nations to trade with her.
2 news of americas triumph is broadcast around the world.
3 britain seated next to the devil laments the loss of trade with america.
4 the british flag falls from a fortress.
5 european ships in american waters.
6 benedict arnold the traitor hangs himself in new york city in fact arnold died of natural causes in london in 1801.
right to vote expanded markedly.
bound labor among whites declined dramatically religious groups enjoyed greater liberty blacks mounted a challenge to slavery in which many won their freedom and women in some ways enjoyed a higher status.
on the other hand for indians many loyalists and the majority of slaves american independence meant a deprivation of freedom.
in the words of one british admirer the genuine liberty on which america is founded is totally and entirely a new system of things and men a new nation which defined itself as an embodiment of freedom had taken its place on the world stage.
not only britain but all europe are spectators of the conflict the arduous struggle for liberty wrote ezra stiles a future president of yale college in 1775.
we consider ourselves as laying the foundation of a glorious future empire and acting a part for the contemplation of the ages like stiles many other americans were convinced that their struggle for independence had worldwide significance.
american independence indeed formed part of a larger set of movements that transformed the atlantic world.
the year 1776 saw not only paines common sense and jeffersons declaration but also the publication in england of adam smiths the wealth of nations which attacked the british policy of closely regulating trade and jeremy benthams fragment on government which criticized the nature of british government.
the winds of change were sweeping across the atlantic world.
the ideals of the american revolution helped to inspire countless subsequent struggles for social equality and national independence from the french revolution which exploded in 1789 to the uprising that overthrew the slave system in haiti in the 1790s to the latin american wars for independence in the early nineteenth century and numerous struggles of colonial peoples for nationhood in the twentieth.
but within the new republic the debate over who should enjoy the blessings of liberty would continue long after independence had been achieved.
suggested reading suggested reading books berkin carol.
revolutionary mothers women in the struggle for american independence 2005.
presents profiles of women who took part in the movement for independence.
boulton terry.
taming democracy the people the founders and the troubled ending of the american revolution 2007.
argues that the democratic impulse unleashed by the war of independence was to some extent reversed by the events of the 1780s.
brown wallace.
the good americans the loyalists in the american revolution 1969.
a study of americans who remained loyal to great britain during the war of independence.
calloway colin.
the american revolution in indian country 1995.
examines how the revolution affected indians in each region of the united states.
davis david brion.
the problem of slavery in the age of revolution 1975.
an influential study of the emergence of slavery as a major public issue in the atlantic world.
doerflinger thomas m a vigorous spirit of enterprise merchants and economic development in revolutionary philadelphia 1986.
explores how philadelphia merchants participated in and reacted to the upheavals of the revolutionary era.
frey sylvia r water from the rock black resistance in a revolutionary age 1991.
a study of the many ways blacks sought to gain freedom for themselves during the revolution.
hatch nathan o the democratization of american christianity 1989.
a comprehensive account of the revolutions impact on religion and its aftermath.
holton woody.
forced founders indians debtors slaves and the making of the american revolution in virginia 1999.
explores how the struggles of those outside virginias elite contributed to the movement for independence.
kruman marc.
between authority and liberty state constitution making in revolutionary america 1997.
the most detailed account of how state constitutions were changed during the era.
the unknown american revolution the unruly birth of democracy and the struggle to create america 2005.
emphasizes the role of ordinary americans in the struggle for independence.
schama simon.
rough crossing britain the slaves and the american revolution 2006.
a detailed look at the experience of the thousands of slaves who escaped to british lines and their fate after the end of the war of independence.
taylor alan.
the divided ground indians settlers and the northern borderland of the american revolution 2006.
examines the revolution and its consequence in the iroquois region of upstate new york.
wood gordon.
the radicalism of the american revolution 1992.
an influential work that sees the revolution as transforming a hierarchical society into a democratic one.
websites creating the united states default aspx religion and the founding of the american republic religion religion html the geography of slavery in virginia c hapter r eview review questions 1 colonial society was based on inequality and obedience to authority.
how did the american revolution challenge the existing order of society.
2 why did the revolution cause more radical changes in pennsylvania than elsewhere and how was this radicalism demonstrated in the new state constitution.
3 even after the american revolution conservatives denied that freedom and equality were synonymous and opposed the growth of democracy.
how did conservatives resist democratization in the south.
4 what role did the founders forsee for religion in american government and society.
5 what was the impact of the american revolution on native americans.
6 what were the most important features of the new state constitutions.
7 how did popular views of property rights and the marriage contract prevent women and slaves from enjoying all the freedoms of the social contract.
8 what was republican motherhood and why was it significant.
freedom questions 1 revolutions create change challenge authority and embolden marginalized groups to apply revolutionary ideals to their own situation.
how did slaves indentured servants women and native americans use the ideals of freedom to further their causes.
2 wartime patriots insisted that freedom of conscience was a key part of liberty.
what steps were taken to protect religious freedom and did this freedom apply to everyone.
3 before the american revolution americans commonly held that the role of government was to promote the public good.
after the war merchants and other leaders advocated free trade and free markets ruled by self interest as an expression of freedom.
how did this new concept of freedom for some americans deprive others of their freedoms.
4 patriots claimed to be fighting a war to protect liberty and freedom in america yet these ideas did not apply to everyone.
how did loyalists and native americans suffer and why were their natural rights not protected.
slavery and liberty were the two most frequently used terms in the debate over freedom.
how did they apply to the political rights of white property owners but then mean something entirely different when referring to african americans held as property.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e one house legislature p 223 freedom and the state constitutions thoughts on government p 224 provision states eliminated property qualification for voting all states except virginia maryland south carolina wall of separation p 227 eliminated all property and tax qualifications for voting vermont bill for establishing religious freedom p 228 granted vote to free blacks who met qualifications all states except virginia south carolina georgia free labor p 231 one house state government pennsylvania georgia vermont free trade p 232 two house state government all states except pennsylvania georgia vermont guaranteed complete religious liberty new york loyalists p 233 stockbridge indians p 236 deprived governor of veto power all states except massachusetts general john sullivan p 237 established annual elections to increase accountability all states except north carolina balanced government p 224 suffrage p 225 inflation p 232 abolition p 239 freedom petitions p 241 lemuel haynes p 241 free blacks p 248 citizens of color p 248 republican motherhood p 250 suitable education p 251 c hapter 7 somerset case articles of confederation drafted articles of confederation ratified letters from an american farmer 1784 land ordinances approved jeffersons notes on the state of virginia 1786 shayss rebellion northwest ordinance of 1787 constitutional convention convened the federalist constitution ratified naturalization act bill of rights ratified little turtle defeats arthur st clairs forces little turtle defeated at battle of fallen timbers treaty of greenville congress prohibits the slave trade founding a nation 1783 1789 america under the confederation the articles of confederation congress and the west settlers and the west the land ordinances the confederations weaknesses shayss rebellion nationalists of the 1780s slavery in the constitution the final document the ratification debate and the origin of the bill of rights the federalist extend the sphere the anti federalists the bill of rights a new constitution the people the structure of government the limits of democracy the division and separation of powers the debate over slavery national identity indians in the new nation blacks and the republic jefferson slavery and race principles of freedom in this late eighteenth century engraving americans celebrate the signing of the constitution beneath a temple of liberty.
f ocus q uestions what were the achievements and problems of the confederation government.
what major disagreements and compromises molded the final content of the constitution.
how did anti federalist concerns raised during the ratification process lead to the creation of the bill of rights.
how did the definition of citizenship in the new republic exclude native americans and africanamericans.
l d uring june and july of 1788 civic leaders in cities up and down the atlantic coast organized colorful pageants to celebrate the ratification of the united states constitution.
for one day benjamin rush commented of philadelphias parade social class forgot its claims as thousands of marchers rich and poor businessman and apprentice joined in a common public ceremony.
new yorks grand federal procession was led by farmers followed by the members of every craft in the city from butchers and coopers makers of wooden barrels to bricklayers blacksmiths and printers.
lawyers merchants and clergymen brought up the rear.
the parades testified to the strong popular support for the constitution in the nations cities.
and the prominent role of skilled artisans reflected how the revolution had secured their place in the american public sphere.
elaborate banners and floats gave voice to the hopes inspired by the new structure of government.
may commerce flourish and industry be rewarded declared philadelphias mariners and shipbuilders.
throughout the era of the revolution americans spoke of their nation as a rising empire destined to populate and control the entire north american continent.
while europes empires were governed by force americas would be different.
in jeffersons phrase it would be an empire of liberty bound together by a common devotion to the principles of the declaration of independence.
already the united states exceeded in size great britain spain and france combined.
as a new nation it possessed many advantages including physical isolation from the old world a significant asset between 1789 and 1815 when european powers were almost constantly at war a youthful population certain to grow much larger and a broad distribution of property ownership and literacy among white citizens.
on the other hand while americans dreamed of economic prosperity and continental empire the nations prospects at the time of independence were not entirely promising.
control of its vast territory was by no means secure.
nearly all of the 3 9 million americans recorded in the first national census of 1790 lived near the atlantic coast.
large areas west of the appalachian mountains remained in indian hands.
the british retained military posts on american territory near the great lakes and there were fears that spain might close the port of new orleans to american commerce on the mississippi river.
away from navigable waterways communication and transportation were primitive.
the country was overwhelmingly rural fewer than one american in thirty lived in a place with 8 000 inhabitants or more.
the population consisted of numerous ethnic and religious groups and some 700 000 slaves making unity difficult to achieve.
no republican government had ever been established over so vast a territory or with so what were the achievements and problems of the confederation government.
diverse a population.
local loyalties outweighed national patriotism.
we have no americans in america commented john adams.
it would take time for consciousness of a common nationality to sink deep roots.
today with the united states the most powerful country on earth it is difficult to recall that in 1783 the future seemed precarious indeed for the fragile nation seeking to make its way in a world of hostile great powers.
profound questions needed to be answered.
what course of development should the united states follow.
how could the competing claims of local self government sectional interests and national authority be balanced.
who should be considered full fledged members of the american people entitled to the blessings of liberty.
these issues became the focus of heated debate as the first generation of americans sought to consolidate their new republic.
a m e r i c a u n d e r t h e c o n f e d e r at i o n the articles of confederation the first written constitution of the united states was the articles of confederation drafted by congress in 1777 and ratified by the states four years later.
the articles sought to balance the need for national coordination of the war of independence with widespread fear that centralized political power posed a danger to liberty.
it explicitly declared the new national government to be a perpetual union but it resembled less a blueprint for a common government than a treaty for mutual defense in its own words a firm league of friendship among the states.
under the articles the thirteen states retained their individual sovereignty freedom and independence the national government consisted of a one house congress in which each state no matter how large or populous cast a single vote.
there was no president to enforce the laws and no judiciary to interpret them.
major decisions required the approval of nine states rather than a simple majority.
the only powers specifically granted to the national government by the articles of confederation were those essential to the struggle for independence declaring war conducting foreign affairs and making treaties with other governments.
congress had no real financial resources.
it could coin money but lacked the power to levy taxes or regulate commerce.
its revenue came mainly from contributions by the individual states.
to amend the articles required the unanimous consent of the states a formidable obstacle to change.
various amendments to strengthen the national government were proposed during the seven years 1781 1788 when the articles of confederation were in effect but none received the approval of all the states.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 western lands america under the confederation 1782 1802 r lake michigan vermont 1791 new ceded by virginia 1784 o new york hampshire i r a t on lake massachusetts ceded by ceded by massachusetts 1785 massachusetts and virginia 1784 rie rhode island ceded by ee k a connecticut ceded by connecticut 1786 l connecticut and virginia 1784 new pennsylvania ceded by jersey connecticut 1800 maryland delaware ceded by virginia 1784 ohio r l hudson r u ro n r maine part of massachusetts eh pi.
ak i m ss i ssi p rio r ce en st l a lak e supe wr british canada virginia spanish louisiana ceded by virginia 1792 ceded by south carolina north carolina ceded by north carolina south carolina ceded by georgia 1802 atl anti c o cean georgia ceded by spain 1795 ceded by georgia 1802 spanish florida gulf of mexico states after land cessions ceded territory territory ceded by new york 1782 200 miles 100 200 kilometers the creation of a nationally controlled public domain from western land ceded by the states was one of the main achievements of the federal government under the articles of confederation.
what were the achievements and problems of the confederation government.
the articles made energetic national government impossible.
but congress in the 1780s did not lack for accomplishments.
the most important was establishing national control over land to the west of the thirteen states and devising rules for its settlement.
disputes over access to western land almost prevented ratification of the articles in the first place.
citing their original royal charters which granted territory running all the way to the south sea the pacific ocean states like virginia the carolinas and connecticut claimed immense tracts of western land.
land speculators politicians and prospective settlers from states with clearly defined boundaries insisted that such land must belong to the nation at large.
only after the land rich states in the interest of national unity ceded their western claims to the central government did the articles win ratification.
congress and the west establishing rules for the settlement of this national domain the area controlled by the federal government stretching from the western boundaries of existing states to the mississippi river was by no means easy.
although some americans spoke of it as if it were empty some 100 000 indians in fact inhabited the region.
in the immediate aftermath of independence congress took the position that by aiding the british indians had forfeited the right to their lands.
little distinction was made among tribes that had sided with the enemy those that had aided the patriots and those in the interior that had played no part in the war at all.
at peace conferences at fort stanwix new york in 1784 and fort mcintosh near pittsburgh the following year american representatives demanded and received large surrenders of indian land north of the ohio river.
similar treaties soon followed with the cherokee choctaw and chickasaw tribes in the south although here congress guaranteed the permanency of the indians remaining much reduced holdings.
the treaties secured national control of a large part of the countrys western territory.
when it came to disposing of western land and regulating its settlement the confederation government faced conflicting pressures.
many leaders believed that the economic health of the new republic required that farmers have access to land in the west.
but they also saw land sales as a potential source of revenue and worried that unregulated settlement would produce endless conflicts with the indians.
land companies which lobbied congress vigorously hoped to profit by purchasing real estate and reselling it to settlers.
the government they insisted should step aside and allow private groups to take control of the wests economic development.
settlers and the west the arrival of peace meanwhile triggered a large population movement from settled parts of the original states into frontier areas like upstate new york and across the appalachian mountains into kentucky and tennessee.
to settlers the right to take possession of western lands and use them as they saw fit was an essential element of american freedom.
when a group of ohioans petitioned congress in 1785 assailing landlords and speculators c h.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 america under the confederation an engraving from the farmers and mechanics almanac shows farm families moving west along a primitive road.
who monopolized available acreage and asking that preference in land ownership be given to actual settlements their motto was grant us liberty indeed settlers paid no heed to indian land titles and urged the government to set a low price on public land or give it away.
they frequently occupied land to which they had no legal title.
by the 1790s kentucky courts were filled with lawsuits over land claims and many settlers lost land they thought they owned.
eventually disputes over land forced many early settlers including the parents of abraham lincoln to leave kentucky for opportunities in other states.
at the same time however like british colonial officials before them many leaders of the new nation feared that an unregulated flow of population across the appalachian mountains would provoke constant warfare with indians.
moreover they viewed frontier settlers as disorderly and lacking in proper respect for authority our debtors loose english people our german servants and slaves benjamin franklin had once called them.
establishing law and order in the west and strict rules for the occupation of land there seemed essential to attracting a better class of settlers to the west and avoiding discord between the settled and frontier parts of the new nation.
the land ordinances a series of measures approved by congress during the 1780s defined the terms by which western land would be marketed and settled.
drafted by thomas jefferson the ordinance of 1784 established stages of self government for the west.
the region would be divided into districts initially governed by congress and eventually admitted to the union as member states.
by a single vote congress rejected a clause that would have prohibited slavery what were the achievements and problems of the confederation government.
western ordinances 1785 1787 british north america canada r maine part of massachusetts st la wr en ce lake superior fort michilimackinac dutchman s point ak i r la fort niagara michigan 1837 fort detroit spanish louisiana io ke ontar la ke er new hampshire oswego new york ie hudson r lake mich p sip u ro n igan eh wisconsin 1848 mi s si s pointau fer l massachusetts rhode island connecticut pennsylvania illinois 1818 ohio 1803 indiana 1816 new jersey maryland delaware.
virginia oh i or forts disputed boundaries northwest territory kentucky 1792 200 miles the seven ranges first area survey detail of township 36 square miles 6 miles virginia pennsylvania 7th range 6th range 5th range 4th range 3rd range 2nd range 1st range 6 miles north carolina tennessee 1796 200 kilometers 1 mile a series of ordinances in the 1780s provided for both the surveying and sale of lands in the public domain north of the ohio river and the eventual admission of states carved from the area as equal members of the union.
income from section 16 reserved for school support detail of section 1 square mile 640 acres half section 320 acres 1 mile atl antic o cean half quarter section 80 acres quarter quarter section 40 acres each quarter section 160 acres c h.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 america under the confederation throughout the west.
a second ordinance in 1785 regulated land sales in the region north of the ohio river which came to be known as the old northwest.
land would be surveyed by the government and then sold in sections of a square mile 640 acres at 1 per acre.
in each township one section would be set aside to provide funds for public education.
the system promised to control and concentrate settlement and raise money for congress.
but settlers violated the rules by pressing westward before the surveys had been completed.
like the british before them american officials found it difficult to regulate the thirst for new land.
the minimum purchase price of 640 however put public land out of the financial reach of most settlers.
they generally ended up buying smaller parcels from speculators and land companies.
in 1787 congress decided to sell off large tracts to private groups including 1 5 million acres to the ohio company organized by new england land speculators and army officers.
this was a different organization from the ohio company of the 1750s mentioned in chapter which referred to a way of mass producing goods with interchangeable parts not a political program for economic growth.
the plan rested on three pillars a new national bank a tariff on imported manufactured goods to protect american industry and federal financing of improved roads and canals.
the last was particularly important to those worried about the dangers of disunity.
let us bind the nation together with a perfect system of roads and canals john c calhoun implored congress in 1815.
let us conquer space when believers in strict construction of the constitution objected calhoun replied if we are restricted in the use of money to the enumerated powers on what principle can the purchase of louisiana be justified government sponsored internal improvements as the construction of roads and canals was called proved to be the most controversial part of the plan.
congress enacted an internal improvements program drafted by calhoun only to be astonished when the president on the eve of his retirement from office in march 1817 vetoed the bill.
since calling for its enactment madison had become convinced that allowing the national government to exercise powers not mentioned in the constitution would prove dangerous to individual liberty and southern interests.
a constitutional amendment would be necessary he declared before the federal government could build roads and canals.
the other two parts of his plan however became law.
the tariff of 1816 offered protection to goods that could be produced in the united states especially cheap cotton textiles while admitting tax free those that could not be manufactured at home.
many southerners supported the tariff believing that it would enable their region to develop a manufacturing base to rival new englands.
and in 1816 a new bank of the united states was created with a twenty year charter from congress.
banks and money the second bank of the united states soon became the focus of public resentment.
like its predecessor it was a private profit making corporation that served as the governments financial agent issuing paper money collecting taxes and paying the governments debts.
it was also charged with ensuring that paper money issued by local banks had real value.
the number of local banks had risen to more than 200 a sign of the accelerating market revolution.
they promoted economic growth by helping to finance john c calhoun in an 1822 portrait by the artist charles bird king.
calhoun would evolve from a nationalist into the most prominent spokesman for state sovereignty and the right of nullification.
10 democracy in america 1815 1840 nationalism and its discontents manufacturing and commerce and extending loans to farmers for the purchase of land tools consumer goods and in the south slaves.
they also printed paper money.
today only the federal government issues paper money and the amount is determined by the federal reserve bank not the amount of gold held at the repository at fort knox.
but in the nineteenth century paper money consisted of notes promising to pay the bearer on demand a specified amount of specie gold or silver.
the value of the currency issued by individual banks depended on their reputation for stability.
since banks often printed far more money than the specie in their vaults the value of paper currency fluctuated wildly.
the bank of the united states was supposed to prevent the overissuance of money.
because it held all the funds of the federal government it accumulated a large amount of paper money issued by local banks which had been used to purchase public land.
the bank of the united states could demand payment in gold and silver from a local bank in exchange for that banks paper money.
this prospect was supposed to prevent local banks from acting improperly for if it could not provide the specie when asked it would have to suspend operations.
the panic of but instead of effectively regulating the currency and loans issued by local banks the bank of the united states participated in a speculative fever that swept the country after the end of the war of 1812 the resumption of trade with europe created a huge overseas market for american cotton and grain.
coupled with the rapid expansion of settlement into the west this stimulated demand for loans to purchase land which local banks and branches of the bank of the united states were only too happy to meet by printing more money.
the land boom was especially acute in the south where the cotton kingdom was expanding.
early in 1819 as european demand for american farm products returned to normal levels the economic bubble burst.
the demand for land plummeted and speculators lost millions as the price of western land fell.
at this time loans tended to be of short duration and banks could demand repayment at any time.
the bank of the united states followed by state banks began asking for payments from those to whom it had loaned money.
farmers and businessmen who could not repay declared bankruptcy and unemployment rose in eastern cities.
the politics of the panic the panic of 1819 lasted little more than a year but it severely disrupted the political harmony of the previous years.
those suffering from the economic downturn pressed the state and national governments for assistance.
to the consternation of creditors many states especially in the west responded by suspending the collection of debts.
kentucky went even further establishing a state bank that flooded the state with paper money that creditors were required to accept in repayment of loans.
this eased the burden on indebted farmers but injured those who had loaned them the money.
overall the panic deepened many americans traditional distrust of banks.
it undermined the reputation of the second bank of the united states what efforts were made in this period to strengthen the economic integration of the nation and what major crises hindered these efforts.
which was widely blamed for causing the panic.
several states retaliated against the national bank by taxing its local branches.
these tax laws produced another of john marshalls landmark supreme court decisions in the case of mcculloch v maryland 1819.
reasserting his broad interpretation of governmental powers marshall declared the bank a legitimate exercise of congressional authority under the constitutions clause that allowed congress to pass necessary and proper laws.
marshalls interpretation of the constitution directly contradicted the strict construction view that limited congress to powers specifically granted in the constitution.
marshall acknowledged that the constitution nowhere mentions the right of lawmakers to issue corporate charters.
but he wrote where the aim of legislation in this case to promote the general welfare was legitimate all means which are.
not prohibited.
are constitutional maryland the chief justice continued could not tax the bank.
the power to tax marshall remarked involves the power to destroy and the states lacked the authority to destroy an agency created by the national government.
the missouri controversy in 1816 james monroe handily defeated federalist candidate rufus king becoming the last of the virginia presidents.
by 1820 the federalists fielded electoral tickets in only two states and monroe carried the entire country.
one elector william plumer of new hampshire however cast his vote for john quincy adams whom he deemed more qualified than monroe to be president.
the legend later arose that plumer voted as he did because he wished george washington to remain the only president elected unanimously.
monroes two terms in office were years of one party government sometimes called the era of good feelings.
plenty of bad feelings however surfaced during his presidency.
in the absence of two party competition politics was organized along lines of competing sectional interests.
even as political party divisions faded and john marshall aligned the supreme court with the aggressive nationalism of clay calhoun and others the troublesome issue of slavery again threatened to disrupt the nations unity.
in 1819 congress considered a request from missouri an area carved out of the louisiana purchase to form a constitution in preparation for admission to the union as a state.
missouris slave population already exceeded 10 000 james tallmadge a republican congressman from new york moved that the introduction of further slaves be prohibited and that children of those already in missouri be freed at age twenty five.
tallmadges proposal sparked two years of controversy during which republican unity shattered along sectional lines.
his restriction passed the house where most northern congressmen supported it over the objections of southern representatives.
it died in the senate however.
when congress reconvened in 1820 senator jesse thomas of illinois proposed a compromise with three parts.
missouri would be authorized to draft a constitution without tallmadges restriction.
maine which prohibited slavery would be admitted to the union to maintain the sectional balance between free and slave states.
and slavery would be prohibited in all remaining territory within the louisiana purchase north of latitude 36309 missouris southern boundary.
congress adopted thomass plan as the missouri compromise.
10 democracy in america 1815 1840 missouri r.
l superior m is sip sis sr nsa new spain independent mexico 1821 ny pa va de md nc tn sc d an gr rio mi ga atl an tic o cean al e la territory closed to slavery by the missouri compromise free states and territories territory opened to slavery by the missouri compromise slave states and territories florida territory gulf of mexico the missouri compromise temporarily settled the question of the expansion of slavery by dividing the louisiana purchase into free and slave areas.
me admitted as a free state 1820 vt nh ma ct ri ky.
arkansas red r territory.
ntario washington d c or ohi mo admitted as a slave state 1821 ark a l e l o i re oh in il.
or missouri compromise line 3630 pa cific o ce a n ter rit o ry r pi co ad lor.
l ro n unorganized territory.
michigan hu sn ak er british north america.
oregon territory joint u s british occupation of disputed territory er compromise st la wr en c missouri.
the nationalism and its discontents l michigan 500 miles 500 kilometers a year later missouri presented to congress its new constitution which not only protected slavery but prohibited free blacks from entering the state.
since some northern states still considered blacks citizens this seemed to violate the federal constitutions comity clause which requires each state to recognize the rights of citizens of other states.
henry clay engineered a second missouri compromise according to which congress accepted the states constitution as written but instructed missouri that it could not deprive the citizens of any states of their rights under the u s constitution.
missouri however largely ignored this provision.
the slavery question thomas jefferson who had drafted the clause of the northwest ordinance of 1787 prohibiting slavery north of the ohio river strenuously opposed efforts to keep the institution out of missouri.
he saw the entire controversy as an attempt by federalists to revive their party by setting northern and southern republicans against each other.
jefferson was correct that political power not moral scruples motivated most northern congressmen.
but republicans not the few remaining federalists provided the bulk of the votes against slavery in missouri.
by 1820 new york had surpassed virginia in population and what efforts were made in this period to strengthen the economic integration of the nation and what major crises hindered these efforts.
new york republicans were among the leading advocates of emancipation in missouri.
twenty eight years of virginia presidents interrupted only by the single term of john adams of massachusetts had persuaded many northerners that the south exercised undue influence in washington.
more slave states meant more southern congressmen and electoral votes.
the missouri controversy raised for the first time what would prove to be a fatal issue the westward expansion of slavery.
the sectional division it revealed aroused widespread feelings of dismay.
this momentous question wrote jefferson like a fire bell in the night awakened and filled me with terror.
i considered it at once as the knell of the union john quincy adams wrote of the debate in his diary it disclosed a secret it revealed the basis for a new organization of parties.
here was a new party really formed.
terrible to the whole union but portentously terrible to the south threatening in its progress the emancipation of all their slaves threatening in its immediate effect that southern domination which has swayed the union for the last twenty years.
the dissolution of the union over the issue of slavery adams mused disastrous as that might be would result in civil war and the extirpation of slavery from this whole continent it would take more than forty years for adamss prediction to be fulfilled.
for the moment the slavery issue faded once again from national debate.
n at i o n s e c t i o n a n d pa r t y the united wars of states and the latin american independence between 1810 and 1822 spains latin american colonies rose in rebellion and established a series of independent nations including mexico venezuela ecuador and peru.
by 1825 spains once vast american empire had been reduced to the islands of cuba and puerto rico.
the uprisings inspired a wave of sympathy in the united states.
in 1822 the monroe administration became the first government to extend diplomatic recognition to the new latin american republics.
parallels existed between the spanish american revolutions and the one that had given birth to the united states.
in both cases the crisis of empire was precipitated by programs launched by the imperial country aimed in large measure at making the colonies contribute more to its finances.
the government in spain had been trying to strengthen its hold on the empire since the late eighteenth century.
a french army under napoleon occupied spain in 1808 and overthrew the monarchy inspiring assertions of local control throughout spanish america.
a new constitution adopted by spain in 1812 granted greater local rights in spain and the colonies.
when the king was restored in 1814 he repudiated the constitution and moved to reassert control over the colonies.
but the colonists had become used to autonomy.
as had happened in british north america local elites demanded status and treatment equal to residents of the imperial power.
the voices of freedom from president james monroe annual message to congress 1823 in the wake of the latin american struggle for independence president james monroe included in his annual message a passage that became known as the monroe doctrine.
it outlined liberty and happiness of their fellow men on that side of the atlantic.
in the wars of the european powers in countrys relations with the rest of the world for matters relating to themselves we have never taken any part nor does it comport with our policy to do so.
it is only when our rights are invaded or seriously nearly a century that the western hemisphere menaced that we resent injuries or make preparation principles that would help to govern the was no longer open to european colonization and that the united states would remain uninvolved in the wars of europe.
this occasion has been judged proper for asserting as a principle.
that the american continents by the free and independent condition which they have assumed and maintain are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any european powers.
it was stated at the commencement of the last session that a great effort was then making in spain and portugal to improve the condition of the people of those countries and that it appeared to be conducted with extraordinary moderation.
it need scarcely be remarked that the results have been so far very different from what was then anticipated.
of events in that quarter of the globe with which we have so much intercourse and from which we derive our origin we have always been anxious and interested spectators.
the citizens of the united states cherish sentiments the most friendly in favor of the for our defense.
with the movements in this hemisphere we are of necessity more immediately connected and by causes which must be obvious to all enlightened and impartial observers.
the political system of the allied powers of europe is essentially different in this respect from that of america.
we owe it therefore to candor and to the amicable relations existing between the united states and those powers to declare that we should consider any attempt on their part to extend their system to any portion of this hemisphere as dangerous to our peace and safety.
with the existing colonies or dependencies of any european power we have not interfered and shall not interfere.
but with the governments who have declared their independence and maintain it and whose independence we have on great consideration and on just principles acknowledged we could not view any interposition for the purpose of oppressing them or controlling in any other manner their destiny by any european power in any other light than as the manifestation of an unfriendly disposition toward the united states.
from john c calhoun a d i s q u i s i t i o n o n g o v e r n m e n t c a.
1 8 4 5 the most prominent political philosopher in the pre civil war south john c calhoun sought to devise ways that the south could retain the power to protect its interests within the union especially the institution of slavery as it fell behind the north in population and political power.
between them has been so entirely overlooked that when the term majority is used in political discussions it is applied exclusively to designate the numerical as if there were no other.
the first and leading error which naturally arises from overlooking the distinction referred to is to confound the numerical majority with the people and this is so completely as to regard them as identical.
this is a consequence that necessarily results from considering the numerical as the only there are two different modes in which the sense of the community may be taken one simply by the right of suffrage unaided the other by the right through a proper organism.
each collects the sense of the majority.
but one regards numbers only and considers the whole community as a unit having but one common interest throughout and collects the sense of the greater number of the whole as that of the community.
the other on the contrary regards interests as well as numbers considering the community as made up of different and conflicting interests as far as the action of the government is concerned and takes the sense of each through its majority or appropriate organ and the united sense of all as the sense of the entire community.
the former of these i shall call the numerical or absolute majority and the latter the concurrent or constitutional majority.
i call it the constitutional majority because it is an essential element in every constitutional government be whatever form it takes.
so great is the difference politically speaking between the two majorities that they cannot be confounded without leading to great and fatal errors and yet the distinction majority.
all admit that a popular government or democracy is the government of the people.
those who regard the numerical as the only majority.
are forced to regard the numerical majority as in effect the entire people.
the necessary consequence of taking the sense of the community by the concurrent majority is.
to give to each interest or portion of the community a negative on the others.
it is this mutual negative among its various conflicting interests which invests each with the power of protecting itself.
without this there can be no constitution.
questions 1 why does monroe think that the systems of europe and the western hemisphere are fundamentally different.
2 which americans would be most likely to object to calhouns political system.
3 how do the two documents differ in their conception of how powerful the national government ought to be.
10 democracy in america 1815 1840 nation section and party spanish american declarations of independence borrowed directly from that of the united states.
the first issued in 1811 even before the restoration of the monarchy in spain declared that the united provinces of venezuela now enjoyed among the sovereign nations of the earth the rank which the supreme being and nature has assigned us language strikingly similar to jeffersons.
unlike the british empire spains dissolved into seventeen different nations.
the spanish empire was too vast and disconnected for a common sense of nationhood to emerge.
the spanish government had imposed severe restrictions on printing thereby making communication between the various parts of the empire more difficult than in the british colonies.
the first printing press in bogot a major city in south america was not established until the 1770s.
nonetheless imported books had circulated widely spreading the eras revolutionary ideas.
in some ways the new latin american constitutions were more democratic than that of the united states.
most sought to implement the transatlantic ideals of rights and freedom by creating a single national people out of the diverse populations that made up the spanish empire.
to do so they extended the right to vote to indians and free blacks.
the latin american wars of independence in which black soldiers participated on both sides also set in motion the gradual abolition of slavery.
but the latin american wars of independence lasted longer sometimes more than a decade and were more destructive than the one in the united states had been.
in some countries independence was followed by civil war.
as a result it proved far more difficult for the new latin american republics to achieve economic development than the united states.
the monroe doctrine john quincy adams who was serving as james monroes secretary of state was devoted to consolidating the power of the national government at home and abroad.
adams feared that spain would try to regain its latin american colonies.
in 1823 he drafted a section of the presidents annual message to congress that became known as the monroe doctrine.
it expressed three principles.
first the united states would oppose any further efforts at colonization by european powers in the americas a statement aimed not only against spain but also at france which had designs on cuba and at russia which was seeking to expand its holdings on the pacific coast.
second the united states would abstain from involvement in the wars of europe.
finally monroe warned european powers not to interfere with the newly independent states of latin america.
the monroe doctrine is sometimes called americas diplomatic declaration of independence.
for many decades it remained a cornerstone of american foreign policy.
based on the assumption that the old and new worlds formed separate political and diplomatic systems it claimed for the united states the role of dominant power in the western hemisphere.
for adams the commercial implications were as important as the political ones.
in 1823 latin america was a major market for british goods and british citizens were heavily involved in mining banking and commercial enterprises there.
adams hoped that the united states could eventually assume britains economic role.
what were the major areas of conflict between nationalism and sectionalism.
the americas british north america d i s p u t ed united states a t l an t i c o c e an mexico lu ca ya s b a ha ma i sl a n d s b r haiti p u e r t o rico s p gulf of ba mexico cu s p mexico veracruz british honduras j a ma ica b r united provinces of caribbean trin idb ar d sea central america caracas venezuela bogot pa c i f i c o ce an w in d wa rd i sl a n d s b rit ish fre n ch d u t ch a n d d a n ish po sse ssio n s british guiana dutch guiana french guiana colombia galap agos islands quito ecuador brazil peru lima salvador la paz bolivia sao paraguay paulo asuncin 1000 miles 500 1000 kilometers chile colonies and other dependent areas the election of rio de janeiro uruguay buenos aires montevideo united provinces rio del la plata p ata g o n i a argentine confederation the monroe doctrine reflected a rising sense of american nationalism.
but sectionalism seemed to rule domestic politics.
as the election of 1824 approached only andrew jackson could claim truly national support.
jacksons popularity rested not on any specific public policy few voters knew his views but on military victories over the british at the battle of fa l k l a n d i sl a n d s b r this map depicts the western hemisphere after most of spains colonies achieved their independence.
10 democracy in america 1815 1840 the presidential election of 1824 nation section and party new orleans and over the creek and seminole indians.
other candidates included john quincy adams secretary of the treasury william h crawford of georgia and henry clay of kentucky.
adamss support was concentrated in new england and more generally in the north where republican leaders insisted the time had come for the south to relinquish the presidency.
crawford represented the souths old republicans who wanted the party to reaffirm the principles of states rights and limited government.
clay was one of the eras most popular politicians but his support in 1824 lay primarily in the west.
a caucus of republican congressmen traditionally chose the partys nominee for president.
the caucus selected crawford but this did not deter the other candidates a sign that at a time of expanding democracy a small group of officials could no longer determine who ran for office.
jackson received 153 544 votes and carried states in all the regions outside of new england.
but with four candidates in the field none received a majority of the electoral votes.
as required by the constitution clay who finished fourth was eliminated and the choice among the other three fell to the house of representatives.
sincerely believing adams to be the most qualified candidate and the one most likely to promote the american system and probably calculating that the election of jackson a westerner would impede his own presidential ambitions clay gave his support to adams helping to elect him.
he soon became secretary of state in adamss cabinet.
the charge that he had made a corrupt bargain bartering critical votes in the presidential contest for a public office clung to clay for the rest of his career making it all but impossible for him to reach the white house.
the election of 1824 laid the groundwork for a new system of political parties.
supporters of jackson and crawford would soon unite in a new organization the democratic party determined to place jackson in the white house in 1828 the alliance of clay and adams became the basis for the whig party of the 1830s.
the 5 1 1 2 5 3 7 3 5 8 8 non voting territory no parties candidate jackson adams crawford clay electoral vote share 99 38 84 32 41 16 37 14 popular vote share 153 544 43 108 740 31 46 618 13 47 136 13 note adams won 3 electoral votes in maryland and 1 in delaware.
nationalism john quincy of adams john quincy adams enjoyed one of the most distinguished pre presidential careers of any american president.
the son of john adams he had witnessed the battle of bunker hill at age eight and at fourteen had worked as private secretary and french interpreter for an american envoy in europe.
he had gone on to serve as ambassador to prussia the netherlands britain and russia and as senator from massachusetts.
although elected as a federalist adams cast one of new englands few votes in favor of jeffersons embargo policy arguing that his region must rise above sectional self interest to defend the national good.
given the intense political passions of the time he had been forced to resign his seat as a result of his vote and he soon abandoned the federalist party.
adams was not an engaging figure.
he described himself what were the major areas of conflict between nationalism and sectionalism.
as a man of cold austere and foreboding manners but he had a clear vision of national greatness.
at home he strongly supported the american system of government sponsored economic development.
abroad he hoped to encourage american commerce throughout the world and as illustrated by his authorship of the monroe doctrine enhance american influence in the western hemisphere.
as monroes secretary of state he had been the only cabinet member to oppose reprimanding andrew jackson for his violent incursion into florida.
in 1819 as noted in the previous chapter 11 and he rose to the defense of northern society.
i want every man to have the chance said lincoln and i believe a black man is entitled to it in which he can better his condition blacks might not be the equal of whites in all respects but in their natural right to the fruits of their labor they were my equal and the equal of all others the lincoln douglas abraham lincoln in 1858 the year of the lincoln douglas debates.
campaign the campaign against douglas the norths preeminent political leader created lincolns national reputation.
accepting his partys nomination for the senate in june 1858 lincoln etched sharply the differences between them.
a house divided against itself he announced cannot stand.
i believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free lincolns point was not that civil war was imminent but that americans must choose between favoring and opposing slavery.
there could be no middle ground.
douglass policy of popular sovereignty he insisted reflected a moral indifference that could only result in the institutions spread throughout the entire country.
the lincoln douglas debates held in seven illinois towns and attended by tens of thousands of listeners remain classics of american political oratory.
clashing definitions of freedom lay at their heart.
to lincoln freedom meant opposition to slavery.
the nation needed to rekindle the spirit of the founding fathers who he claimed had tried to place slavery on the path to ultimate extinction douglas argued that the essence of freedom lay in local self government and individual self determination.
a large and diverse nation could only survive by respecting the right of each locality to determine its own institutions.
in response to a question posed by lincoln during the freeport debate douglas insisted that popular sovereignty was not incompatible with the dred scott decision.
although territorial legislatures could no longer exclude slavery directly he argued if the people stephen a douglas in a daguerreotype from around 1853 recent h1 voices of freedom from the l i n c o l n d o u g l a s d e b at e s 1 8 5 8 the most famous political campaign in american history the 1858 race for the u s senate between senator stephen a douglas a former illinois judge and abraham lincoln was highlighted by seven debates in which they discussed the politics of slavery and contrasting understandings of freedom.
lincoln judge douglas says why cant this union endure permanently half slave and half free why cant we let it stand as our fathers placed it that is the exact difficulty between us.
i say when this government was first established it was the policy of its founders to prohibit the spread of slavery into the new territories of the united states where it had not existed.
but judge douglas and his friends have broken up that policy and placed it upon a new basis by which it is to become national douglas mr lincoln says that this government cannot endure permanently in the same condition in which it was made by its framers divided into free and slave states.
he says that it has existed for about seventy years thus divided and yet he tells you that it cannot endure permanently on the same principles and in the same relative conditions in which our fathers made it.
one of the reserved rights of the states was the right to regulate the relations between master and servant on the slavery question.
now my friends if we will only act conscientiously upon this great principle of popular sovereignty which guarantees to each state and territory the right to do as it pleases on all things local and domestic instead of congress interfering we will continue to be at peace one with another.
and perpetual.
all i have asked or desired anywhere is that it should be placed back again upon the basis that the founders of our government originally placed it restricting it from the new territories.
judge douglas assumes that we have no interest in them that we have no right to interfere.
do we not wish for an outlet for our surplus population if i may so express myself.
do we not feel an interest in getting to that outlet with such institutions as we would like to have prevail there.
now irrespective of the moral aspect of this question as to whether there is a right or wrong in enslaving a negro i am still in favor of our new territories being in such a condition that white men may find a home.
i am in favor of this not merely for our own people but as an outlet for free white people everywhere the world over in which hans and baptiste and patrick and all other men from all the world may find new homes and better their conditions in life.
douglas for one i am opposed to negro citizenship in any and every form.
i believe this government was made on the white basis.
i believe it was made by white men for the benefit of white men and their posterity forever.
i do not believe that the almighty made the negro capable of selfgovernment.
i say to you my fellow citizens that in my opinion the signers of the declaration of independence had no reference to the negro whatever when they declared all men to be created equal.
they desired to express by that phrase white men men of european birth and european descent.
when they spoke of the equality of men.
lincoln i have no purpose to introduce political and social equality between the white and the black douglas he tells you that i will not argue the question whether slavery is right or wrong.
i tell you why i will not do it.
i hold that the people of the slaveholding states are civilized men as well as ourselves that they bear consciences as well as we and that they are accountable to god and their posterity and not to us.
it is for them to decide therefore the moral and religious right of the slavery question for themselves within their own limits.
he says that he looks forward to a time when slavery shall be abolished everywhere.
i look forward to a time when each state shall be allowed to do as it pleases.
lincoln i suppose that the real difference between judge douglas and his friends and the republicans is that the judge is not in favor of making any difference between slavery and liberty.
and consequently races.
there is a physical difference between the two which in my judgment will probably forever every sentiment he utters discards the idea that there is any wrong in slavery.
that is the real issue.
that forbid their living together upon the footing of perfect equality and inasmuch as it becomes a necessity that there must be a difference i as well as is the issue that will continue in this country when these poor tongues of judge douglas and myself shall be silent.
it is the eternal struggle between these two judge douglas am in favor of the race to which i principles right and wrong throughout the world.
belong having the superior position.
but i hold that notwithstanding all this there is no reason in the world why the negro is not entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the declaration of independence the right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
i hold that he is as much entitled to these as the white man.
i agree with judge douglas he is not my equal in many respects certainly not in color perhaps not in moral or intellectual endowment.
but in the right to eat the bread without leave of anybody else which his own hand earns he is my equal and the equal of judge douglas and the equal of every living man.
questions 1 how do lincoln and douglas differ on what rights black americans are entitled to enjoy.
2 why does lincoln believe the nation cannot exist forever half slave and half free whereas douglas believes it can.
3 how does each of the speakers balance the right of each state to manage its own affairs against the right of every person to be free.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 the emergence of lincoln wished to keep slaveholders out all they needed to do was refrain from giving the institution legal protection.
in a critique not only of the antislavery movement but of the entire reform impulse deriving from religious revivalism douglas insisted that politicians had no right to impose their own moral standards on society as a whole.
i deny the right of congress he declared to force a good thing upon a people who are unwilling to receive it if a community wished to own slaves it had a right to do so.
of course when douglas spoke of the people he meant whites alone.
he spent much of his time in the debates attempting to portray lincoln as a dangerous radical whose positions threatened to degrade white americans by reducing them to equality with blacks.
the united states government douglas proclaimed had been created by white men for the benefit of white men and their posterity for ever lincoln shared many of the racial prejudices of his day.
he opposed giving illinois blacks the right to vote or serve on juries and spoke frequently of colonizing blacks overseas as the best solution to the problems of slavery and race.
yet unlike douglas lincoln did not use appeals to racism to garner votes.
and he refused to exclude blacks from the human family.
no less than whites they were entitled to the inalienable rights of the declaration of independence which applied to all men in all lands everywhere not merely to europeans and their descendants.
the illinois election returns revealed a state sharply divided like the nation itself.
southern illinois settled from the south voted strongly democratic while the rapidly growing northern part of the state was firmly in the republican column.
until the adoption of the seventeenth amendment in the early twentieth century each states legislature chose its u s senators.
in 1858 republican candidates for the legislature won more votes statewide than democrats.
but because the apportionment of seats based on the census of 1850 did not reflect the growth of northern illinois since then the democrats emerged with a narrow margin in the legislature.
douglas was reelected.
his victory was all the more remarkable because elsewhere in the north republicans swept to victory in 1858 resentment over the administrations kansas policy split the democratic party sometimes producing two democratic candidates pro douglas and pro buchanan running against a single republican.
coupled with the impact of the economic recession that began in 1857 this helped to produce republican victories even in indiana and pennsylvania which democrats had carried two years earlier.
john john brown in an 1847 portrait by augustus washington a black photographer.
brown at harpers ferry an armed assault by the abolitionist john brown on the federal arsenal at harpers ferry virginia further heightened sectional tensions.
brown had a long career of involvement in antislavery activities.
in the 1830s and 1840s he had befriended fugitive slaves and although chronically in debt helped to finance antislavery publications.
like other abolitionists brown was a deeply religious man.
but his god was not the forgiving jesus of the revivals who encouraged men to save themselves through conversion but the vengeful father of the old testament.
during the civil war in kansas what enabled lincoln to emerge as president from the divisive party politics of the 1850s.
an 1835 painting of the federal arsenal at harpers ferry virginia now west virginia.
john browns raid on harpers ferry in october 1859 helped to bring on the civil war.
brown traveled to the territory.
in may 1856 after the attack on lawrence he and a few followers murdered five proslavery settlers at pottawatomie creek.
for the next two years he traveled through the north and canada raising funds and enlisting followers for a war against slavery.
on october 16 1859 with twenty one men seven of them black brown seized harpers ferry.
militarily the plan made little sense.
browns band was soon surrounded and killed or captured by a detachment of federal soldiers headed by colonel robert e lee.
placed on trial for treason to the state of virginia brown conducted himself with dignity and courage winning admiration from millions of northerners who disapproved of his violent deeds.
when virginias governor henry a wise spurned pleas for clemency and ordered brown executed he turned brown into a martyr to much of the north.
henry david thoreau pronounced him a crucified hero since browns death radicals of both the left and right have revered brown as a man willing to take action against an institution he considered immoral.
black leaders have long hailed him as a rare white person willing to sacrifice himself for the cause of racial justice.
to the south the failure of browns assault seemed less significant than the adulation he seemed to arouse from much of the northern public.
his raid and execution further widened the breach between the sections.
browns last letter was a brief prophetic statement i john brown am quite certain that the crimes of this guilty land will never be purged away but with blood the rise of southern nationalism with the republicans continuing to gain strength in the north democrats might have been expected to put a premium on party unity as the election of 1860 approached.
by this time however a sizable group of southerners c h.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 the emergence of lincoln now viewed their regions prospects as more favorable outside the union than within it.
throughout the 1850s influential writers and political leaders kept up a drumbeat of complaints about the souths problems.
the skyhigh price of slaves made it impossible for many planters sons and upwardly mobile small farmers to become planters in their own right.
many white southerners felt that the opportunity was eroding for economic independence through ownership of land and slaves liberty as they understood it.
the north secessionists charged reaped the benefits of the cotton trade while southerners fell deeper and deeper into debt.
to remain in the union meant to accept bondage to the north.
but an independent south could become the foundation of a slave empire ringing the caribbean and embracing cuba other west indian islands mexico and parts of central america.
more and more southerners were speaking openly of southward expansion.
in 1854 pierre soul of louisiana the american ambassador to spain had persuaded the ministers to britain and france to join him in signing the ostend manifesto which called on the united states to purchase or seize cuba where slavery was still legal from spain.
meanwhile the military adventurer william walker led a series of filibustering expeditions the term derived from the spanish word for pirate filibustero in central america.
born in tennessee walker had headed to california to join the gold rush.
failing to strike it rich he somehow decided to try to become the leader of a latin american country.
in 1853 he led a band of men who captured baja california a peninsula owned by mexico south of california and named himself president of an independent republic.
the arrival of mexican naval vessels forced walker and his men to beat a hasty retreat.
walker next decided to establish himself as ruler of nicaragua in central america and to open that country to slavery.
nicaragua at the time was engaged in a civil war and one faction invited walker to assist it by bringing 300 armed men.
in 1855 walker captured the city of granada and in the following year proclaimed himself president.
the administration of franklin pierce recognized walkers government but neighboring countries sent in troops who forced walker to flee.
his activities represented clear violations of american neutrality laws.
but walker won acclaim in the south and when federal authorities placed him on trial in new orleans in 1858 the jury acquitted him.
by the late 1850s southern leaders were bending every effort to strengthen the bonds of slavery.
slavery is our king declared a south carolina politician in 1860.
slavery is our truth slavery is our divine right new state laws further restricted access to freedom.
one in louisiana stated simply after the passage of this act no slave shall be emancipated in this state some southerners called for the reopening of the african slave trade hoping that an influx of new slaves would lower the price thereby increasing the number of whites with a vested interest in the peculiar institution.
by early 1860 seven states of the deep south had gone on record demanding that the democratic platform pledge to protect slavery in all the territories that had not yet been admitted to the union as states.
virtually no northern politician could accept this position.
for southern leaders to insist on it would guarantee the destruction of the democratic party as a what enabled lincoln to emerge as president from the divisive party politics of the 1850s.
national institution.
but southern nationalists known as fire eaters hoped to split the party and the country and form an independent southern confederacy.
the democratic split when the democratic convention met in april 1860 douglass supporters commanded a majority but not the two thirds required for a presidential nomination.
because of his fight against kansass lecompton constitution and his refusal to support congressional laws imposing slavery on all the territories douglas had become unacceptable to political leaders of the deep south.
they were still determined to bring kansas into the union as a slave state.
when the convention adopted a platform reaffirming the doctrine of popular sovereignty delegates from the seven slave states of the lower south walked out and the gathering recessed in confusion.
six weeks later it reconvened replaced the bolters with douglas supporters and nominated him for president.
in response southern democrats placed their own ticket in the field headed by john c breckinridge of kentucky.
breckinridge insisted that slavery must be protected in the western territories.
the democratic party the last great bond of national unity had been shattered.
national conventions had traditionally been places where party managers mindful of the need for unity in the fall campaign reconciled their differences.
but in 1860 neither northern nor southern democrats were interested in conciliation.
southern democrats no longer trusted their northern counterparts.
douglass backers for their part would not accept a platform that doomed their party to certain defeat in the north.
the nomination of lincoln meanwhile republicans gathered in chicago and chose lincoln as their standard bearer.
although he entered the convention with fewer delegates than william h seward lincoln did not suffer from sewards political liabilities.
former know nothings a majority of whom had by now joined republican ranks bitterly resented sewards efforts as governor of new york to channel state funds to catholic schools.
seward had a not entirely deserved reputation for radicalism as a result of his higher law and irrepressible conflict speeches discussed earlier.
lincolns devotion to the union appealed to moderate republicans and his emphasis on the moral dimension of the sectional controversy made him acceptable to republicans from abolitionist backgrounds.
having never associated with the know nothings he could appeal to immigrant voters and nativists preferred him to the hated seward.
most important coming from illinois lincoln was better positioned to carry the pivotal doubtful states essential for republican victory.
on the third ballot he was nominated.
the party platform denied the validity of the dred scott decision reaffirmed republicans opposition to slaverys expansion and added economic planks designed to appeal to a broad array of northern voters free homesteads in the west a protective tariff and government aid in building a transcontinental railroad.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 the impending crisis the the presidential election of 1860 election of in effect two presidential campaigns took place in 1860 in the north lincoln and douglas were the combatants.
in the south the republicans had no presence and three can55 8 didates contested the election douglas breckinridge and john bell of tennessee the candidate of the hastily organ5 ized constitutional union party.
a haven for unionist for4 mer whigs this new party adopted a platform consisting of a single pledge to preserve the constitution as it is that is with slavery and the union as it was without sec8 tional discord 7 9 the most striking thing about the election returns was their sectional character.
lincoln carried all of the north non voting territory except new jersey receiving 1 8 million popular votes 54 percent of the regional total and 40 percent of the electoral vote popular vote national and 180 electoral votes a clear majority.
party candidate share share breckinridge captured most of the slave states although 180 59 1 866 452 40 republican lincoln 72 24 847 953 18 southern democrat breckinridge bell carried three upper south states and about 40 per39 13 590 831 13 constitutional union bell cent of the southern vote as a whole.
douglas placed first 12 4 1 371 157 29 northern democrat douglas only in missouri but his 1 3 million popular votes were states that republicans lost in 1856 won in 1860 second in number only to lincolns.
douglas was the only candidate with significant support in all parts of the country a vindication in a sense of his long effort to transcend sectional divisions.
but his failure to carry either section suggested that a traditional political career based on devotion to the union was no longer possible.
without a single vote in ten southern states lincoln was elected the nations sixteenth president.
he failed to secure a majority of the national popular vote.
but because of the norths superiority in population lincoln would still have carried the electoral college and thus been elected president even if the votes of his three opponents had all been cast for a single candidate.
the impending crisis the secession movement in the eyes of many white southerners lincolns victory placed their future at the mercy of a party avowedly hostile to their regions values and interests.
those advocating secession did not believe lincolns administration would take immediate steps against slavery in the states.
but if as seemed quite possible the election of 1860 marked a fundamental shift in power the beginning of a long period of republican rule who could say what the norths antislavery sentiment would demand in five years or ten.
slaveowners moreover feared republican efforts to extend their party into the south by appealing to non slaveholders.
rather than accept permanent minority status in a nation governed by their opponents deep south political leaders boldly struck for their regions independence.
at stake they believed was not a single election but an entire way of life.
what were the final steps on the road to secession.
an 1860 engraving of a mass meeting in savannah georgia shortly after lincolns election as president which called for the state to secede from the union.
the banner on the obelisk at the center reads our motto states rights equality of the states dont tread on me the last a slogan from the american revolution.
in the months that followed lincolns election seven states stretching from south carolina to texas seceded from the union.
these were the states of the cotton kingdom where slaves represented a larger part of the total population than in the upper south.
first to secede was south carolina the state with the highest percentage of slaves in its population and a long history of political radicalism.
on december 20 1860 the legislature unanimously voted to leave the union.
its declaration of the immediate causes of secession placed the issue of slavery squarely at the center of the crisis.
the north had assumed the right of deciding upon the propriety of our domestic institutions lincoln was a man whose opinions and purposes are hostile to slavery experience had proved that slaveholding states cannot be safe in subjection to nonslaveholding states secessionists equated their movement with the struggle for american independence.
proslavery ideologue george fitzhugh however later claimed that southern secession was even more significant than the commonplace affair of 1776 since the south rebelled not merely against a particular government but against the erroneous modern idea of freedom based on human equality and natural liberty the secession crisis as the union unraveled president buchanan seemed paralyzed.
he denied that a state could secede but he also insisted that the federal government had no right to use force against it.
other political leaders struggled to find a formula to resolve the crisis.
senator john j crittenden of kentucky a slave state on the border between north and south offered the most widely supported compromise plan of the secession winter.
embodied in a series of unamendable constitutional amendments crittendens proposal would c h.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 a richmond virginia cartoonist in april 1861 depicts lincoln as a cat seeking to catch the southern states as mice fleeing the union which lies dead on the left.
the impending crisis have guaranteed the future of slavery in the states where it existed and extended the missouri compromise line to the pacific ocean dividing between slavery and free soil all territories now held or hereafter acquired the seceding states rejected the compromise as too little too late.
but many in the upper south and north saw it as a way to settle sectional differences and prevent civil war.
crittendens plan however foundered on the opposition of abraham lincoln.
willing to conciliate the south on issues like the return of fugitive slaves lincoln took an unyielding stand against the expansion of slavery.
here he informed one republican leader he intended to hold firm as with a chain of steel a fundamental principle of democracy lincoln believed was at stake.
we have just carried an election he wrote on principles fairly stated to the people.
now we are told in advance that the government shall be broken up unless we surrender to those we have beaten before we take the offices.
if we surrender it is the end of us and the end of the government lincoln moreover feared that crittendens reference to land hereafter acquired offered the south a thinly veiled invitation to demand the acquisition of cuba mexico and other territory suited to slavery.
before lincoln assumed office on march 4 1861 the seven seceding states formed the confederate states of america adopted a constitution and chose as their president jefferson davis of mississippi.
with a few alterations the president served a single six year term cabinet members as in britain could sit in congress the confederate constitution was modeled closely on that of the united states.
it departed from the federal constitution however in explicitly guaranteeing slave property both in the states and in any territories the new nation acquired.
the cornerstone of the confederacy announced daviss vice president alexander h stephens of georgia was the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white man that slavery subordination to the superior race is his natural and normal condition what were the final steps on the road to secession.
and the war came even after rejecting the crittenden compromise lincoln did not believe war inevitable.
when he became president eight slave states of the upper south remained in the union.
here slaves and slaveholders made up a considerably lower proportion of the population than in the deep south and large parts of the white population did not believe lincolns election justified dissolving the union.
even within the confederacy whites had divided over secession with considerable numbers of non slaveholding farmers in opposition.
in time lincoln believed secession might collapse from within.
in his inaugural address delivered on march 4 1861 lincoln tried to be conciliatory.
he rejected the right of secession but denied any intention of interfering with slavery in the states.
he said nothing of retaking the forts arsenals and customs houses the confederacy had seized although he did promise to hold remaining federal property in the seceding states.
but lincoln also issued a veiled warning in your hands my dissatisfied fellow countrymen and not in mine is the momentous issue of civil war in his first month as president lincoln walked a tightrope.
he avoided any action that might drive more states from the union encouraged southern unionists to assert themselves within the confederacy and sought to quiet a growing clamor in the north for forceful action against secession.
knowing that the risk of war existed lincoln strove to ensure that if hostilities did break out the south not the union would fire the first shot.
and that is precisely what happened on april 12 1861 at fort sumter an enclave of union control in the harbor of charleston south carolina.
a few days earlier lincoln had notified south carolinas governor that he intended to replenish the garrisons dwindling food supplies.
viewing fort sumters presence as an affront to southern nationhood and perhaps inauguration of mr lincoln a photograph taken on march 4 1861 the unfinished dome of the capitol building symbolizes the precarious state of the union at the time lincoln assumed office.
13 a house divided 1840 1861 bombardment of fort sumter a lithograph by nathaniel currier and james ives depicting the beginning of the civil war.
the impending crisis hoping to force the wavering upper south to join the confederacy jefferson davis ordered batteries to fire on the fort.
on april 14 its commander surrendered.
the following day lincoln proclaimed that an insurrection existed in the south and called for 75 000 troops to suppress it.
civil war had begun.
within weeks virginia north carolina tennessee and arkansas joined the confederacy.
both sides deprecated war lincoln later said but one of them would make war rather than let the nation survive and the other would accept war rather than let it perish.
and the war came in 1842 henry wadsworth longfellow published poems on slavery a collection that included a work entitled simply the warning in it longfellow compared the american slave to the mighty biblical figure of samson who after being blinded and chained managed to destroy the temple of his tormentors there is a poor blind samson in this land shorn of his strength and bound in bonds of steel who may in some grim revel raise his hand and shake the pillars of this commonweal till the vast temple of our liberties a shapeless mass of wreck and rubbish lies.
in 1861 longfellows warning came to pass.
the union created by the founders lay in ruins.
the struggle to rebuild it would bring about a new birth of american freedom.
suggested reading suggested reading books anbinder tyler.
nativism and slavery the northern know nothings and the politics of the 1850s 1992.
a detailed study of the relationship between nativism and antislavery politics in the north.
cronon william.
natures metropolis chicago and the great west 1992.
an influential account of the rise of chicago and the citys relationship to its agricultural hinterland.
current richard n lincoln and the first shot 1963.
examines the decisions and strategy of both lincoln and jefferson davis that produced the firing on fort sumter that began the civil war.
davis william c lone star rising the revolutionary birth of the texas republic 2004.
an up to date history of the texas war for independence.
earle jonathan h jacksonian antislavery and the politics of free soil 1824 1854 2004.
emphasizes the role of northern jacksonians in antislavery politics.
foner eric.
free soil free labor free men the ideology of the republican party before the civil war 1970.
a discussion of the basic ideas that united republicans in the 1850s especially their free labor ideology goodman david.
gold seeking victoria and california in the 1850s 1994.
a comparative history of the two gold rushes.
haas lisbeth.
conquests and historical identities in california 1769 1936 1995.
contains a detailed description of how californias acquisition by the united states affected the states diverse population groups.
johannsen robert w to the halls of montezuma the mexican war in the american imagination 1985.
a history of the mexican war and how it was remembered after its conclusion.
levine bruce.
half slave and half free the roots of the civil war 1992.
a survey of the coming of the civil war stressing irreconcilable differences between north and south.
potter david m the impending crisis 1848 1861 1976.
still the standard account of the nations history in the years before the civil war.
sinha manisha.
the counterrevolution of slavery politics and ideology in antebellum south carolina 2002.
a detailed study of how a vigorous defense of slavery developed in south carolina which justified the decision for secession.
stampp kenneth.
and the war came the north and the secession crisis 1860 61 1950.
an examination of northern actions and attitudes during the secession crisis.
stephanson anders.
manifest destiny american expansionism and the empire of right 1995.
considers how the idea of an american mission to spread freedom and democracy has affected american foreign policy throughout the countrys history.
websites getting the message out national campaign materials 1840 1860 dig lib niu edu message gold rush.
the mexican american war and the media index htm the oregon trail uncle toms cabin and american culture c hapter r eview review questions 1 explain the justifications for the doctrine of manifest destiny including material and idealistic motivations.
2 what economic forces promoted continental expansion in the 1830s and 1840s.
3 why did many americans criticize the mexican war.
how did they see expansion as a threat to american liberties.
4 how did the concept of race develop by the mid nineteenth century and how did it enter into the manifest destiny debate.
5 explain the factors behind the creation of the republican party.
6 what three questions did the supreme court address in the dred scott case.
assess the courts arguments.
7 based on the lincoln douglas debates how did the views of both men differ on the expansion of slavery equal rights and the role of the national government.
8 what were the international implications of southern nationalism.
9 explain how sectional voting patterns in the 1860 presidential election allowed southern fire eaters to justify secession.
freedom questions 1 how did americans argue that conquering texas and other parts of mexico was extending the area of freedom.
2 explain how both northerners and southerners believed winning the struggle over the expansion of slavery was the key to preserving their freedoms and to preventing their domination by the other section of the nation.
3 according to the republican party how was free labor the key to preserving american freedoms and the free society threatened by the slave power.
4 how did southern nationalists justify independence as freedom from northern bondage.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e santa fe trail p 495 road toward war tejanos p 496 the texas revolt p 496 santa anna p 497 event date explanation compromise 1850 of 1850 reannexation of texas and reoccupation of oregon p 499 wilmot proviso p 507 southerners are concerned that congressional balance would be disrupted by californias request for free state status california becomes a free state the fugitive slave act is passed and slavery in the new mexico territory is to be decided by locals kansasnebraska act a bill that provides for slavery to be decided by popular sovereignty bleeding kansas civil war in kansas over the issue of slavery in 1856 dred scott decision supreme court rules that only white persons are citizens and that congress possesses no power to bar slavery from a territory it in effect declared unconstitutional the republican platform of restricting slaverys expansion john brown 1859 and harpers ferry brown raids a federal arsenal to launch a slave rebellion and is executed for his crime brown becomes a martyr to many in the north 1860 election 1860 abraham lincoln wins with no votes in the south ending decades of southern control of the presidency seven southern states secede from the union before lincoln is inaugurated free soil party p 507 fugitive slave act of 1850 p 510 result popular sovereignty p 511 kansas nebraska act of 1854 p 511 balloon frame houses p 515 know nothing party p 515 the slave power p 516 bleeding kansas p 517 the caning of charles sumner p 517 dred scott decision p 519 lecompton constitution p 527 harpers ferry p 524 filibustering expeditions p 526 fire eaters p 527 c hapter 14 civil war begins at fort sumter first battle of bull run forts henry and donelson captured monitor v merrimac sea battle battle of shiloh seven days campaign second battle of bull run battle at antietam battle at fredricksburg union pacific and central pacific chartered emancipation proclamation homestead act new york draft riots battle at gettysburg battle at vicksburg lincoln introduces his tenpercent plan general grant begins a war of attrition wade davis bill general sherman marches to the sea thirteenth amendment union capture of richmond general lee surrenders to grant at appomattox courthouse lincoln assassinated ex parte milligan ruling a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 the first modern war the two combatants the technology of war the public and the war mobilizing resources military strategies the war begins the war in the east 1862 the war in the west the coming of emancipation slavery and the war the unraveling of slavery steps toward emancipation lincolns decision the emancipation proclamation enlisting black troops the black soldier the second american revolution liberty and union lincolns vision from union to nation the war and american religion liberty in wartime the norths transformation government and the economy building the transcontinental railroad the war and native americans a new financial system women and the war the divided north the confederate nation leadership and government the inner civil war economic problems southern unionists women and the confederacy black soldiers for the confederacy turning points gettysburg and vicksburg rehearsals for reconstruction and the end of the war the sea island experiment wartime reconstruction in the west the politics of wartime reconstruction victory at last the war and the world the war in american history departure of the 7th regiment a lithograph from 1861 illustrating the departure of a unit of the new york state militia for service in the civil war.
a contemporary writer captured the exuberant spirit of the early days of the war new york was certainly raving mad with excitement.
the ladies laughed smiled sighed sobbed and wept.
the men cheered and shouted as never men cheered and shouted before f ocus q uestions why is the civil war considered the first modern war.
how did a war to preserve the union become a war to end slavery.
how did the civil war transform the national economy and create a stronger nation state.
how did the war effort and leadership problems affect the society and economy of the confederacy.
what were the military and political turning points of the war.
what were the most important wartime rehearsals for reconstruction.
l l ike hundreds of thousands of other americans marcus m spiegel volunteered in 1861 to fight in the civil war.
born into a jewish family in germany in 1829 spiegel took part in the failed german revolution of 1848 in the following year he emigrated to ohio where he married the daughter of a local farmer.
when the civil war broke out the nations 150 000 jews represented less than 1 percent of the total population.
but spiegel shared wholeheartedly in american patriotism.
he went to war he wrote to his brother in law to defend the flag that was ever ready to protect you and me and every one who sought its protection from oppression spiegel rose to the rank of colonel in the 120th ohio infantry and saw action in virginia mississippi and louisiana.
he corresponded frequently with his wife caroline.
i have seen and learned much he wrote in 1863.
i have seen men dying of disease and mangled by the weapons of death i have witnessed hostile armies arrayed against each other the charge of infantry and cavalry hunting men down like beasts but he never wavered in his commitment to the glorious cause of preserving the union and its heritage of freedom.
what one pennsylvania recruit called the magic word freedom shaped how many union soldiers understood the conflict.
the wars purpose wrote samuel mcilvaine a sergeant from indiana was to preserve the american nation as the beacon light of liberty and freedom to the human race but as the war progressed prewar understandings of liberty gave way to something new.
millions of northerners who had not been abolitionists became convinced that preserving the union as an embodiment of liberty required the destruction of slavery.
marcus spiegels changing views mirrored the transformation of a struggle to save the union into a war to end slavery.
spiegel was an ardent democrat.
he shared the eras racist attitudes and thought lincolns emancipation proclamation a serious mistake.
yet as the union army penetrated the heart of the deep south spiegel became increasingly opposed to slavery.
since i am here he wrote to his wife from louisiana in january 1864 i have learned and seen.
the horrors of slavery.
you know it takes me long to say anything that sounds antidemocratic opposed to democratic party policies but.
never hereafter will i either speak or vote in favor of slavery marcus spiegel was killed in a minor engagement in louisiana in may 1864 one of 620 000 americans to perish in the civil war.
w h y i s t h e c i v i l wa r c o n s i d e r e d t h e f i r s t m o d e r n w a r.
the secession of southern states wisconsin nebraska territory 1860 1861 new york michigan iowa pennsylvania illinois utah territory ohio indiana maryland west virginia kansas missouri delaware virginia apr.
17 1861 kentucky indian territory new jersey north carolina tennessee may 20 1861 may 7 1861 arkansas south carolina may 6 1861 dec 20 1860 mississippi jan 9 1861 alabama jan 11 1861 georgia jan 19 1861 texas feb 1 1861 a t l a ntic ocean louisiana jan 26 1861 florida gulf of mexico 200 miles jan 10 1861 border states slave states that did not secede states that seceded before the fall of fort sumter states that seceded after the fall of fort sumter the western counties of virginia remained loyal to the union and were admitted as the state of west virginia in 1863.
100 200 kilometers by the time secession ran its course eleven slave states had left the union.
t h e f i r s t m o d e r n wa r the american civil war is often called the first modern war.
never before had mass armies confronted each other on the battlefield with the deadly weapons created by the industrial revolution.
the resulting casualties dwarfed anything in the american experience.
beginning as a battle of army versus army the war became a conflict of society against society in which the distinction between military and civilian targets often disappeared.
in a war of this kind the effectiveness of political leadership the ability to mobilize economic resources and a societys willingness to keep up the fight despite setbacks are as crucial to the outcome as success or failure on individual battlefields.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 the first modern war sergeant james w travis thirty eighth illinois infantry union army and private edwin francis jemison second louisiana regiment confederate army two of the nearly 3 million americans who fought in the civil war.
before going off to war many soldiers sat for photographs like these reproduced on small cards called cartes de visite which they distributed to friends and loved ones.
jemison was killed in the battle of malvern hill in july 1862 the two combatants almost any comparison between union and confederacy seemed to favor the union.
the population of the north and the loyal border slave states numbered 22 million in 1860 while only 9 million persons lived in the confederacy 3 5 million of them slaves.
in manufacturing railroad mileage and financial resources the union far outstripped its opponent.
on the other hand the union confronted by far the greater task.
to restore the shattered nation it had to invade and conquer an area larger than western europe.
confederate soldiers were highly motivated fighters defending their homes and families.
like washingtons forces during the american revolution southern armies could lose most of the battles and still win the war if their opponent tired of the struggle.
no people confederate general p g t beauregard later claimed ever warred for independence with more relative advantages than the confederacy on both sides the outbreak of war stirred powerful feelings of patriotism.
recruits rushed to enlist expecting a short glorious war.
later as enthusiasm waned both sides resorted to a draft.
the confederacy in the spring of 1862 passed the first draft law in american history and the north soon followed.
by 1865 more than 2 million men had served in the union army and 900 000 in the confederate army.
each was a cross section of its society the norths was composed largely of farm boys shopkeepers artisans and urban workers while the souths consisted mostly of non slaveholding small farmers with slaveowners dominating the officer corps.
few recruits had any military experience.
fifteen years had passed since the mexican war.
ideas about war were highly romantic based on novels magazine articles and lithographs of soldiers covering themselves with glory.
one private wrote home in 1862 that his notion of combat had come from the pictures of battles he had seen they would all be in a line all standing in a nice level field fighting a number of ladies taking care of the wounded etc.
but it isnt so nor were the recruits ready for military regimentation.
it comes rather hard at first to be deprived of liberty wrote an illinois soldier.
initially the constant round of drilling ditch digging and other chores were only occasionally interrupted by fierce bursts of fighting w h y i s t h e c i v i l wa r c o n s i d e r e d t h e f i r s t m o d e r n w a r.
on the battlefield.
according to one estimate during the first two years of the war the main union force the army of the potomac spent only thirty days in actual combat.
the technology of war neither the soldiers nor their officers were prepared for the way technology had transformed warfare.
the civil war was the first major conflict in which the railroad transported troops and supplies and the first to see railroad junctions such as atlanta and petersburg become major military objectives.
the famous sea battle between the union vessel monitor and the confederate merrimac in 1862 was the first demonstration of the superiority of ironclads over wooden ships revolutionizing naval warfare.
the war saw the use of the telegraph for military communication the introduction of observation balloons to view enemy lines and even primitive hand grenades and submarines.
perhaps most important a revolution in arms manufacturing had replaced the traditional musket accurate at only a short range with the more modern rifle deadly at 600 yards or more because of its grooved or rifled barrel.
this development changed the nature of combat emphasizing the importance of heavy fortifications and elaborate trenches and giving those on the defensive usually southern armies a significant advantage over attacking forces.
my men said confederate general thomas stonewall jackson sometimes fail to drive the enemy from his position but to hold one never the war of rifle and trench produced the appalling casualty statistics of civil war battles.
the 620 000 who perished in the war represent the equivalent in terms of todays population of more battle of the iron clads monitor and merrimac painted in 1877 by william torgerson depicts the first clash between ironclad ships which took place off the coast of virginia on march 9 1862 precursors of modern battleships ironclads were among the numerous technological advances introduced during the civil war.
the masts of a wooden naval vessel are visible on the horizon.
confederate dead at spotsylvania virginia the site of a bloody battle in 1864 c h.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 a surgeons kit used in the civil war containing amputation instruments knives and tourniquets.
with medical knowledge and practices primitive at best far more men died from wounds infections and disease than in battle.
the first modern war than 6 million men.
these figures do not include the thousands of civilians who became victims of battles or who perished in disease ridden camps for runaway slaves or in conflicts between unionist and confederate families that raged in parts of the south.
the death toll in the civil war nearly equals the total number of americans who died in all the nations other wars from the revolution to the war in iraq.
nor was either side ready for other aspects of modern warfare.
medical care remained primitive.
i believe the doctors kill more than they cure wrote an alabama private in 1862 diseases like measles dysentery malaria and typhus swept through army camps killing more men than did combat.
the civil war was the first war in which large numbers of americans were captured by the enemy and held in dire conditions in military prisons.
some 50 000 men died in these prisons victims of starvation and disease including 13 000 union soldiers at andersonville georgia.
everywhere in the world war was becoming more destructive.
the scale of civil war bloodshed was unique in american history but not in the nineteenth century world.
the taiping rebellion in china 1850 1864 resulted in 23 million deaths.
the war of the triple alliance in south america 1864 1870 which pitted argentina brazil and uruguay against paraguay caused the death of half of paraguays prewar population of around 525 000 napoleon iiis military destruction of the paris commune in 1871 resulted in the death of more than 20 000 of his fellow countrymen in a single city.
the public and the war another modern feature of the civil war was that both sides were assisted by a vast propaganda effort to mobilize public opinion.
in the union an confederate prisoners of war at camp douglas chicago in 1864 w h y i s t h e c i v i l wa r c o n s i d e r e d t h e f i r s t m o d e r n w a r.
outpouring of lithographs souvenirs sheet music and pamphlets issued by patriotic organizations and the war department reaffirmed northern values tarred the democratic party with the brush of treason and accused the south of numerous crimes against union soldiers and loyal civilians.
comparable items appeared in the confederacy.
at the same time the wars brutal realities were brought home with unprecedented immediacy to the public at large.
war correspondents accompanied the armies and newspapers reported the results of battles on the following day and quickly published long lists of casualties.
the infant art of photography carried images of war into millions of american living rooms.
beginning in 1862 when photographers entered the battlefield to take shocking pictures of the dead at antietam the camera in the words of one journalist brought the bodies and laid them in our door yards mathew brady who organized a corps of photographers to cover the war found the conflict a passport to fame and wealth.
for photography itself it was a turning point in its growth as an art and business enterprise.
mobilizing resources figure 14 1 resources for war union versus confederacy population 22 million 9 million including 3 5 million slaves factories value of goods produced railroad tracks of total u s mileage textiles including cotton cloth and woolen goods the outbreak of the war found both sides unprepared.
in 1861 there was no national railroad gauge the distance separating the two tracks so trains built for one line could not run on another.
there was no national banking system no tax system capable of raising the enormous funds needed to finance the war and not even accurate maps of the southern states.
soon after the firing on fort sumter lincoln proclaimed a naval blockade of the south part of the so called anaconda plan which aimed to strangle the south economically.
but the navy charged with patrolling the 3 500 mile coastline consisted of only ninety vessels fewer than half of them steam powered.
not until late in the war did the blockade become effective.
then there was the problem of purchasing and distributing the food weapons and other supplies required by the soldiers.
the union army eventually became the best fed and best supplied military force in history.
by the wars third year on the other hand southern armies were suffering from acute shortages of food uniforms and shoes.
yet the chief of the confederacys ordnance bureau josiah gorgas a transplanted northerner proved brilliantly resourceful in arming southern troops.
under his direc firearms pig iron 110 000 union 18 000 confederacy 1 5 billion 155 million 70 30 ratio 17 1 ratio 32 1 ratio 20 1 in nearly every resource for warfare the union enjoyed a distinct advantage.
but this did not make union victory inevitable as during the war of independence the stronger side sometimes loses.
union army wagons crossing the rapidan river in virginia in may 1864 supplying civil war armies required an immense mobilization of economic resources.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 the first modern war tion the confederate government imported weapons from abroad and established arsenals of its own to turn out rifles artillery and ammunition.
military strategies each side tried to find ways to maximize its advantages.
essentially the confederacy adopted a defensive strategy with occasional thrusts into the north.
general robert e lee the leading southern commander was a brilliant battlefield tactician who felt confident of his ability to fend off attacks by larger union forces.
he hoped that a series of defeats would weaken the norths resolve and lead it eventually to abandon the conflict and recognize southern independence.
lincolns early generals found it impossible to bring the unions advantages in manpower and technology to bear on the battlefield.
in april 1861 the regular army numbered little more than 15 000 men most of whom were stationed west of the mississippi river.
its officers had been trained to lead small professional forces into battle not the crowds of untrained men who assembled in 1861 the north also suffered from narrowness of military vision.
its generals initially concentrated on occupying southern territory and attempting to capture richmond the confederate capital.
they attacked sporadically and withdrew after a battle thus sacrificing the norths manpower superiority and allowing the south to concentrate its smaller forces when an engagement impended.
well before his generals did lincoln realized that simply capturing and occupying territory would not win the war and that defeating the souths armies not capturing its capital had to be the norths battlefield objective.
and when he came to adopt the policy of emancipation lincoln acknowledged what confederate vice president alexander h stephens had already affirmed slavery was the cornerstone of the confederacy.
to win the war therefore the union must make the institution that lay at the economic and social foundation of southern life a military target.
the war begins in the east most of the wars fighting took place in a narrow corridor between washington and richmond a distance of only 100 miles as a succession of union generals led the army of the potomac as the main northern force in the east was called toward the confederate capital only to be turned back by southern forces.
the first significant engagement the first battle of bull run took place in northern virginia on july 21 1861 it ended with the chaotic retreat of the union soldiers along with the sightseers and politicians who had come to watch the battle.
almost 800 men died at bull run a toll eclipsed many times in the years to come but more americans than had been killed in any previous battle in the nations history.
the encounter disabused both sides of the idea that the war would be a brief lark.
in the wake of bull run george b mcclellan an army engineer who had recently won a minor engagement with confederate troops in western virginia assumed command of the unions army of the potomac.
a brilliant organizer mcclellan succeeded in welding his men into a superb fighting force.
he seemed reluctant however to commit them to battle w h y i s t h e c i v i l wa r c o n s i d e r e d t h e f i r s t m o d e r n w a r.
civil war in the e a s t lee r the antietam sept 17 1862 ac t om o p 1861 1862 new jersey maryland aw lan l el cc del m lee baltimore o pot nd oa hr.
she na m r ch ac esa confederate victories confederate advances confederate retreats confederate states union victories union advances union retreats union states pen mcclel la insu la ca n m pa ig n e a s t atl antic o cean norfolk since he tended to overestimate the size of enemy forces.
and as a democrat he hoped that compromise might end the war without large scale loss of life or a weakening of slavery.
months of military inactivity followed.
the mcclellan richmond r e bay seven days campaign june 25 july 1 1862 peak pp ra ah an no ck york r s r me ja in ay ide fredericksburg dec 13 1862 war eb delaware burns lee virginia the ar annapolis battle of bull run washington d c july 21 1861 first aug 30 1862 second manassas not until the spring of 1862 after a growing clamor for action by republican newspapers members of congress and an increasingly impatient lincoln did mcclellan lead his army of more than 100 000 men into virginia.
here they confronted the smaller army of northern virginia under the command of the confederate general joseph e johnston and after he was wounded robert e lee.
a brilliant battlefield tactician lee had been offered a command in the union army but chose to fight for the confederacy because of his devotion to virginia.
in the seven days campaign a series of engagements in june 1862 on the peninsula south of richmond lee blunted mcclellans attacks and forced him to withdraw back to the vicinity of washington d c in during the first two years of the war most of the fighting took place in virginia and maryland.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 the battle of antietam a painting of a union advance by captain james hope of the second vermont volunteers.
more than 4 000 men died on september 17 1862 when the battle of antietam was fought.
the first modern war august 1862 lee again emerged victorious at the second battle of bull run against union forces under the command of general john pope.
successful on the defensive lee now launched an invasion of the north.
he hoped to bring the border slave states into the confederacy persuade britain and france to recognize southern independence influence the norths fall elections and perhaps capture washington d c at the battle of antietam in maryland mcclellan and the army of the potomac repelled lees advance.
in a single day of fighting nearly 4 000 men were killed and 18 000 wounded 2 000 of whom later died of their injuries.
the dead one survivor recalled lay three deep in the field mowed down like grass before the scythe more americans died on september 17 1862 when the battle of antietam was fought than on any other day in the nations history including pearl harbor and d day in world war ii and the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 indeed more american soldiers perished at antietam than in all the other wars fought by the united states in the nineteenth century combined.
since lee was forced to retreat the north could claim antietam as a victory.
it was to be the unions last success in the east for some time.
in december 1862 the union suffered one of its most disastrous defeats of the war when general ambrose e burnside who had replaced mcclellan as the head of the army of the potomac assaulted lees army which was entrenched on heights near fredricksburg virginia.
it was not a fight wrote one union soldier to his mother it was a massacre the war in the west while the union accomplished little in the east in the first two years of the war events in the west followed a different course.
here the architect of early success was ulysses s grant.
a west point graduate who had resigned from the army in 1854 in part because of allegations of excessive drinking grant had been notably unsuccessful in civilian life.
when the war broke w h y i s t h e c i v i l wa r c o n s i d e r e d t h e f i r s t m o d e r n w a r.
out he was working as a clerk in his brothers leather store in galena illinois.
but after being commissioned as a colonel in an illinois regiment grant quickly displayed the daring the logical mind and the grasp of strategy he would demonstrate throughout the war.
in february 1862 grant won the unions first significant victory when he captured forts henry and donelson in tennessee.
in april naval forces under admiral david g farragut steamed into new orleans giving the the civil war in the w e s t most of the unions victories in the first two years of the war occurred in the west especially at shiloh and new orleans.
1861 1862 indiana m kansas iss iss illinois ohio r i pp ir.
missouri kentucky fort henry february 6 1862 er tennessee r memphis shiloh april 6 7 1862 be au reg a rd arkansas.
ten nes se indian territory gran t arkansas fort donelson february 16 1862 nashville georgia mississippi alabama texas louisiana mis siss ipp i r vicksburg florida mobile new orleans captured april 26 1862 far rag ut 100 miles 100 kilometers gulf of mexico union victory union advance confederate advance confederate retreat confederate states union states c h.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 the coming of emancipation union control of the souths largest city and the rich sugar plantation parishes to its south and west.
at the same time grant withstood a surprise confederate attack at shiloh tennessee.
but union momentum in the west then stalled.
t h e c o m i n g o f e m a n c i pat i o n slavery and the war war it has been said is the midwife of revolution.
and the civil war produced far reaching changes in american life.
the most dramatic of these was the destruction of slavery the central institution of southern society.
between 1831 when the british abolished slavery in their empire and 1888 when emancipation came to brazil some 6 million slaves gained their freedom in the western hemisphere.
of these nearly 4 million two thirds of the total lived in the southern united states.
in numbers scale and the economic power of the institution of slavery american emancipation dwarfed that of any other country although far more people were liberated in 1861 when czar alexander ii abolished serfdom in the russian empire.
at the outset of the war lincoln invoked time honored northern values to mobilize public support.
in a message to congress he identified the union cause with the fate of democracy for the whole family of man he identified the differences between north and south in terms of the familiar free labor ideology this is essentially a peoples struggle.
on the side of the union it is a struggle for maintaining in the world that form and substance of government whose leading object is to elevate the condition of men.
to afford all an unfettered start and a fair chance in the race of life but while appealing to free labor values lincoln initially insisted that slavery was irrelevant to the conflict.
in the wars first year his paramount concerns were to keep the border slave states delaware maryland kentucky and missouri in the union and to build the broadest base of support in the north for the war effort.
action against slavery he feared would drive the border with its white population of 2 6 million and nearly 500 000 slaves into the confederacy and alienate conservative northerners.
the unraveling of slavery thus in the early days of the war a nearly unanimous congress adopted a resolution proposed by senator john j crittenden of kentucky which affirmed that the union had no intention of interfering with slavery.
northern military commanders even returned fugitive slaves to their owners a policy that raised an outcry in antislavery circles.
yet as the confederacy set slaves to work as military laborers and blacks began to escape to union lines the policy of ignoring slavery unraveled.
by the end of 1861 the military had adopted the plan begun in virginia by general benjamin f butler of treating escaped blacks as contraband of war that is property of military value subject to confiscation.
butlers order added a word to the wars vocabulary.
escaping slaves became known as the contrabands they were housed by the army in contraband camps and educated in new contraband schools meanwhile slaves themselves took actions that helped propel a reluctant how did a war to preserve the union become a war to end slavery.
white america down the road to emancipation.
whatever the policies of the administration blacks saw the outbreak of fighting as heralding the long awaited end of bondage.
well before lincoln made emancipation a war aim blacks in the north and the south were calling the conflict the freedom war in 1861 and 1862 as the federal army occupied confederate territory slaves by the thousands headed for union lines.
unlike fugitives before the war these runaways included large numbers of women and children as entire families abandoned the plantations.
not a few passed along military intelligence and detailed knowledge of the souths terrain.
the most valuable and reliable information of the enemys movements in our vicinity that we have been able to get noted the union general daniel e sickles derived from negroes who came into our lines in southern louisiana the arrival of the union army in 1862 led slaves to sack plantation houses and refuse to work unless wages were paid.
slavery there wrote a northern reporter is forever destroyed and worthless no matter what mr lincoln or anyone else may say on the subject steps toward emancipation at first blacks determination to seize the opportunity presented by the war proved a burden to the army and an embarrassment to the administration.
but the failure of traditional strategies to produce victory strengthened the hand of antislavery northerners.
since slavery stood at the foundation of the southern economy they insisted emancipation was necessary to weaken the souths ability to sustain the war.
the most uncompromising opponents of slavery before the war abolitionists and radical republicans quickly concluded that the institution must become a target of the union war effort.
it is plain declared thaddeus stevens a radical republican congressman from pennsylvania that nothing approaching the present policy will subdue the rebels outside of congress few pressed the case for emancipation more eloquently than frederick douglass.
from the outset he insisted that it was futile to separate the freedom of the slave from the victory of the government fire must be met with water douglass declared darkness with light and war for the destruction of liberty must be met with war for the destruction of slavery these appeals won increasing support in a congress frustrated by lack of military success.
in march 1862 congress prohibited the army from returning fugitive slaves.
then came abolition in the district of columbia with monetary compensation for slaveholders and the territories followed in july by the second confiscation act which liberated slaves of disloyal owners in union occupied territory as well as slaves who escaped to union lines.
an 1863 advertisement for a runaway domestic slave circulated by louis manigault a member of a prominent georgia and south carolina planter family.
manigault blamed an unknown white man for enticing her away but she most likely escaped with a male slave who had begun to court her.
slaves fled to union lines from the first days of the civil war.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 the coming of emancipation throughout these months lincoln struggled to retain control of the emancipation issue.
in august 1861 john c frmont commanding union forces in missouri a state racked by a bitter guerrilla war between pronorthern and pro southern bands decreed the freedom of its slaves.
fearful of the orders impact on the border states lincoln swiftly rescinded it.
in november the president proposed that the border states embark on a program of gradual emancipation with the federal government paying owners for their loss of property.
he also revived the idea of colonization.
in august 1862 lincoln met at the white house with a delegation of black leaders and urged them to promote emigration from the united states.
you and we are different races he declared.
it is better for us both to be separated as late as december the president signed an agreement with a shady entrepreneur to settle former slaves on an island off the coast of haiti.
lincolns abe lincolns last card an engraving from the british magazine punch october 18 1862 portrays the preliminary emancipation proclamation as the last move of a desperate gambler.
decision sometime during the summer of 1862 lincoln concluded that emancipation had become a political and military necessity.
many factors contributed to his decision lack of military success hope that emancipated slaves might help meet the armys growing manpower needs changing northern public opinion and the calculation that making slavery a target of the war effort would counteract sentiment in britain for recognition of the confederacy.
but on the advice of secretary of state william h seward lincoln delayed his announcement until after a union victory lest it seem an act of desperation.
on september 22 1862 five days after mcclellans army forced lee to retreat at antietam lincoln issued the preliminary emancipation proclamation.
it warned that unless the south laid down its arms by the end of 1862 he would decree abolition.
the initial northern reaction was not encouraging.
in the fall elections of 1862 democrats made opposition to emancipation the centerpiece of their campaign warning that the north would be africanized inundated by freed slaves who would compete for jobs and seek to marry white women.
the republicans suffered sharp reverses.
they lost control of the legislatures of indiana and illinois and the governorship of new york and saw their majorities dangerously reduced in other states.
in his annual message to congress early in december lincoln tried to calm northerners racial fears reviving the ideas of gradual emancipation and colonization.
he concluded however on a higher note fellow citizens we cannot escape history.
the fiery trial through which we pass will light us down in honor or dishonor to the latest generation.
in giving freedom to the slave we assure freedom to the free honorable alike in what we give and what we preserve how did a war to preserve the union become a war to end slavery.
the emancipation proclamation on january 1 1863 after greeting visitors at the annual white house new years reception lincoln retired to his study to sign the emancipation proclamation.
the document did not liberate all the slaves indeed on the day it was issued it applied to very few.
because its legality derived from the presidents authority as military commander in chief to combat the souths rebellion the proclamation exempted areas firmly under union control where the war in effect had already ended.
thus it did not apply to the loyal border slave states that had never seceded or to areas of the confederacy occupied by union soldiers such as tennessee and parts of virginia and louisiana.
but the vast majority of the souths slaves more than 3 million men women and children it declared henceforward shall be free since most of these slaves were still behind confederate lines however their liberation would have to await union victories.
despite its limitations the proclamation set off scenes of jubilation among free blacks and abolitionists in the north and contrabands and slaves in the south.
sound the loud timbrel oer egypts dark sea intoned a black preacher at a celebration in boston.
jehovah hath triumphed his people are free by making the union army an agent of emancipation and wedding the goals of union and abolition the proclamation sounded the eventual death knell of slavery.
not only did the emancipation proclamation alter the nature of the civil war and the course of american history but it also represented a turning point in lincolns own thinking.
it contained no reference to compensation to slaveholders or to colonization of the freed people.
for the first time it committed the government to enlisting black soldiers in the union army.
lincoln now became in his own mind the great emancipator that is he assumed the role that history had thrust upon him and he tried to live up freed negroes celebrating president lincolns decree of emancipation a fanciful engraving from the french periodical le monde illustr march 21 1863.
visions of freedom freedom to the slave.
this handcolored lithograph from 1863 celebrates the promise of emancipation and also links the american flag the symbol of nationality with freedom by placing a liberty cap atop it.
on the left are symbols of freedom including a school a church a plow and a black man reading a newspaper.
a broken chain lies in the right foreground.
the image conveys the optimism inspired by the emancipation proclamation.
but many former slaves would never fully enjoy the kinds of freedom imagined in this lithograph.
questions 1 what does the image tell us about how emancipation was achieved.
2 in what ways does the artist suggest that freedom differed from life under slavery.
how did a war to preserve the union become a war to end slavery.
the emancipation proclamation pennsylvania ohio colorado territory illinois west virginia missouri virginia kentucky new mexico territory maryland delaware indiana kansas indian territory new jersey north carolina tennessee arkansas mississippi south carolina alabama georgia texas louisiana florida free state slave state in the union to which proclamation does not apply free territory confederate area occupied by union exempted from proclamation areas to which emancipation proclamation applies confederate area occupied by union where slaves are freed immediately to it.
he would later refuse suggestions that he rescind or modify the proclamation in the interest of peace.
were he to do so he told one visitor i should be damned in time and eternity like the end of slavery in haiti and mainland latin america abolition in the united states came about as the result of war.
but emancipation in the united states differed from its counterparts elsewhere in the western hemisphere it was immediate not gradual and offered no compensation to slaveholders for their loss of property with the exception of those in washington d c it also foretold the inevitable end of slavery in cuba puerto rico and brazil.
not until 1888 however when brazil abolished the institution did slavery come to an end in the entire western hemisphere.
the civil war which was begun to preserve the prewar union now portended a far reaching transformation in southern life and a redefinition of american freedom.
decoupling emancipation from colonization meant that the freed slaves would become part of american life.
a new system of labor politics and race relations would have to replace the shattered institution of slavery.
up to now wrote the socialist thinker karl marx observing events from london we have witnessed only the first act of the civil war the constitutional waging of war.
the second act the revolutionary waging of war is at hand the evolution of 300 miles 300 kilometers with the exception of a few areas the emancipation proclamation applied only to slaves in parts of the confederacy not under union control on january 1 1863 lincoln did not free the slaves with a stroke of his pen but the proclamation did change the nature of the civil war.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 the coming of emancipation lincolns emancipation policy displayed the hallmarks of his wartime leadership his capacity for growth and his ability to develop broad public support for his administration.
enlisting this widely reprinted recruiting poster urged african american men to join the union army after congress and the president changed the policy of allowing only whites to serve.
black troops of the proclamations provisions few were more radical in their implications than the enrollment of blacks into military service.
since sailor had been one of the few occupations open to free blacks before the war secretary of the navy gideon welles had already allowed african americans to serve on union warships.
but as during the american revolution when george washington initially excluded blacks from the continental army blacks in the civil war had to fight for the right to fight on land.
early in the war harry jarvis a virginia slave escaped to fortress monroe and offered to enlist in the union army.
general benjamin f butler jarvis later recalled said it wasnt a black mans war.
i told him it would be a black mans war before they got through at the outset the union army refused to accept northern black volunteers.
the administration feared that whites would not be willing to fight alongside blacks and that enlisting black soldiers would alienate the border slave states that remained in the union.
by the end of 1861 however the army was employing escaped slaves as cooks laundresses and laborers.
preliminary steps to enlist combat troops were taken in a few parts of the south in 1862 white abolitionist thomas wentworth higginson was sent to the south carolina sea islands which the union navy had seized early in the war to enroll slaves in the first south carolina volunteers.
but only after the emancipation proclamation did the recruitment of black soldiers begin in earnest.
by the end of the war more than 180 000 black men had served in the union army and 24 000 in the navy.
one third died in battle or of wounds or disease.
fifteen black soldiers and eight sailors received the medal of honor the highest award for military valor.
some black units won considerable notoriety among them the fiftyfourth massachusetts volunteers a company of free blacks from throughout the north commanded by robert gould shaw a young reformer from a prominent boston family.
the bravery of the fifty fourth in the july 1863 attack on fort wagner south carolina where nearly half the unit including shaw perished helped to dispel widespread doubts about blacks ability to withstand the pressures of the civil war battlefield.
the exploits of shaw and the fiftyfourth massachusetts were popularized in the 1989 film glory.
how did a war to preserve the union become a war to end slavery.
most black soldiers were emancipated slaves who joined the army in the south.
after union forces in 1863 seized control of the rich plantation lands of the mississippi valley general lorenzo thomas raised fifty regiments of black soldiers some 76 000 men in all.
another large group hailed from the border states exempted from the emancipation proclamation where enlistment was for most of the war the only route to freedom.
here black military service undermined slavery for congress expanded the emancipation proclamation to liberate black soldiers and their families.
the black soldier for black soldiers themselves military service proved to be a liberating experience.
no negro who has ever been a soldier wrote a northern official in 1865 can again be imposed upon they have learned what it is to be free and they will infuse their feelings into others service in the army established men as community leaders and opened a door to political advancement.
out of the army came many of the leaders of the reconstruction era.
at least 130 former soldiers served in political office after the civil war.
in time the memory of black military service would fade from white americas collective memory.
of the hundreds of civil war monuments that still dot the northern landscape fewer than a dozen contain an image of a black soldier.
but well into the twentieth century it remained a point of pride in black families throughout the united states that their fathers and grandfathers had fought for freedom.
the union navy treated black sailors pretty much the same as white sailors.
conditions on ships made racial segregation impossible.
black and white sailors lived and dined together in the same quarters.
they received equal pay and had the same promotion opportunities.
within the army however black soldiers received treatment that was anything but equal to their white counterparts.
organized into segregated units under sometimes abusive white officers they initially received lower pay ten dollars per month compared to sixteen dollars for white soldiers.
they were dis photographs of four anonymous black civil war soldiers including a sergeant with three stripes on his uniform.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 the second american revolution proportionately assigned to labor rather than combat and they could not rise to the rank of commissioned officer until the very end of the war.
if captured by confederate forces they faced the prospect of sale into slavery or immediate execution.
in a notorious incident in 1864 200 of 262 black soldiers died when southern troops under the command of nathan b forrest overran fort pillow in tennessee.
some of those who perished were killed after surrendering.
nonetheless black soldiers played a crucial role not only in winning the civil war but in defining the wars consequences.
once let a black man get upon his person the brass letters u s wrote frederick douglass in urging blacks to enlist and there is no power on earth which can deny that he has earned the right to citizenship in the united states as douglass predicted thanks in part to black military service many republicans in the last two years of the war came to believe that emancipation must bring with it equal protection of the laws regardless of race.
one of the first acts of the federal government to recognize this principle was the granting of retroactive equal pay to black soldiers early in 1865 racism was hardly eliminated from national life.
but declared george william curtis the editor of harpers weekly the war and emancipation had transformed a government for white men into one for mankind the service of black soldiers affected lincolns own outlook.
he insisted that they must be treated the same as whites when captured and suspended prisoner of war exchanges when the confederacy refused to include black troops.
in 1864 lincoln who before the war had never supported suffrage for african americans urged the governor of union occupied louisiana to work for the partial enfranchisement of blacks singling out soldiers as especially deserving.
at some future time he observed they might again be called upon to keep the jewel of liberty in the family of freedom the second american revolution old things are passing away wrote a black resident of california in 1862 and eventually old prejudices must follow.
the revolution has begun and time alone must decide where it is to end the changing status of black americans was only one dramatic example of what some historians call the second american revolution the transformation of american government and society brought about by the civil war.
liberty the illustration accompanying the american flag a piece of patriotic civil war sheet music exemplifies how the war united the ideals of liberty and nationhood.
and union never was freedoms contested nature more evident than during the civil war.
we all declare for liberty lincoln observed in 1864 but in using the same word we do not all mean the same thing to the north he continued freedom meant for each man to enjoy the product of his labor to southern whites it conveyed mastership the power to do as they please with other men and the product of other mens labor the unions triumph consolidated the northern understanding of freedom as the national norm.
the attack on fort sumter crystallized in northern minds the direct conflict between freedom and slavery that abolitionists had insisted upon h o w d i d t h e c i v i l wa r t r a n s f o r m t h e n a t i o n a l e c o n o m y a n d c r e a t e a s t r o n g e r n a t i o n s t a t e.
for decades.
the war as frederick douglass recognized as early as 1862 merged the cause of the slaves and the cause of the country liberty and union he continued have become identical as during the american revolution religious and secular understandings of freedom joined in a celebration of national destiny.
as he died to make men holy let us die to make men free proclaimed the popular song battle hymn of the republic written by julia ward howe and published in 1862 emancipation offered proof of the progressive nature and global significance of the countrys history.
for the first time wrote the chicago tribune the united states could truly exist as our fathers designed it the home of freedom the asylum of the oppressed the seat of justice the land of equal rights under the law lincolns vision but it was lincoln himself who linked the conflict with the deepest beliefs of northern society.
it is sometimes said that the american civil war was part of a broader nineteenth century process of nation building.
throughout the world powerful centralized nation states developed in old countries and new nations emerged where none had previously existed.
the civil war took place as modern states were consolidating their power and reducing local autonomy.
the meiji restoration in japan saw the emperor reclaim power from local lords or shoguns.
argentina in the 1850s adopted a new constitution that abolished slavery established universal male suffrage and gave the national government the right to intervene in local affairs.
as in the united states economic development quickly followed national unification.
japan soon emerged as a major economic power and argentina embarked on a policy of railroad construction centralization of banking industrial development and the encouragement of european immigration which soon made it the worlds sixth largest economy.
lincoln has been called the american equivalent of giuseppe mazzini or otto von bismarck who during this same era created nation states in italy and germany from disunited collections of principalities.
but lincolns nation was different from those being constructed in europe.
they were based on the idea of unifying a particular people with a common ethnic cultural and linguistic heritage.
to lincoln the american nation embodied a set of universal ideas centered on political democracy and human liberty.
the united states represented to the world the principle that government should rest on popular consent and that all men should be free.
these ideals lincoln declared allowed immigrants from abroad who could not trace their connection by blood to the nations birth nonetheless to become fully american.
lincoln summarized his conception of the wars meaning in november 1863 in brief remarks at the dedication of a military cemetery at the site of the wars greatest battle.
the gettysburg address is considered his finest speech see the appendix for the full text.
in less than three minutes he identified the nations mission with the principle that all men are created equal spoke of the war as bringing about a new birth of freedom and defined the essence of democratic government.
the sacrifices of union soldiers he declared would ensure that government of the people by the people for the people shall not perish from the earth lincoln and the female slave by the free black artist david b bowser.
working in philadelphia bowser painted flags for a number of black civil war regiments.
lincoln confers freedom on a kneeling slave an image that downplays blacks role in their own emancipation.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 the second american revolution from union to nation the eagles nest an 1861 antisecession cartoon promising annihilation to traitors the eggs representing seceding states have become rotten and are hatching monsters.
the mobilization of the unions resources for modern war brought into being a new american nation state with greatly expanded powers and responsibilities.
the united states remained a federal republic with sovereignty divided between the state and national governments.
but the war forged a new national selfconsciousness reflected in the increasing use of the word nation a unified political entity in place of the older union of separate states.
in his inaugural address in 1861 lincoln used the word union twenty times while making no mention of the nation by 1863 union does not appear at all in the 269 word gettysburg address while lincoln referred five times to the nation liberty.
true liberty the writer francis lieber proclaimed requires a country this was the moral of one of the eras most popular works of fiction edward everett hales short story the man without a country published in 1863 hales protagonist philip nolan in a fit of anger curses the land of his birth.
as punishment he is condemned to live on a ship never to set foot on american soil or hear the name the united states spoken.
he learns that to be deprived of national identity is to lose ones sense of self.
the war and american religion the upsurge of patriotism and of national power was reflected in many aspects of american life.
even as the war produced unprecedented casualties the northern protestant clergy strove to provide it with a religious justification and to reassure their congregations that the dead had not died in vain.
the religious press now devoted more space to military and political developments than to spiritual matters.
in numerous wartime sermons christianity and patriotism were joined in a civic religion that saw the war as gods mechanism for ridding the united states of slavery and enabling it to become what it had never really been a land of freedom.
lincoln one of the few american presidents who never joined a church shrewdly marshaled religious symbolism to generate public support declaring days of thanksgiving after northern victories and encouraging northern clergymen to support republican candidates for office.
religious beliefs also enabled americans to cope with the unprecedented mass death the war involved.
of course equating death with eternal life h o w d i d t h e c i v i l wa r t r a n s f o r m t h e n a t i o n a l e c o n o m y a n d c r e a t e a s t r o n g e r n a t i o n s t a t e.
is a central tenet of christianity.
but the war led to what one historian calls a transformation of heaven as americans imagined future celestial family reunions that seemed more and more like gatherings in middle class living rooms.
some americans could not wait until their own deaths to see the departed.
spiritualism belief in the ability to communicate with the dead grew in popularity.
mary todd lincoln held seances in the white house to experience again the presence of her young son willie who succumbed to disease in 1862 coping with death also required unprecedented governmental action from notifying next of kin to accounting for the dead and missing.
both the union and confederacy established elaborate systems for gathering statistics and maintaining records of dead and wounded soldiers an effort supplemented by private philanthropic organizations.
after the war ended the federal government embarked on a program to locate and re bury hundreds of thousands of union soldiers in national military cemeteries.
between 1865 and 1871 the government reinterred more than 300 000 union but not confederate soldiers including black soldiers who were buried as they had fought in segregated sections of military cemeteries.
liberty in wartime this intense new nationalism made criticism of the war effort or of the policies of the lincoln administration seem to republicans equivalent to treason.
although there had been sporadic persecution of opponents of the mexican war the civil war presented for the first time since the revolution the issue of the limits of wartime dissent.
during the conflict declared the republican new york times the safety of the nation is the supreme law arbitrary arrests numbered in the thousands.
they included opposition newspaper editors democratic politicians individuals who discouraged enlistment in the army and ordinary civilians like the chicago man briefly imprisoned for calling the president a damned fool with the constitution unclear as to who possessed the power to suspend the writ of habeas corpus thus allowing prisoners to be held without charge this image adorned a printed version of a popular civil war song the dying soldier it illustrates how americans sought solace in religion in the face of the wars enormous death toll.
at the left an angel receives the dying soldier while at the right his wife mother or sweetheart prays for his soul.
recent h1 voices of freedom from speech of alexander h stephens vi c e pr e s i d e n t o f t h e c o n f e d e r a c y m a r c h 2 1 1 8 6 1 a whig leader in georgia alexander h stephens opposed secession until his state voted to leave the union.
he then accepted the vice presidency of the confederacy and in a speech in savannah in march 1861 he explained the basic premises of the new government.
this was an error.
our new government is founded upon exactly the opposite ideas its foundations are laid its cornerstone rests upon the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white man that slavery subordination to the superior race is his natural and moral condition.
this our new government is the first in the history of the world based upon this great physical philosophical the confederate constitution has put at rest forever all the agitating questions relating to our peculiar institutions african slavery as it exists among us the proper status of the negro in our form of civilization.
this was the immediate cause of the late rupture and present revolution.
the prevailing ideas entertained by jefferson and most of the leading statesmen at the time of the formation of the old constitution were that the enslavement of the african was in violation of the laws of nature that it was wrong in principle socially morally and politically.
these ideas however were fundamentally wrong.
they rested on the assumption of the equality of and moral truth.
it is the first government ever instituted upon principles in strict conformity to nature and the ordination of providence in furnishing the materials of human society.
many governments have been founded upon the principles of certain classes but the classes thus enslaved were of the same race and in violation of the laws of nature.
our system commits no such violation of natures laws.
the negro by nature or by the curse against canaan is fitted for that condition which he occupies in our system.
the substratum of our society is made of the material fitted by nature for it and by experience we know that it is the best not only for the superior but for the inferior race that it should be so.
from abraham lincoln a d d r e s s a t s a n i t a r y fa i r b a l t i m o r e a p r i l 1 8 1 8 6 4 abraham lincolns speech at a sanitary fair a grand bazaar that raised money for the care of union soldiers offers a dramatic illustration of the contested meaning of freedom during the civil war.
the world has never had a good definition of the word liberty and the american people just now are much in want of one.
we all declare for liberty but in using the same word we do not all mean the same thing.
with some the word liberty may mean for each man to do as he pleases with himself and the was a black one.
plainly the sheep and the wolf are not agreed upon a definition of the word liberty and precisely the same difference prevails today among us human creatures even in the north and all professing to love liberty.
hence we behold the process by which thousands are daily passing from under the yoke of bondage hailed by some as the advance of liberty and bewailed by others as the destruction of all liberty.
recently as it seems the people of maryland have been doing something to define liberty abolishing slavery in the state and thanks to them that in what they have done the wolfs dictionary has been repudiated.
product of his labor while with others the same word may mean for some men to do as they please with other men and the product of other mens labor.
here are two not only different but incompatible things called by the same name liberty.
and it questions follows that each of the things is by the respective 1 why does stephens argue that slavery in the south differs from slavery as it has existed in previous societies.
parties called by two different and incompatible names liberty and tyranny.
the shepherd drives the wolf from the sheeps 2 what does lincoln identify as the essential difference between northern and southern definitions of freedom.
throat for which the sheep thanks the shepherd as a liberator while the wolf denounces him for the same act as the destroyer of liberty especially as the sheep 3 how do lincoln and stephens differ in their definition of liberty and whether it applies to african americans.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 the second american revolution lincoln claimed the right under the presidential war powers and twice suspended the writ throughout the entire union for those accused of disloyal activities the courts generally gave the administration a free hand.
they refused to intervene when a military court convicted clement l vallandigham a leading ohio democrat known for his blistering antiwar speeches of treason.
on lincolns order vallandigham was banished to the confederacy.
in 1861 chief justice roger b taney had ordered the president to release john merryman a civilian who had been arrested by military authorities in maryland but the president ignored him.
not until 1866 after the fighting had ended did the supreme court in the case ex parte milligan declare it unconstitutional to bring accused persons before military tribunals where civil courts were operating.
the constitution declared justice david davis is not suspended in wartime it remains a law for rulers and people equally in time of war and peace lincoln was not a despot.
most of those arrested were quickly released the democratic press continued to flourish and contested elections were held throughout the war.
but the policies of the lincoln administration offered proof to be repeated during later wars of the fragility of civil liberties in the face of assertive patriotism and wartime demands for national unity.
the north s transformation even as he invoked traditional values lincoln presided over far reaching changes in northern life.
the effort to mobilize the resources of the union greatly enhanced the power not only of the federal government but also of a rising class of capitalist entrepreneurs.
unlike the south which suffered economic devastation the north experienced the war as a time of prosperity.
nourished by wartime inflation and government contracts the profits of industry boomed.
new england mills worked day and night to supply the army with blankets and uniforms and pennsylvania coal mines and ironworks rapidly expanded their production.
mechanization proceeded apace in many industries especially those like boot and shoe production and meatpacking that supplied the armys ever increasing needs.
agriculture also flourished for even as farm boys by the hundreds of thousands joined the army the frontier of cultivation pushed westward with machinery and immigrants replacing lost labor.
wisconsin furnished 90 000 men to the union army yet its population grain production and farm income continued to grow.
government sheet music for two of the best known patriotic songs written during the civil war.
and the economy as in contemporary germany and japan the new american nation state that emerged during the civil war was committed to rapid economic development.
congress adopted policies that promoted economic growth and permanently altered the nations financial system.
with the south now unrepresented the lawmakers adopted policies long advocated by many northerners.
to spur agricultural development the homestead act offered 160 acres of free public land to settlers in the west.
it took effect on january 1 1863 the same day as the emancipation proclamation and like the proclamation tried to implement a vision of freedom.
by the 1930s h o w d i d t h e c i v i l wa r t r a n s f o r m t h e n a t i o n a l e c o n o m y a n d c r e a t e a s t r o n g e r n a t i o n s t a t e.
more than 400 000 families had acquired farms under its provisions.
in addition the land grant college act assisted the states in establishing agricultural and mechanic colleges building the transcontinental railroad congress also made huge grants of money and land for internal improvements including up to 100 million acres to the union pacific and central pacific two companies chartered in 1862 and charged with building a railroad from the missouri river to the pacific coast.
these were the first corporate charters issued by the federal government since the second bank of the united states in 1816.
when first proposed by entrepreneur asa whitney in 1846 the idea of a transcontinental railroad had been considered by congress too gigantic and entirely impracticable and indeed the project was monumental.
the central pacific progressed only twenty miles a year for the first three years of construction because the sierra nevada range was almost impassable.
it required some 20 000 men to lay the tracks across prairies and mountains a substantial number of them immigrant chinese contract laborers called coolies by many americans.
hundreds of chinese workers died blasting tunnels and building bridges through this treacherous terrain.
when it was completed in 1869 the transcontinental railroad which ran from omaha nebraska to san francisco expanded the national market facilitated the spread of settlement and investment in the west and heralded the doom of the plains indians.
the war and native americans one of lincolns first orders as president was to withdraw federal troops from the west so that they could protect washington d c recognizing that this would make it impossible for the army to keep white interlopers from intruding on indian land as treaties required it to do indian leaders begged lincoln to reverse this decision but to no avail.
inevitably conflict flared in the west between native americans and white settlers with disastrous results.
during the civil war the sioux killed hundreds of white farmers in minnesota before being subdued by the army.
after a military court sentenced more than 300 indians to death lincoln commuted the sentences of all but 38 but their hanging in december 1862 remains the largest official execution in american history.
in 1864 a unit of colorado soldiers under the command of colonel john chivington attacked a village of cheyenne and arapaho indians at sand creek killing perhaps 400 men women and children.
the union army also launched a campaign against the navajo in the southwest destroying their orchards and sheep and forcing 8 000 people to move to a reservation set aside by the government.
the navajos long walk became as central to their historical experience as the trail of tears to the cherokee see chapter 14.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 carpetbaggers emancipation an 1865 lithograph is unusual because along with the familiar images of lincoln and emancipated slaves it also portrays a poor white family suggesting that all americans will benefit from the end of slavery and reconstruction.
and radical reconstruction in the south scalawags the new southern governments also brought to power new groups of whites.
many reconstruction officials were northerners who for one reason or another had made their homes in the south after the war.
their opponents dubbed them carpetbaggers implying that they had packed all their belongings in a suitcase and left their homes in order to reap the spoils of office in the south.
some carpetbaggers were undoubtedly corrupt adventurers.
the large majority however were former union soldiers who decided to remain in the south when the war ended before there was any prospect of going into politics.
others were investors in land and railroads who saw in the postwar south an opportunity to combine personal economic advancement with a role in helping to substitute as one wrote the civilization of freedom for that of slavery teachers freedmens bureau officers and others who came to the region genuinely hoping to assist the former slaves represented another large group of carpetbaggers most white republicans however had been born in the south.
former confederates reserved their greatest scorn for these scalawags whom they considered traitors to their race and region.
some southern born republicans were men of stature and wealth like james l alcorn the owner of one of mississippis largest plantations and the states first republican governor.
most scalawags however were non slaveholding white farmers from the southern upcountry.
many had been wartime unionists and they now cooperated with the republicans in order to prevent rebels from returning to power.
others hoped reconstruction governments would help them recover from wartime economic losses by suspending the collection of debts and enacting laws protecting small property holders from losing their homes to creditors.
in states like north carolina tennessee and arkansas republicans initially commanded a significant minority of the white vote.
even in the deep south the small white republican vote was important because the population remained almost evenly divided between blacks almost all of whom voted for the party of lincoln and whites overwhelmingly democratic.
southern republicans in power in view of the daunting challenges they faced the remarkable thing is not that reconstruction governments in many respects failed but how much they did accomplish.
perhaps their greatest achievement lay in establishing the souths first state supported public schools.
the new educational systems served both black and white children although generally in schools segregated by race.
only in new orleans were the public schools integrated during reconstruction and only in south carolina did the state university admit black students elsewhere separate colleges were established.
by the 1870s in a region whose prewar leaders had made it illegal for slaves to learn and had done little to provide education for poorer whites more than half the children black and white were attending public schools.
the new governments also pioneered civil rights legislation.
their laws made it illegal for railroads hotels and other institutions to discriminate on the basis of race.
enforcement varied considerably from locality to locality but reconstruction established for the first time at the state what were the social and political effects of radical reconstruction in the south.
black students outside a schoolhouse in a post civil war photograph.
the teacher is seated at the far right.
level a standard of equal citizenship and a recognition of blacks right to a share of public services.
republican governments also took steps to strengthen the position of rural laborers and promote the souths economic recovery.
they passed laws to ensure that agricultural laborers and sharecroppers had the first claim on harvested crops rather than merchants to whom the landowner owed money.
south carolina created a state land commission which by 1876 had settled 14 000 black families and a few poor whites on their own farms.
the quest for prosperity rather than land distribution however the reconstruction governments pinned their hopes for southern economic growth and opportunity for african americans and poor whites alike on regional economic development.
railroad construction they believed was the key to transforming the south into a society of booming factories bustling towns and diversified agriculture.
a free and living republic declared a tennessee republican would spring up in the track of the railroad every state during reconstruction helped to finance railroad construction and through tax reductions and other incentives tried to attract northern manufacturers to invest in the region.
the program had mixed results.
economic development in general remained weak.
with abundant opportunities existing in the west few northern investors ventured to the reconstruction south.
to their supporters the governments of radical reconstruction presented a complex pattern of disappointment and accomplishment.
a revitalized southern economy failed to materialize and most african americans remained locked in poverty.
on the other hand biracial democratic government a thing unknown in american history for the first time functioned effectively in many parts of the south.
public facilities were rebuilt and expanded school systems established and legal codes purged of racism.
the conservative elite that had dominated southern government from colonial c h.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 the overthrow of reconstruction murder of louisiana an 1873 cartoon illustrates the intensity of the opposition to reconstruction.
president ulysses s grant depicted as an emperor advised by attorney general george h williams in the form of the devil prepares to sacrifice the state on the altar of radicalism the victim held by two black men has already had her heart cut out by republican governor william p kellogg.
the other southern states with south carolina kneeling in chains look on.
times to 1867 found itself excluded from political power while poor whites newcomers from the north and former slaves cast ballots sat on juries and enacted and administered laws.
we have gone through one of the most remarkable changes in our relations to each other declared a white south carolina lawyer in 1871 that has been known perhaps in the history of the world it is a measure of how far change had progressed that the reaction against reconstruction proved so extreme.
the overthrow of reconstruction reconstructions opponents the souths traditional leaders planters merchants and democratic politicians bitterly opposed the new governments.
they denounced them as corrupt inefficient and examples of black supremacy intelligence virtue and patriotism in public life declared a protest by prominent southern democrats had given way to ignorance stupidity and vice corruption did exist during reconstruction but it was confined to no race region or party.
the rapid growth of state budgets and the benefits to be gained from public aid led in some states to a scramble for influence that produced bribery insider dealing and a get rich quick atmosphere.
southern frauds however were dwarfed by those practiced in these years by the whiskey ring which involved high officials of the grant administration and by new yorks tweed ring controlled by the democrats whose thefts ran into the tens of millions of dollars.
these are discussed in the next chapter.
the rising taxes needed to pay for schools and other new public facilities and to assist railroad development were another cause of opposition to reconstruction.
many poor whites who had initially supported the republican party turned against it when it became clear that their economic situation was not improving.
what were the main factors in b oth the north and south for the abandonment of reconstruction.
the most basic reason for opposition to reconstruction however was that most white southerners could not accept the idea of former slaves voting holding office and enjoying equality before the law.
in order to restore white supremacy in southern public life and to ensure planters a disciplined reliable labor force they believed reconstruction must be overthrown.
opponents launched a campaign of violence in an effort to end republican rule.
their actions posed a fundamental challenge both for reconstruction governments in the south and for policymakers in washington d c a reign of terror the civil war ended in 1865 but violence remained widespread in large parts of the postwar south.
in the early years of reconstruction violence was mostly local and unorganized.
blacks were assaulted and murdered for refusing to give way to whites on city sidewalks using insolent language challenging end of year contract settlements and attempting to buy land.
the violence that greeted the advent of republican governments after 1867 however was far more pervasive and more directly motivated by politics.
in wide areas of the south secret societies sprang up with the aim of preventing blacks from voting and destroying the organization of the republican party by assassinating local leaders and public officials.
the most notorious such organization was the ku klux klan which in effect served as a military arm of the democratic party in the south.
from its founding in 1866 in tennessee the klan was a terrorist organization.
it quickly spread into nearly every southern state.
led by planters merchants and democratic politicians men who liked to style themselves the souths respectable citizens the klan committed some of the most brutal criminal acts in american history.
in many counties it launched what one victim called a reign of terror against republican leaders black and white.
the klans victims included white republicans among them wartime unionists and local officeholders teachers and party organizers.
william luke an irish born teacher in a black school was lynched in 1870 but african americans local political leaders those who managed to acquire land and others who in one way or another defied the norms of white supremacy bore the brunt of the violence.
in york county south carolina where nearly the entire white male population joined the klan and women participated by sewing the robes and hoods klansmen wore as disguises the organization committed eleven murders and hundreds of whippings.
on occasion violence escalated from assaults on individuals to mass terrorism and even local insurrections.
in meridian mississippi in 1871 some thirty blacks were murdered in cold blood along with a white republican judge.
the bloodiest act of violence during reconstruction took place in colfax louisiana in 1873 where armed whites assaulted the town with a small cannon.
hundreds of former slaves were murdered including fifty members of a black militia unit after they had surrendered.
unable to suppress the klan the new southern a prospective scene in the city of oaks a cartoon in the september 1 1868 issue of the independent monitor a democratic newspaper published in tuscaloosa alabama.
the cartoon sent a warning to the reverend a s lakin who had moved from ohio to become president of the university of alabama and dr n b cloud a southern born republican serving as alabamas superintendent of public education.
the ku klux klan forced both men from their positions.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 the overthrow of reconstruction governments appealed to washington for help.
in 1870 and 1871 congress adopted three enforcement acts outlawing terrorist societies and allowing the president to use the army against them.
these laws continued the expansion of national authority during reconstruction.
they defined crimes that aimed to deprive citizens of their civil and political rights as federal offenses rather than violations of state law.
in 1871 president grant dispatched federal marshals backed up by troops in some areas to arrest hundreds of accused klansmen.
many klan leaders fled the south.
after a series of well publicized trials the klan went out of existence.
in 1872 for the first time since the civil war peace reigned in most of the former confederacy.
the two members of the ku klux klan in their disguises from harpers weekly december 19 1868 the klan did not adopt its familiar white robes until after reconstruction.
the old plantation home a lithograph from 1872 produced by the prominent firm of currier and ives in new york city illustrates how a nostalgic image of slavery as a time of carefree happiness for african americans was being promoted even as reconstruction took place.
liberal republicans despite the grant administrations effective response to klan terrorism the norths commitment to reconstruction waned during the 1870s.
many radicals including thaddeus stevens who died in 1868 had passed from the scene.
within the republican party their place was taken by politicians less committed to the ideal of equal rights for blacks.
northerners increasingly felt that the south should be able to solve its own problems without constant interference from washington.
the federal government had freed the slaves made them citizens and given them the right to vote.
now blacks should rely on their own resources not demand further assistance.
in 1872 an influential group of republicans alienated by corruption within the grant administration and believing that the growth of federal power during and after the war needed to be curtailed formed their own party.
they included republican founders like lyman trumbull and prominent editors and journalists such as e l godkin of the nation.
calling themselves liberal republicans they nominated horace greeley editor of the new york tribune for president.
what were the main factors in b oth the north and south for the abandonment of reconstruction.
the liberals alienation from the grant administration initially had little to do with reconstruction.
they claimed that corrupt politicians had come to power in the north by manipulating the votes of immigrants and workingmen while men of talent and education like themselves had been pushed aside.
democratic criticisms of reconstruction however found a receptive audience among the liberals.
as in the north they became convinced the best men of the south had been excluded from power while ignorant voters controlled politics producing corruption and misgovernment.
power in the south should be returned to the regions natural leaders during the campaign of 1872 greeley repeatedly called on americans to clasp hands across the bloody chasm by putting the civil war and reconstruction behind them.
greeley had spent most of his career first as a whig and then as a republican denouncing the democratic party.
but with the republican split presenting an opportunity to repair their political fortunes democratic leaders endorsed greeley as their candidate.
many rank and file democrats unable to bring themselves to vote for greeley stayed at home on election day.
as a result greeley suffered a devastating defeat by grant whose margin of more than 700 000 popular votes was the largest in a nineteenth century presidential contest.
but greeleys campaign placed on the northern agenda the one issue on which the liberal reformers and the democrats could agree a new policy toward the south.
the north s retreat the liberal attack on reconstruction which continued after 1872 contributed to a resurgence of racism in the north.
journalist james s pike a leading greeley supporter in 1874 published the prostrate state an influential account of a visit to south carolina.
the book depicted a state engulfed by political corruption drained by governmental extravagance and under the control of a mass of black barbarism the souths problems he insisted arose from negro government the solution was to restore leading whites to political power.
newspapers that had long supported reconstruction now began to condemn black participation in southern government.
they expressed their views visually as well.
engravings depicting the former slaves as heroic civil war veterans upstanding citizens or victims of violence were increasingly replaced by caricatures presenting them as little more than unbridled animals.
resurgent racism offered a convenient explanation for the alleged failure of reconstruction.
other factors also weakened northern support for reconstruction.
in 1873 the country plunged into a severe economic depression.
distracted changes in graphic artist thomas nasts depiction of blacks in harpers weekly mirrored the evolution of republican sentiment in the north.
and not this man.
august 5 1865 shows the black soldier as an upstanding citizen deserving of the vote.
colored rule in a reconstructed.
state march 14 1874 suggests that reconstruction legislatures had become travesties of democratic government.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 the overthrow of reconstruction by economic problems republicans were in no mood to devote further attention to the south.
the depression dealt the south a severe blow and further weakened the prospect that republicans could revitalize the regions economy.
democrats made substantial gains throughout the nation in the elections of 1874 for the first time since the civil war their party took control of the house of representatives.
before the new congress met the old one enacted a final piece of reconstruction legislation the civil rights act of 1875 this outlawed racial discrimination in places of public accommodation like hotels and theaters.
but it was clear that the northern public was retreating from reconstruction.
the supreme court whittled away at the guarantees of black rights congress had adopted.
in the slaughterhouse cases 1873 butchers excluded from a state sponsored monopoly in louisiana went to court claiming that their right to equality before the law guaranteed by the fourteenth amendment had been violated.
the justices rejected their claim ruling that the amendment had not altered traditional federalism.
most of the rights of citizens it declared remained under state control.
three years later in united states v cruikshank the court gutted the enforcement acts by throwing out the convictions of some of those responsible for the colfax massacre of 1873 the of course he wants to vote the democratic ticket a cartoon from harpers weekly october 21 1876 comments on the campaign of terror launched by south carolina democrats in an attempt to carry the election of 1876 triumph of the redeemers by the mid 1870s reconstruction was clearly on the defensive.
democrats had already regained control of states with substantial white voting majorities such as tennessee north carolina and texas.
the victorious democrats called themselves redeemers since they claimed to have redeemed the white south from corruption misgovernment and northern and black control.
in those states where reconstruction governments survived violence again erupted.
this time the grant administration showed no desire to intervene.
in contrast to the klans activities conducted at night by disguised men the violence of 1875 and 1876 took place in broad daylight as if to underscore democrats conviction that they had nothing to fear from washington.
in mississippi in 1875 white rifle clubs drilled in public and openly assaulted and murdered republicans.
when governor adelbert ames a maine born union general frantically appealed to the federal government for assistance president grant responded that the northern public was tired out by southern problems.
on election day armed democrats destroyed ballot boxes and drove former slaves from the polls.
the result was a democratic landslide and the end of reconstruction in mississippi.
a revolution has taken place wrote ames and a race are disfranchised they are to be returned to.
an era of second slavery similar events took place in south carolina in 1876 democrats nominated for governor former confederate general wade hampton.
hampton promised to respect the rights of all citizens of the state but his supporters inspired by democratic tactics in mississippi launched a wave of intimidation.
democrats intended to carry the election one planter told a black official if we have to wade in blood knee deep what were the main factors in b oth the north and south for the abandonment of reconstruction.
reconstruction in the south 1867 1877 pennsylvania colorado ohio indiana illinois west virginia kansas missouri indian territory north carolina tennessee 1868 1876 1866 1870 arkansas virginia 1870 1873 kentucky new mexico territory maryland delaware 1868 1874 south carolina mississippi alabama 1870 1875 1868 1874 1876 georgia 1870 1871 texas 1870 1873 atlant i c ocean louisiana 1868 1876 florida 1876 gulf of mexico former confederate states 1869 date of re admission to the union 1873 date of election that produced democratic control of legislature and governorship the disputed bargain of election 300 miles 300 kilometers and events in south carolina directly affected the outcome of the presidential campaign of 1876 to succeed grant the republicans nominated governor rutherford b hayes of ohio.
democrats chose as his opponent new yorks governor samuel j tilden.
by this time only south carolina florida and louisiana remained under republican control.
the election turned out to be so close that whoever captured these states which both parties claimed to have carried would become the next president.
unable to resolve the impasse on its own congress in january 1877 appointed a fifteen member electoral commission composed of senators representatives and supreme court justices.
republicans enjoyed an 8 7 majority on the commission and to no ones surprise the members decided by that margin that hayes had carried the disputed southern states and had been elected president.
even as the commission deliberated however behind thescenes negotiations took place between leaders of the two parties.
hayess representatives agreed to recognize the presidential election of 1876 21 15 22 8 10 11 non voting territory electoral vote popular vote party candidate share share republican hayes 185 50 4 036 298 48 democrat tilden 184 50 4 300 590 51 greenback cooper 0 0 93 895 1 disputed assigned to hayes by electoral commission c h.
15 what is freedom reconstruction 1865 1877 suggested reading democratic control of the entire south and to avoid further intervention in local affairs.
they also pledged that hayes would place a southerner in the cabinet position of postmaster general and that he would work for federal aid to the texas and pacific railroad a transcontinental line projected to follow a southern route.
for their part democrats promised not to dispute hayess right to office and to respect the civil and political rights of blacks.
thus was concluded the bargain of 1877 not all of its parts were fulfilled.
but hayes became president and he did appoint david m key of tennessee as postmaster general.
hayes quickly ordered federal troops to stop guarding the state houses in louisiana and south carolina allowing democratic claimants to become governor.
contrary to legend hayes did not remove the last soldiers from the south he simply ordered them to return to their barracks.
but the texas and pacific never did get its land grant.
of far more significance the triumphant southern democrats failed to live up to their pledge to recognize blacks as equal citizens.
the is this a republican form of government a cartoon by thomas nast in harpers weekly september 2 1876 illustrates his conviction that the overthrow of reconstruction meant that the united states was not prepared to live up to its democratic ideals or protect the rights of black citizens threatened by violence.
end of reconstruction as a historical process the nations adjustment to the destruction of slavery reconstruction continued well after 1877 blacks continued to vote and in some states hold office into the 1890s.
but as a distinct era of national history when republicans controlled much of the south blacks exercised significant political power and the federal government accepted the responsibility for protecting the fundamental rights of all american citizens reconstruction had come to an end.
despite its limitations reconstruction was a remarkable chapter 17 had begun around 1890 but reached its peak during the progressive era.
between 1901 and the outbreak of world war i in europe in 1914 some 13 million immigrants came to the united states the majority from italy russia and the austro hungarian empire.
in fact progressive era immigration formed part of a larger process of worldwide migration set in motion by industrial expansion and the decline of traditional agriculture.
poles emigrated not only to pittsburgh and chicago but to work in german factories and scottish mines.
italians sought jobs in belgium france and argentina as well as the united states.
as many as 750 000 chinese migrated to other countries each year.
during the years from 1840 to 1914 when immigration to the united states would be virtually cut off first by the outbreak of world war i and then by legislation perhaps 40 million persons emigrated to the united states and another 20 million to other parts of the western hemisphere including canada argentina brazil and the caribbean.
this population flow formed one part of a massive shifting of peoples throughout the world much of which took place in asia.
millions of persons migrated to southeast asia and the south pacific mainly from india and china.
millions more moved from russia and northern asia to manchuria siberia and central asia.
the world on the move st petersburg winnipeg halifax new york europe 4 millio russian empire novosibirsk n lvov n baku tashkent east and vladivostok southeast asia tientsin tianjin 7 million returnees 3 million the four world migration systems 1815 1914 atlantic russo siberian asian contract labor colonial estimated emigration millions population 1900 25 milllion people transportation after 1880 transcontinental railroad suez canal 1869 o sia yokohama s ca e ri shanghai japan am e china new orleans th calcutta burma africa hong kong egypt mexico cuba bombay india puerto rico veracruz yemen siam acapulco pac ific manila dakar jamaica bangkok saigon nigeria oc ean accra lagos georgetown caracas ceylon 5 malaya panama canal 1914 uganda douala mi mogadishu l lio singapore n in belem ter to africa dutch east indies quito ivory nal mombasa gold ly coast batavia jakarta south america coast madagascar 0 75 million to callao lima africa and australia brazil salvador la paz beira pa cific rio de janeiro windhoek mauritius australia brisbane oce a n sao paulo south maputo africa valparaiso in d ia n o c e a n sydney cape town montevideo melbourne buenos aires new argentina zealand 2 5 million los angeles on t rom a chicago lio 35 mil 1815 1914 1m illi llion f seattle united states san francisco st louis 6 million minsk 8m illio n mi vancouver european russia moscow at l ant i c oce an canada migration siberia north sea north america world the century between 1815 when the napoleonic wars in europe and the war of 1812 in the united states ended and the outbreak of world war i in 1914 witnessed a series of massive shifts in the worlds population.
the 35 million people who crossed the atlantic to north america formed the largest migration stream but millions of migrants also moved to south america eastern russia and various parts of asia.
colonial plantation systems foods wheat rice bananas stimulants coffee tea tobacco sugar cocoa opium industrial crops cotton palm oil rubber ch.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 an illustration in the 1912 publication the new immigration depicts the various types entering the united states.
italian family on ferry boat leaving ellis island a 1905 photograph by lewis hine.
the family of immigrants has just passed through the inspection process at the gateway to the united states.
an urban age and a consumer society numerous causes inspired this massive uprooting of population.
rural southern and eastern europe and large parts of asia were regions marked by widespread poverty and illiteracy burdensome taxation and declining economies.
political turmoil at home like the revolution that engulfed mexico after 1911 also inspired emigration.
not all of these immigrants could be classified as free laborers however.
large numbers of chinese mexican and italian migrants including many who came to the united states were bound to long term labor contracts.
these contracts were signed with labor agents who then provided the workers to american employers.
but all the areas attracting immigrants were frontiers of one kind or another agricultural mining or industrial with expanding job opportunities.
most european immigrants to the united states entered through ellis island.
located in new york harbor this became in 1892 the nations main facility for processing immigrants.
millions of americans today trace their ancestry to an immigrant who passed through ellis island.
the less fortunate who failed a medical examination or were judged to be anarchists prostitutes or in other ways undesirable were sent home.
at the same time an influx of asian and mexican newcomers was taking place in the west.
after the exclusion of immigrants from china in the late nineteenth century a small number of japanese arrived primarily to work as agricultural laborers in californias fruit and vegetable fields and on hawaiis sugar plantations.
by 1910 the population of japanese origin had grown to 72 000 between 1910 and 1940 angel island in san francisco bay the ellis island of the west served as the main entry point for immigrants from asia.
far larger was mexican immigration.
between 1900 and 1930 some 1 million mexicans more than 10 percent of that countrys population why was the city such a central element in progressive america.
entered the united states a number exceeded by only a few european countries.
many mexicans entered through el paso texas the main southern gateway into the united states.
many ended up in the san gabriel valley of california where citrus growers searching for cheap labor had earlier experimented with native american south asian chinese and filipino migrant workers.
by 1910 one seventh of the american population was foreign born the highest percentage in the countrys history.
more than 40 percent of new york citys population had been born abroad.
in chicago and smaller industrial cities like providence milwaukee and san francisco the figure exceeded 30 percent.
although many newcomers moved west to take part in the expansion of farming most clustered in industrial centers.
by 1910 nearly three fifths of the workers in the twenty leading manufacturing and mining industries were foreign born.
the immigrant quest for freedom like their nineteenth century predecessors the new immigrants arrived imagining the united states as a land of freedom where all persons enjoyed equality before the law could worship as they pleased enjoyed economic opportunity and had been emancipated from the oppressive social hierarchies of their homelands.
america is a free country one polish immigrant wrote home.
you dont have to be a serf to anyone agents sent abroad by the american government to investigate the reasons for large scale immigration reported that the main impetus was a desire to share in the freedom and prosperity enjoyed by the people of the united states freedom they added was largely an economic ambition a desire to escape from hopeless poverty and achieve a standard of living impossible at home.
while some of the new immigrants especially jews fleeing religious persecution in the russian empire thought of themselves as permanent emigrants the majority initially planned to earn enough money to return home and purchase land.
groups like mexicans and italians included many birds of passage who remained only temporarily in the united states.
in 1908 a year of economic downturn in the united states more italians left the country than entered.
the new immigrants clustered in close knit ethnic neighborhoods with their own shops theaters and community organizations and often continued to speak their native tongues.
as early as 1900 more than 1 000 foreignlanguage newspapers were published in the united a community settlement map for chicago in 1900 illustrates the immigrant and racial neighborhoods in the nations second largest city.
table 18 2 immigrants and their children as percentage of population ten major cities 1920 city percentage new york city 76 cleveland boston chicago detroit san francisco minneapolis pittsburgh seattle los angeles ch.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 an immigrant from mexico arriving around 1912 in a cart drawn by a donkey.
an urban age and a consumer society states.
churches were pillars of these immigrant communities.
in new yorks east harlem even anti clerical italian immigrants who resented the close alliance in italy between the catholic church and the oppressive state participated eagerly in the annual festival of the madonna of mt.
after italian americans scattered to the suburbs they continued to return each year to reenact the festival.
although most immigrants earned more than was possible in the impoverished regions from which they came they endured low wages long hours and dangerous working conditions.
in the mines and factories of pennsylvania and the midwest eastern european immigrants performed low wage unskilled labor while native born workers dominated skilled and supervisory jobs.
the vast majority of mexican immigrants became poorly paid agricultural mine and railroad laborers with little prospect of upward economic mobility.
my people are not in america remarked one slavic priest they are under it consumer freedom cities however were also the birthplace of a mass consumption society that added new meaning to american freedom.
there was of course nothing unusual in the idea that the promise of american life lay in part in the enjoyment by the masses of citizens of goods available in other countries only to the well to do.
not until the progressive era however did the advent of large downtown department stores chain stores in urban neighborhoods and retail mail order houses for farmers and small town resi in hester street painted in 1905 george luks a member of the ashcan school of urban artists captures the colorful street life of an immigrant neighborhood in new york city.
visions of freedom movie 5 cents.
in this 1907 painting the artist john sloan depicts the interior of a movie house.
by this time millions of people each week were flocking to see silent motion pictures.
the audience includes different classes and races as well as couples and women attending alone.
questions 1 what does the nature of the audience suggest about movie theaters as places of a new social freedom.
2 does the painting help explain why some critics complained that movies promoted immorality.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 women at work in a shoe factory 1908 an urban age and a consumer society dents make available to consumers throughout the country the vast array of goods now pouring from the nations factories.
by 1910 americans could purchase among many other items electric sewing machines washing machines vacuum cleaners and record players.
low wages the unequal distribution of income and the souths persistent poverty limited the consumer economy which would not fully come into its own until after world war ii.
but it was in progressive america that the promise of mass consumption became the foundation for a new understanding of freedom as access to the cornucopia of goods made available by modern capitalism.
leisure activities also took on the characteristics of mass consumption.
amusement parks dance halls and theaters attracted large crowds of city dwellers.
the most popular form of mass entertainment at the turn of the century was vaudeville a live theatrical entertainment consisting of numerous short acts typically including song and dance comedy acrobats magicians and trained animals.
in the 1890s brief motion pictures were already being introduced into vaudeville shows.
as the movies became longer and involved more sophisticated plot narratives separate theaters developed.
by 1910 25 million americans per week mostly working class urban residents were attending nickelodeons motion picture theaters whose five cent admission charge was far lower than at vaudeville shows.
the working woman the new visibility of women in urban public places at work as shoppers and in places of entertainment like cinemas and dance halls indicated that traditional gender roles were changing dramatically in progressive america.
as the triangle fire revealed more and more women were working for wages.
black women still worked primarily as domestics or in southern cotton fields.
immigrant women were largely confined to lowpaying factory employment.
but for native born white women the kinds of jobs available expanded enormously.
by 1920 around 25 percent of employed women were office workers or telephone operators and only 15 percent worked in domestic service the largest female job category of the nineteenth century.
female work was no longer confined to young unmarried white women and adult black women.
in 1920 of 8 million women working for wages one quarter were married and living with their husbands.
table 18 3 percentage of women 14 years and older in the labor force year all women married women women as of labor force 20 4 5 6 18 25 2 10 7 23 3 9 0 24 3 11 7 why was the city such a central element in progressive america.
the working woman immigrant and native working class and professional became a symbol of female emancipation.
women faced special limitations on their economic freedom including wage discrimination and exclusion from many jobs.
yet almost in spite of themselves union leader abraham bisno remarked young immigrant working women developed a sense of independence they acquired the right to a personality something alien to the highly patriarchal family structures of the old country.
we enjoy our independence and freedom was the assertive statement of the bachelor girls social club a group of female mail order clerks in new york.
the growing number of younger women who desired a lifelong career wrote charlotte perkins gilman in her influential book women and economics 1898 offered evidence of a spirit of personal independence that pointed to a coming transformation of both economic and family life.
gilmans writings reinforced the claim that the road to womans freedom lay through the workplace.
in the home she argued women experienced not fulfillment but oppression and the housewife was an unproductive parasite little more than a servant to her husband and children.
by condemning women to a life of domestic drudgery prevailing gender norms made them incapable of contributing to society or enjoying freedom in any meaningful sense of the word.
the desire to participate in the consumer society produced remarkably similar battles within immigrant families of all nationalities between parents and their self consciously free children especially daughters.
contemporaries native and immigrant noted how the novelties and frivolities of fashion appealed to young working women who spent part of their meager wages on clothing and makeup and at places of entertainment.
daughters considered parents who tried to impose curfews or to prevent them from going out alone to dances or movies as old fashioned and not sufficiently american immigrant parents found it very difficult to adapt to what one mexican mother called this terrible freedom in this united states the mexican girls she told a sociologist studying immigrant life in los angeles seeing american girls with freedom they want it too the rise of table 18 4 percentage of women workers in various occupations occupation professional technical 8 2 11 7 clerical 4 0 18 7 sales workers 4 3 6 2 unskilled and semiskilled manufacturing 23 7 20 2 household workers 28 7 15 7 fordism if any individual exemplified the new consumer society it was henry ford.
the son of an immigrant irish farmer ford had worked as an apprentice in michigan machine shops and later as an engineer for the edison illuminating company.
ford did not invent the automobile but he developed the techniques of production and marketing that brought it within the reach of ordinary americans.
in 1905 he established the ford motor company one of dozens of small automobile manufacturing firms that emerged in these years.
three years later he introduced the model t a simple light vehicle sturdy enough to navigate the countrys poorly maintained roads.
while early european models like the mercedes aimed at an elite market and were superior in craftsmanship ford concentrated on standardizing output and lowering prices.
in 1913 fords factory in highland park michigan adopted the method of production known as the moving assembly line in which car frames were brought to workers on a continuously moving conveyor belt.
the process enabled ford to expand output by greatly reducing the time it took the return from toil a drawing by john sloan for the radical magazine the masses pictures working women not as downtrodden but as independent minded stylish and self confident.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 an urban age and a consumer society the assembly line at the ford motor company factory in highland park michigan around 1915 to produce each car.
in 1914 he raised wages at his factory to the unheard of level of five dollars per day more than double the pay of most industrial workers enabling him to attract a steady stream of skilled laborers.
labor conditions in the ford plant were not as appealing as the wages however assembly line work was monotonous the worker repeated the same basic motions for the entire day and ford used spies and armed detectives to prevent unionization.
when other businessmen criticized him for endangering profits by paying high wages ford replied that workers must be able to afford the goods being turned out by american factories.
fords output rose from 34 000 cars priced at 700 each in 1910 to 730 000 model ts that sold at a price of 316 well within the reach of many workers in 1916 the economic system based on mass production and mass consumption came to be called fordism.
table 18 5 sales of passenger cars year number of cars in thousands 4 1 24 2 181 0 895 9 1 905 5 3 735 1 the promise of abundance as economic production shifted from capital goods steel railroad equipment etc.
to consumer products the new advertising industry perfected ways of increasing sales often by linking goods with the idea of freedom.
numerous products took liberty as a brand name or used an image of the statue of liberty as a sales device.
the department store magnate edward filene called consumerism a school of freedom since shoppers made individual choices on basic questions of living.
economic abundance would eventually come to define the american way of life in which personal fulfillment was to be found through acquiring material goods.
the promise of abundance shifted the quest for freedom to the realm of private life but it also inspired political activism.
exclusion from the world of mass consumption would come to seem almost as great a denial of the why was the city such a central element in progressive america.
one days output of model t fords in a 1913 photograph.
the assembly line made mass production like this possible.
rights of citizenship as being barred from voting once had been.
the desire for consumer goods led many workers to join unions and fight for higher wages.
the argument that monopolistic corporations artificially raised prices at the expense of consumers became a weapon against the trusts.
consumers consciousness wrote walter lippmann who emerged in these years as one of the nations most influential social commentators was growing rapidly with the high cost of living as its rallying cry.
an american standard of living the maturation of the consumer economy gave rise to concepts a living wage and an american standard of living that offered a new language for criticizing the inequalities of wealth and power in progressive america.
father john a ryans influential book a living wage 1906 described a decent standard of living one that enabled a person to participate in the consumer economy as a natural and absolute right of citizenship.
ryan had grown up in minnesota in a family sympathetic to henry george the knights of labor and the populists.
his book sought to translate into american terms pope leo xiiis powerful statement of 1894 rerum novarum which criticized the divorce of economic life from ethical considerations endorsed the right of workers to organize unions and repudiated competitive individualism in favor of a more cooperative vision of the good society.
ryans insistence that economic relationships should be governed by moral standards had a powerful influence on social thought among american catholics.
the popularity of the idea of an american standard of living reflected in part the emergence of a mass consumption society during the progressive era.
for the first time in the nations history mass consumption came to occupy a central place in descriptions of american society and its future.
in the one of the numerous advertisements of the early twentieth century that invoked the statue of liberty to market consumer goods in this case a brand of crackers.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 varieties of progressivism gilded age social theorists like henry george had wondered why economic progress produced both increased wealth and abject misery.
the progressive generation was strongly influenced by the more optimistic writings of simon w patten a prophet of prosperity.
patten announced the end of the reign of want and the advent of a society of abundance and leisure.
in the dawning new civilization he proclaimed americans would enjoy economic equality in a world in which every one is independent and free va r i e t i e s o f p r o g r e s s i v i s m picturesque america a 1909 cartoon by harry grant dart offers a satirical comment on how advertising was threatening to overwhelm public life.
dart also includes a political comment he would rather advertise than be president on senator robert lafollette of wisconsin pictured at the top right delivering a speech.
for most americans however pattens new civilization lay far in the future.
the more immediate task in the progressives view was to humanize industrial capitalism and find common ground in a society still racked by labor conflict and experiencing massive immigration from abroad.
some progressives proposed to return to a competitive marketplace populated by small producers.
others accepted the permanence of the large corporation and looked to the government to reverse the growing concentration of wealth and to ensure social justice.
still others would relocate freedom from the economic and political worlds to a private realm of personal fulfillment and unimpeded self expression.
but nearly all progressives agreed that freedom must be infused with new meaning to deal with the economic and social conditions of the early twentieth century.
the old democracy wrote walter weyl associate editor of the new republic a weekly magazine that became the bible of progressive intellectuals provided no answer to the problems of a world in which the chief restrictions upon liberty were economic not political.
industrial freedom in progressive america complaints of a loss of freedom came not only from the most poorly paid factory workers but from better off employees as well.
large firms in the automobile electrical steel and other industries sought to implement greater control over the work process.
efficiency expert frederick w taylor pioneered what he called scientific management a program that sought to streamline production and boost profits by systematically controlling costs and work practices.
through scientific study the one best way of producing goods could be determined and implemented.
the role of workers was to obey the detailed instructions of supervisors.
not surprisingly many skilled workers saw the erosion of their traditional influence over the work process as a loss of freedom.
men and women complained samuel gompers whose american federation of labor afl represented such skilled workers cannot live during working hours under autocratic conditions and instantly become sons and daughters of freedom as they step outside the shop gates the great increase in the number of white collar workers the army of salespeople bookkeepers salaried professionals and corporate managers how did the labor and womens movements challenge the nineteenth century meanings of american freedom.
that sprang up with the new system of management also undermined the experience of personal autonomy.
for although they enjoyed far higher social status and incomes than manual workers many wrote one commentator were the kind of individuals who under former conditions would have been.
managing their own businesses not working for someone else.
these developments helped to place the ideas of industrial freedom and industrial democracy which had entered the political vocabulary in the gilded age at the center of political discussion during the progressive era.
lack of industrial freedom was widely believed to lie at the root of the much discussed labor problem since in an industrial age the prospect of managing ones own business seemed increasingly remote many progressives believed that the key to increasing industrial freedom lay in empowering workers to participate in economic decision making via strong unions.
louis d brandeis an active ally of the labor movement whom president woodrow wilson appointed to the supreme court in 1916 maintained that unions embodied an essential principle of freedom the right of people to govern themselves.
the contradiction between political liberty and industrial slavery brandeis insisted was americas foremost social problem.
workers deserved a voice not only in establishing wages and working conditions but also in making such managerial decisions as the relocation of factories layoffs and the distribution of profits.
the socialist presence economic freedom was also a rallying cry of american socialism which reached its greatest influence during the progressive era.
founded in 1901 the socialist party brought together surviving late nineteenth century radicals such as populists and followers of edward bellamy with a portion of the labor movement.
the party called for immediate reforms such as free college education legislation to improve the condition of laborers and as an ultimate goal democratic control over the economy through public ownership of railroads and factories.
it was the task of socialism said western labor leader john oneill to gather together the shards of liberty the fragments of the american heritage of freedom scattered by a government controlled by capitalist millionaires.
by 1912 the socialist party claimed 150 000 dues paying members published hundreds of newspapers enjoyed substantial support in the american federation of labor and had elected scores of local officials.
socialism flourished in diverse communities throughout the country.
on the lower east side of new york city it arose from the economic exploitation of immigrant workers and judaisms tradition of social reform.
here a vibrant socialist culture developed complete with yiddish language newspapers and theaters as well as large public meetings and street demonstrations.
in 1914 the district elected socialist meyer london to congress.
another center of socialist strength was milwaukee where victor berger a german born teacher and newspaper editor mobilized local afl unions into a potent political force that elected emil seidel mayor in 1910 seidels administration provided aid to the unemployed forced the police to recognize the rights of strikers and won the respect of middle class residents for its honesty and freedom from machine domination.
socialism also made roller skaters with socialist leaflets during a new york city strike in 1916 a scab is a worker who crosses the picket line during a strike.
voices of freedom from charlotte perkins gilman wo m e n a n d e c o n o m i c s 1 8 9 8 women and economics by the prolific feminist social critic and novelist charlotte perkins gilman influenced the new generation of women aspiring to greater independence.
it inevitable change to our daughters as well as to our sons.
one of its most noticeable features is the their entire lives and that therefore women demand in women not only for their own money but for their own work for the sake of personal expression.
few girls today fail to manifest some must free themselves from the home to achieve signs of this desire for individual expression.
insisted that how people earned a living shaped genuine freedom.
it is not motherhood that keeps the housewife on her feet from dawn till dark it is house service not child service.
women work longer and harder than most men.
a truer spirit is the increasing desire of young girls to be independent to have a career of their own at least for a while and the growing objection of countless wives to the pitiful asking for money to the beggary of their position.
more and more do fathers give their daughters and husbands their wives a definite allowance a separate bank account something.
all their own.
the spirit of personal independence in the women of today is sure proof that a change has come.
the radical change in the economic position of women is advancing upon us.
the growing individualization of democratic life brings economic independence for women necessarily involves a change in the home and family relation.
but if that change is for the advantage of individual and race we need not fear it.
it does not involve a change in the marriage relation except in withdrawing the element of economic dependence nor in the relation of mother to child save to improve it.
but it does involve the exercise of human faculty in women in social service and exchange rather than in domestic service solely.
today when our still developing social needs call for an ever increasing.
freedom the woman in marrying becomes the house servant or at least the housekeeper of the man.
when women stand free as economic agents they will achieve a much better fulfilment of their duties as wives and mothers and contribute to the vast improvement in health and happiness of the human race.
f r o m j o h n m i t c h e l l t h e wo r k i n g m a n s c o n c e p t i o n o f industrial liberty 1910 during the progressive era the idea of industrial liberty moved to the center of political discussion.
progressive reformers and labor leaders like john mitchell head of the united mine workers condemned the prevailing idea of liberty of contract in favor of a broader definition of economic freedom.
practice of paying wages in merchandise.
from time immemorial it had been the custom of coal companies to conduct general supply stores and the workingmen were required as a condition of employment to accept products in lieu of money in return for services rendered.
this system was a great hardship to the workmen.
the question of the constitutionality of this legislation was carried into the courts and by the highest tribunal it was declared to be an invasion of the workmans liberty while the declaration of independence established civil and political liberty it did not as you all know establish industrial liberty.
liberty means more than the right to choose the field of ones employment.
he is not a free man whose family must buy food today with the money that is earned tomorrow.
he is not really free who is forced to work unduly long hours and for wages so low that he can not provide the necessities of life for himself and his family who must live in a crowded tenement and see his children go to work in the mills the mines and the factories before their bodies are developed and their minds trained.
to have freedom a man must be free from the harrowing fear of hunger and want he must be in such a position that by the exercise of reasonable frugality he can provide his family with all of the necessities and the reasonable comforts of life.
he must be able to educate his children and to provide against sickness accident and old age.
a number of years ago the legislatures of several coal producing states enacted laws requiring employers to pay the wages of their workmen in lawful money of the united states and to cease the to deny him the right to accept merchandise in lieu of money as payment of his wages.
this is typical of hundreds of instances in which laws that have been enacted for the protection of the workingmen have been declared by the courts to be unconstitutional on the grounds that they invaded the liberty of the working people.
is it not natural that the workingmen should feel that they are being guaranteed the liberties they do not want and denied the liberty that is of real value to them.
may they not exclaim with madame roland of the french revolution o liberty.
how many crimes are committed in thy name questions 1 what does gilman see as the main obstacles to freedom for women.
2 what does mitchell believe will be necessary to establish industrial liberty.
3 how do the authors differ in their view of the relationship of the family to individual freedom.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 socialist towns and burlington edmonds tukwila hillyard coeur d alene beatrice camas wa missoula 2 commissioners butte coquille minden mt varieties of progressivism cities 1900 1920 rugby canada hilaire duluth crookston st tenstrike me minot commissioner commissioner laporte cloquet nd pillager brainerd barre harbor springs or sisseton eagle bend wi traverse city gustin vt nh id minneapolis dawson schenectady mn manitowoc s frankfort ma sd eureka buffalo ny wilson w salem sheboygan naugatuck wy milwaukee west allis haledon mi ia davis rockaway ct pa davenport torino stockton murray ne madrid phelps silvis nv mammoth eureka longmont berkeley nj in canton oh ut md daly city nederland lafayette red cloud wymore riverton lincoln clinton de edgewater grand junction thayer il hymera mografton jerseyville wv buena vista ks victor ca cedar city granite city o fallon va arma hillsboro mascoutah co brookneal curranville liberal buckner dorrisville ky girard buffalo az nm watts frontenac mindenmines gibson nc cardwell tn winslow lackawanna ok hartford greenville flint chant sc ny osnaburg antlers ga al ar amsterdam ashtabula mi birmingham conneaut ms union city roulette commissioner kalamazoo mineral ridge winnfield wheatland pa williamsport cleveland commissioner tx lorain salem new castle mckeesport hazeldell la fl shelby massillon controller fostoria mineral city pitcairn broad jenera st mary s toronto canal dover top twp.
gulfport mt.
vernon martins ferry garrett gas city lima linden lake worth byesville star city heights barnhill elwood sugar grove piqua hendricks coshocton adamston hamilton in oh ky wv miami although the socialist party never won more than 6 percent of the vote nationally it gained control of numerous small and medium sized cities between 1900 and 1920 des lacs va ri 500 miles 500 kilometers socialist mayor major municipal officer other than mayor inroads among tenant farmers in old populist areas like oklahoma and in the mining regions of idaho and montana.
the gospel of debs no one was more important in spreading the socialist gospel or linking it to ideals of equality self government and freedom than eugene v debs the railroad union leader who as noted in the previous chapter.
roosevelt regarded the president as the steward of the public welfare he moved aggressively to set the political agenda.
when the british writer h g wells visited the united states soon after the turn of the century he found that the steady trend towards concentration had become the cardinal topic of thought and discussion in the american mind roosevelts program which he called the square deal attempted to confront the problems caused by economic consolidation by distinguishing between good and bad corporations.
the former among which he included u s steel and standard oil served the public interest.
the latter were run by greedy financiers interested only in profit and had no right to exist.
soon after assuming office roosevelt shocked the corporate world by announcing his intention to prosecute under the sherman antitrust act the northern securities company.
created by financier j p morgan this holding company owned the stock and directed the affairs of three major western railroads.
it monopolized transportation between the great lakes and the pacific.
morgan was outraged.
wall street is paralyzed quipped one newspaper at the thought that a president of the united states should sink to enforce the law in 1904 the supreme court ordered northern securities dissolved a major victory for the antitrust movement.
r o o s e v e lt and economic president theodore roosevelt addressing a crowd in evanston illinois in 1902 regulation roosevelt also believed that the president should be an honest broker in labor disputes rather than automatically siding with employers as his predecessors had usually done.
when a strike paralyzed the west virginia and pennsylvania coalfields in 1902 he summoned union and management leaders to the white house.
by threatening a federal takeover of the mines he persuaded the owners to allow the dispute to be settled by a commission he himself would appoint.
reelected in 1904 roosevelt pushed for more direct federal regulation of the economy.
appealing to the public for support he condemned the misuse of the vast power conferred by vast wealth he proposed to strengthen the interstate commerce commission which the supreme court had essentially limited to collecting economic statistics.
by this time journalistic exposs labor unrest and the agitation of progressive reformers had created significant public support for roosevelts regulatory program.
in 1906 putting the screws on him a 1904 cartoon depicts president theodore roosevelt squeezing ill gotten gains out of the trusts.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 the progressive presidents congress passed the hepburn act giving the icc the power to examine railroads business records and to set reasonable rates a significant step in the development of federal intervention in the corporate economy.
that year as has been noted also saw the pure food and drug act which established a federal agency to police the quality and labeling of food and drugs and the meat inspection act.
many businessmen supported these measures recognizing that they would benefit from greater public confidence in the quality and safety of their products.
but they were alarmed by roosevelts calls for federal inheritance and income taxes and the regulation of all interstate businesses.
the conservation movement a dedicated outdoorsman who built a ranch in north dakota in the 1880s roosevelt also moved to preserve parts of the natural environment from economic exploitation.
if the united states lagged behind europe in many areas of social policy it led the way in the conservation of national resources.
the first national park yellowstone in wyoming had been created in 1872 partly to preserve an area of remarkable natural beauty and partly at the urging of the northern pacific railroad which was anxious to promote western tourism.
in the 1890s the scottish born naturalist john muir organized the sierra club to help preserve forests which he called gods first temples from uncontrolled logging by timber companies and other intrusions of civilization.
congress in that decade authorized the president to withdraw forest reserves from economic development.
it was under roosevelt that conservation became a concerted federal policy.
relying for advice on gifford pinchot the head of the u s forest service he ordered that millions of acres be set aside as wildlife preserves and encouraged congress to create new national parks.
the creation of parks like yellowstone yosemite and glacier required the removal of indians who hunted and fished there as well as the reintroduction of animals that had previously disappeared.
city dwellers who visited the national parks did not realize that these were to a considerable extent artificially created and managed environments not primordial nature.
in some ways conservation was a typical progressive reform.
manned by experts the government could stand above political and economic battles serving the public good while preventing special interests from causing irreparable damage to the environment.
the aim was less to end the economic utilization of natural resources than to develop responsible scientific plans for their use.
pinchot halted timber companies reckless assault on the nations forests.
but unlike muir he believed that development and conservation could go hand in hand and that logging mining and grazing on public lands should be controlled not eliminated.
conservation also reflected the progressive thrust toward efficiency and control in this case control of nature itself.
in the view of progressive conservationists the wests scarcest resource water cried out for regulation.
governments at all levels moved to control the power of western rivers building dams and irrigation projects to regularize their flow prevent waste and provide water for large scale agriculture and urban development.
with such projects came political conflict as cities like los angeles and san francisco battled with rural areas for access to how did the progressive presidents foster the rise of the nation state.
after secretly buying up large tracts of land in the owens valley east of the city for example the city of los angeles constructed a major aqueduct between 1908 and 1913 over the vigorous objections of the valleys residents.
by the 1920s so much water had been diverted to the city that the once thriving farming and ranching businesses of owens valley could no longer operate.
taft in office having served nearly eight years as president roosevelt did not run again in 1908 his chosen successor was william howard taft a federal judge from ohio who had served as governor of the philippines after the spanishamerican war.
taft defeated william jennings bryan making his third unsuccessful race for the white house.
tafts inaugural address expressed the progressive view of the state the scope of a modern government.
has been widened far beyond the principles laid down by the old laissezfaire school of political writers although temperamentally more conservative than roosevelt taft pursued antitrust policy even more aggressively.
he persuaded the supreme court in 1911 to declare john d rockefellers standard oil company one of roosevelts good trusts in violation of the sherman antitrust act and to order its breakup into separate marketing producing and refining companies.
the government also won a case against american tobacco which the court ordered to end pricing policies that were driving smaller firms out of business.
in these decisions the justices announced a new standard for judging large corporations the rule of reason which in effect implemented roosevelts old distinction between good and bad trusts.
big businesses were not in and of themselves antitrust violators unless they engaged in policies that stifled competition.
taft supported the sixteenth amendment to the constitution which authorized congress to enact a graduated income tax one whose rate of taxation is higher for wealthier citizens.
it was ratified shortly before he left office.
a 2 percent tax on incomes over 4 000 had been included in a tariff enacted in 1894 but had been quickly declared unconstitutional by the supreme court as a communistic threat to property the movement to resurrect the income tax united southern and western farmers who wished to reduce government dependence on revenue from the tariff which they believed discriminated against nonindustrial states and progressives who believed that taxation should be based on the ability to pay.
a key step in the modernization of the federal government the income tax provided a reliable and flexible source of revenue for a national state whose powers responsibilities and expenditures were growing rapidly.
despite these accomplishments taft seemed to gravitate toward the more conservative wing of the republican party.
only a few months after taking office he signed the payne aldrich tariff which reduced rates on imported goods but not nearly as much as reformers wished.
tafts rift with progressives grew deeper when richard a ballinger the new secretary of the interior concluded that roosevelt had exceeded his authority in placing land in forest reserves.
ballinger decided to return some of this land to the public domain where mining and lumber companies would have access to it.
gifford pinchot accused ballinger of colluding with business interests and theodore roosevelt and the conservationist john muir at glacier point yosemite valley california in 1906 yosemite was set aside as a national park in 1890 ch.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 the progressive presidents repudiating the environmental goals of the roosevelt administration.
when taft fired pinchot in 1910 the breach with party progressives became irreparable.
in 1912 roosevelt challenged taft for the republican nomination.
defeated roosevelt launched an independent campaign as the head of the new progressive party.
the eugene v debs the socialist party candidate speaking in chicago during the 1912 presidential campaign.
election of all the crosscurrents of progressive era thinking about what mcclures magazine called the problem of the relation of the state and the corporation came together in the presidential campaign of 1912 the four way contest between taft roosevelt democrat woodrow wilson and socialist eugene v debs became a national debate on the relationship between political and economic freedom in the age of big business.
at one end of the political spectrum stood taft who stressed that economic individualism could remain the foundation of the social order so long as government and private entrepreneurs cooperated in addressing social ills.
at the other end was debs.
relatively few americans supported the socialist partys goal of abolishing the capitalistic system altogether but its immediate demands including public ownership of the railroads and banking system government aid to the unemployed and laws establishing shorter working hours and a minimum wage summarized forward looking progressive thought.
but it was the battle between wilson and roosevelt over the role of the federal government in securing economic freedom that galvanized public attention in 1912 the two represented competing strands of progressivism.
both believed government action necessary to preserve individual freedom but they differed over the dangers of increasing the governments power and the inevitability of economic concentration.
though representing a party thoroughly steeped in states rights and laissez faire ideology wilson was deeply imbued with progressive ideas.
freedom today he declared is something more than being let alone.
the program of a government of freedom must in these days be positive not negative merely as governor of new jersey wilson had presided over the implementation of a system of workmens compensation and state regulation of utilities and railroads.
new freedom and new nationalism strongly influenced by louis d brandeis with whom he consulted frequently during the campaign wilson insisted that democracy must be reinvigorated by restoring market competition and freeing government from domination by big business.
wilson feared big government as much as he feared the power of the corporations.
the new freedom as he called his program envisioned the federal government strengthening antitrust laws protecting the right of workers to unionize and actively encouraging small businesses creating in other words the conditions for the renewal of economic competition without increasing government regulation of the economy.
wilson warned that corporations were as likely to corrupt government as to be managed by it a forecast that proved remarkably accurate.
how did the progressive presidents foster the rise of the nation state.
to roosevelts supporters wilson seemed a relic of a bygone era his program they argued served the needs of small businessmen but ignored the inevitability of economic concentration and the interests of professionals consumers and labor.
wilson and brandeis spoke of the curse of bigness what the nation actually needed walter lippmann countered was frank acceptance of the benefits of bigness coupled with the intervention of government to counteract its abuses.
lippmann was expressing the core of the new nationalism roosevelts program of 1912 only the controlling and directing power of the government roosevelt insisted could restore the liberty of the oppressed he called for heavy taxes on personal and corporate fortunes and federal regulation of industries including railroads mining and oil.
the progressive party platform offered numerous proposals to promote social justice.
drafted by a group of settlement house activists labor reformers and social scientists the platform laid out a blueprint for a modern democratic welfare state complete with woman suffrage federal supervision of corporate enterprise national labor and health legislation for women and children an eight hour day and living wage for all workers and a national system of social insurance covering unemployment medical care and old age.
described by roosevelt as the most important document since the end of the civil war the platform brought together many of the streams of thought and political experiences that flowed into progressivism.
roosevelts campaign helped to give freedom a modern social and economic content and established an agenda that would define political liberalism for much of the twentieth century.
wilsons first term the republican split ensured a sweeping victory for wilson who won about 42 percent of the popular vote although roosevelt humiliated taft by winning about 27 percent to the presidents 23 percent.
in office wilson proved himself a strong executive leader.
the presidential he established an office at the capitol so that he could conelection of 1912 fer regularly with members of congress about pending legislation and he was the first president to hold regular press conferences in order to influence public opinion directly 44 6 and continuously.
he delivered messages personally to congress rather than sending them in written form like all his predecessors since john adams.
29 15 3 14 with democrats in control of congress wilson moved 8 12 aggressively to implement his version of progressivism.
the first significant measure of his presidency was the 10 12 14 underwood tariff which substantially reduced duties on imports and to make up for lost revenue imposed a gradu6 ated income tax on the richest 5 percent of americans.
there followed the clayton act of 1914 which exempted electoral vote popular vote labor unions from antitrust laws and barred courts from party candidate share share issuing injunctions curtailing the right to strike.
in 1916 democrat wilson 435 82 6 293 454 41 9 progressive roosevelt 88 17 4 119 207 27 4 came the keating owen act outlawing child labor in the republican taft 8 1 3 483 922 23 2 manufacture of goods sold in interstate commerce the socialist debs 900 369 6 0 adamson act establishing an eight hour workday on the ch.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 suggested reading nations railroads and the warehouse act reminiscent of the populist subtreasury plan which extended credit to farmers when they stored their crops in federally licensed warehouses.
the expanding role of government some of wilsons policies seemed more in tune with roosevelts new nationalism than the new freedom of 1912 he abandoned the idea of aggressive trust busting in favor of greater government supervision of the economy.
wilson presided over the creation of two powerful new public agencies.
in 1913 congress created the federal reserve system consisting of twelve regional banks.
they were overseen by a central board appointed by the president and empowered to handle the issuance of currency aid banks in danger of failing and influence interest rates so as to promote economic growth.
the law was a delayed response to the panic of 1907 when the failure of several financial companies threatened a general collapse of the banking system.
with the federal government lacking a modern central bank it had been left to j p morgan to assemble the funds to prop up threatened financial institutions.
morgans actions highlighted the fact that in the absence of federal regulation of banking power over finance rested entirely in private hands.
a second expansion of national power occurred in 1914 when congress established the federal trade commission ftc to investigate and prohibit unfair business activities such as price fixing and monopolistic practices.
both the federal reserve and ftc were welcomed by many business leaders as a means of restoring order to the economic marketplace and warding off more radical measures for curbing corporate power.
but they reflected the remarkable expansion of the federal role in the economy during the progressive era.
by 1916 the social ferment and political mobilizations of the progressive era had given birth to a new american state.
with new laws administrative agencies and independent commissions government at the local state and national levels had assumed the authority to protect and advance industrial freedom government had established rules for labor relations business behavior and financial policy protected citizens from market abuses and acted as a broker among the groups whose conflicts threatened to destroy social harmony.
but a storm was already engulfing europe that would test the progressive faith in empowered government as the protector of american freedom.
suggested reading books bodnar john.
the transplanted a history of immigrants in urban america 1985.
a comprehensive account of american immigration.
cameron ardis.
radicals of the worst sort laboring women in lawrence massachusetts 1860 1912 1993.
describes the lives of working women in lawrence and their role in the strike of 1912 suggested reading cott nancy f the grounding of modern feminism 1987.
a careful study of feminist ideas in the progressive era.
dawley alan.
struggles for justice social responsibility and the liberal state 1991.
examines the varieties of progressive reform and various efforts to use the power of government for social betterment.
diner steven.
a very different age americans of the progressive era 1998.
a survey of the main trends of the progressive period.
glickman lawrence b a living wage workers and the making of american consumer society 1997.
traces the origins and development of the idea that workers are entitled to a living wage hofstadter richard.
the age of reform from bryan to f d r 1955.
a classic account of the ideas of reformers from populism to the new deal.
johnston robert d the radical middle class populist democracy and the question of capitalism in progressive era portland 2003.
analyzes how progressivism operated in one important city.
maddox lucy.
citizen indians native american intellectuals race and reform 2005.
a study of the society of american indians and other manifestations of indian progressivism.
montgomery david.
the fall of the house of labor the workplace the state and american labor activism 1865 1925 1987.
an account of the labor battles of the era and the gradual decline of labors power especially at the workplace.
orsi robert a the madonna of 115th street faith and community in italian harlem 1880 1950 1985.
an influential study of a single immigrant community and the role of religion in binding it together.
peiss kathy.
cheap amusements working women and leisure in turn of the century new york 1986.
explores the rise of mass entertainment and how it affected womens lives in progressive america.
recchiuti john l civic engagement social science and progressive era reform in new york city 2006.
examines the influence of a group of reform minded scholars on the politics of the progressive era.
rodgers daniel t atlantic crossings social politics in a progressive age 1998.
a comprehensive study of the flow of progressive ideas and policies back and forth across the atlantic.
stansell christine.
american moderns bohemian new york and the creation of a new century 2000.
a colorful account of the greenwich village radicals who expanded the idea of personal freedom in the progressive era.
stromquist shelton.
re inventing the people the progressive movement the class problem and the origins of modern liberalism 2006.
discusses how the desire to re create social harmony in an age of labor conflict shaped progressivism.
websites evolution of the conservation movement 1860 1920 ammem amrvhtml conshome html immigration to the united states 1789 1930 immigra tion triangle shirtwaist factory fire urban experience in chicago hull house and its neighborhoods jaddams hull urbanexp index htm votes for women c hapter r eview review questions 1 identify the main groups and ideas that drove the progressive movement.
2 explain how immigration to the united states in this period was part of a global movement of peoples.
3 describe how fordism transformed american industrial and consumer society.
4 socialism was a rising force across the globe in the early twentieth century.
how successful was the movement in the united states.
5 explain why the industrial workers of the world iww grew so rapidly and aroused so much opposition.
6 what did striking workers mean when they declared that they wanted bread and roses too.
7 what did progressive era feminists want to change in society and how did their actions help to spearhead broader reforms.
8 explain how and why progressivism was an international movement.
9 how did each progressive era president view the role of the federal government.
10 how democratic was the progressive movement.
freedom questions 1 immigrants came to the united states in search of freedom and economic opportunity.
describe to what extent they achieved and were denied these goals.
2 explain the concept of consumer freedom and its connections to the growing womens movement and the new urban society.
3 how did workers and employers differ in their idea of industrial freedom.
4 how did the struggles of the industrial workers of the world and suffrage advocates promote a broader defense of freedom of expression.
5 assess the record of the progressive movement in promoting the expansion of freedom and democracy.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e muckrakers p 728 key federal legislation child labor p 728 act date purpose hepburn act to give the interstate commerce commission the power to oversee railroad practices and rates pure food and drug act fordism p 736 to police the quality and labeling of food and drugs american standard of living p 737 federal reserve system to regulate interest rates and promote national economic growth rerum novarum p 737 federal trade commission to investigate and prohibit unfair business activities clayton act to exempt labor unions from antitrust laws and allow unions the right to strike keating owen act to outlaw child labor in manufacturing goods sold in interstate commerce adamson act to establish an eight hour work day on the nations railroads ellis island and angel island p 730 mexican immigration p 730 scientific management p 738 industrial workers of the world p 743 new feminism p 746 birth control movement p 747 society of american indians p 748 effective freedom p 749 maternalist reform p 754 muller v oregon p 755 workmens compensation laws p 756 coal miners strike of 1902 p 757 pure food and drug act p 758 roosevelt and conservation p 758 federal reserve system p 762 federal trade commission p 762 c hapter 19 united states secures the panama canal zone w e b du boiss the souls of black folk roosevelt corollary to the monroe doctrine the niagara movement established russo japanese war ends gentlemans agreement with japan israel zangwills the melting pot national association for the advancement of colored people organized mexican revolution begins bailey v alabama titanic sinks assassination of archduke ferdinand 1914 world war i 1915 lusitania sinks d w griffiths birth of a nation premieres battle at verdun madison grants the passing of the great race randolph bournes trans national america zimmerman note intercepted united states enters the war espionage act russian revolution woodrow wilsons fourteen points speech eugene v debs convicted under the espionage act eighteenth amendment ratified treaty of versailles signed 1919 red scare 1920 nineteenth amendment ratified senate rejects the treaty of versailles buck v bell safe for democracy the united states and world war i 1916 1920 an era of intervention who is an american.
i took the canal zone the roosevelt corollary moral imperialism wilson and mexico the race problem americanization and pluralism the anti german crusade toward immigration restriction groups apart mexicans puerto ricans and asian americans the color line roosevelt wilson and race w e b du bois and the revival of black protest closing ranks the great migration and the promised land racial violence north and south the rise of garveyism america and the great war neutrality and preparedness the road to war the fourteen points the war at home the progressives war the wartime state the propaganda war the great cause of freedom the coming of woman suffrage prohibition liberty in wartime the espionage act coercive patriotism a worldwide upsurge upheaval in america the great steel strike the red scare wilson at versailles the wilsonian moment the seeds of wars to come the treaty debate a rather aggressive looking statue of liberty directs americans to purchase liberty bonds that is loan money to the federal government during world war i symbols of liberty were widely used by the government in its efforts to mobilize popular support for the war.
the bottom of the full image included the words lest i perish f ocus q uestions in what ways did the progressive presidents promote the expansion of american power overseas.
how did the united states get involved in world war i.
how did the united states mobilize resources and public opinion for the war effort.
how did the war affect race relations in the united states.
why was 1919 such a watershed year for the united states and the world.
l i n 1902 w t stead published a short volume with the arresting title the americanization of the world or the trend of the twentieth century.
stead was an english editor whose sensational writings included an expos of london prostitution maiden tribute of modern babylon.
he would meet his death in 1912 as a passenger on the titanic the ocean liner that foundered after striking an iceberg in the north atlantic.
impressed by americans exuberant energies stead predicted that the united states would soon emerge as the greatest of worldpowers but what was most striking about his work was that stead located the source of american power less in the realm of military might or territorial acquisition than in the countrys single minded commitment to the pursuit of wealth and the relentless international spread of american culture art music journalism even ideas about religion and gender relations.
he foresaw a future in which the united states promoted its interests and values through an unending involvement in the affairs of other nations.
stead proved to be an accurate prophet.
the spanish american war had established the united states as an international empire.
despite the conquest of the philippines and puerto rico however the countrys overseas holdings remained tiny compared to those of britain france and germany.
and no more were added except for a strip of land surrounding the panama canal acquired in 1903 and the virgin islands purchased from denmark in 1917 in 1900 great britain ruled over more than 300 million people in possessions scattered across the globe and france had nearly 50 million subjects in asia and africa.
compared with these the american presence in the world seemed very small.
as stead suggested americas empire differed significantly from those of european countries it was economic cultural and intellectual rather than territorial.
the world economy at the dawn of the twentieth century was already highly globalized.
an ever increasing stream of goods investments and people flowed from country to country.
although britain still dominated world banking and the british pound remained the major currency of international trade the united states had become the leading industrial power.
by 1914 it produced more than one third of the worlds manufactured goods.
already europeans complained of an american invasion of steel oil agricultural equipment and consumer goods.
spearheads of american culture like movies and popular music were not far behind.
europeans were fascinated by american ingenuity and mass production techniques.
many feared american products and culture would overwhelm their own.
what are the chief new features of london life one british writer asked in 1901.
they are the telephone the portable camera the phonograph the electric street car the automobile in what ways did the progressive presidents promote the expansion of american power overseas.
the typewriter.
in every one of these the american maker is supreme meanwhile hundreds of thousands of americans traveled abroad each year in the early twentieth century.
and american racial and ethnic groups became heavily engaged in overseas politics.
through fraternal religious and political organizations based in their ethnic and racial communities irish americans supported irish independence american jews protested the treatment of their co religionists in russia and black americans hoped to uplift africa.
american influence was growing throughout the world.
americas growing connections with the outside world led to increasing military and political involvement.
in the two decades after 1900 many of the basic principles that would guide american foreign policy for the rest of the century were formulated.
the open door the free flow of trade investment information and culture emerged as a key principle of american foreign relations.
since the manufacturer insists on having the world as a market wrote woodrow wilson the flag of his nation must follow him and the doors of nations which are closed against him must be battered down americans in the twentieth century often discussed foreign policy in the language of freedom.
at least in rhetoric the united states ventured abroad including intervening militarily in the affairs of other nations not to pursue strategic goals or to make the world safe for american economic interests but to promote liberty and democracy.
a supreme faith in americas historic destiny and in the righteousness of its ideals enabled the countrys leaders to think of the united states simultaneously as an emerging great power and as the worldwide embodiment of freedom.
more than any other individual woodrow wilson articulated this vision of americas relationship to the rest of the world.
his foreign policy called by historians liberal internationalism rested on the conviction that economic and political progress went hand in hand.
thus greater worldwide freedom would follow inevitably from increased american investment and trade abroad.
frequently during the twentieth century this conviction would serve as a mask for american power and self interest.
it would also inspire sincere efforts to bring freedom to other peoples.
in either case liberal internationalism represented a shift from the nineteenth century tradition of promoting freedom primarily by example to active intervention to remake the world in the american image.
american involvement in world war i provided the first great test of wilsons belief that american power could make the world safe for democracy most progressives embraced the countrys participation in the war believing that the united states could help to spread progressive values throughout the world.
but rather than bringing progressivism to a russian advertisement for the singer sewing machine company one of the many american companies that marketed their goods worldwide in the early twentieth century.
singer established factories in russia and also imported machines from the united states.
the figure that appears to be the number 3 is actually the letter z in the cyrillic alphabet representing the companys name in russian zinger.
european and american ads for sewing machines depicted women in modern dress here however the operator wears the traditional attire of a peasant part of the companys strategy of trying to sell sewing machines to russias vast rural population.
19 safe for democracy an era of intervention the greatest department store on earth a cartoon from puck november 29 1899 depicts uncle sam selling goods mostly manufactured products to the nations of the world.
the search for markets overseas would be a recurring theme of twentieth century american foreign policy.
other peoples the war destroyed it at home.
the government quickly came to view critics of american involvement not simply as citizens with a different set of opinions but as enemies of the very ideas of democracy and freedom.
as a result the war produced one of the most sweeping repressions of the right to dissent in all of american history.
an era of intervention just as they expanded the powers of the federal government in domestic affairs the progressive presidents were not reluctant to project american power outside the countrys borders.
at first their interventions were confined to the western hemisphere whose affairs the united states had claimed a special right to oversee ever since the monroe doctrine of 1823 between 1901 and 1920 u s marines landed in caribbean countries more than twenty times.
usually they were dispatched to create a welcoming in what ways did the progressive presidents promote the expansion of american power overseas.
economic environment for american companies that wanted stable access to raw materials like bananas and sugar and for bankers nervous that their loans to local governments might not be repaid.
i took the canal zone like his distinction between good and bad trusts theodore roosevelt divided the world into civilized and uncivilized nations.
the former he believed had an obligation to establish order in an unruly world.
roosevelt became far more active in international diplomacy than most of his predecessors helping for example to negotiate a settlement of the russojapanese war of 1905 a feat for which he was awarded the nobel peace prize.
closer to home his policies were more aggressive.
i have always been fond of the west african proverb he wrote speak softly and carry a big stick and although he declared that the united states has not the slightest desire for territorial aggrandizement at the expense of its southern neighbors roosevelt pursued a policy of intervention in central america.
the united states in the between 1898 and 1934 the united states intervened militarily numerous times in caribbean countries generally to protect the economic interests of american banks and investors.
caribbean 1898 1934 united states columbus atl anti c o cean u s expeditionary force 1916 1917 santa ysabel houston new orleans parral u s troops 1898 1902 1906 1909 1912 1917 1922 platt amendment 1903 1934 mexico bahamas b r havana tampico mexico city veracruz miami u s seizure u s naval base british honduras guatemala honduras el salvador nicaragua costa rica pa cif ic oce a n cuba u s troops 1915 1934 financial supervision 1916 1941 u s takes control of customs house 1905 dominican u s troops 1916 1924 republic financial supervision 1905 1941 u s possession after 1898 guantanamo haiti pu ert o u s troops 1907 j a m a i ca r i co b r 1924 1925 u s troops 1909 1910 1912 1925 1926 1933 financial supervision 1911 1924 u s leases corn island panama v i rg i n i s la n d s p u rc h a s ed f ro m den m a rk 1 9 1 7 gu a d el o u p e fr.
m a rt i n i q u e fr.
b a rba d o s b r tri n i d a d b r caracas venezuela u s acquired canal zone 1904 canal completed 1914 bogot colombia venezuela debt crisis 1903 1904 french british guiana guiana dutch guiana ecuador 500 miles 250 500 kilometers peru brazil ch.
19 safe for democracy an era of intervention in his first major action in the region roosevelt engineered the separation of panama from colombia in order to facilitate the construction of a canal linking the atlantic and caribbean limon pacific oceans.
the idea of a canal across the fifty one milesea bay colon wide isthmus of panama had a long history.
in 1879 1881 madden the french engineer ferdinand de lesseps attempted to conlake locks gatun struct such a waterway but failed because of inadequate dam na funding and the toll exacted on his workers by yellow fever madden dam vi cha gatio and malaria.
roosevelt had long been a proponent of nne n l american naval development.
he was convinced that a canal darien panama gamboa would facilitate the movement of naval and commercial veslas cascadas g sels between the two oceans.
in 1903 when colombia of paraiso which panama was a part refused to cede land for the project pedro miguel locks lake miraflores roosevelt helped to set in motion an uprising by conspirators panama city lock miraflores locks led by philippe bunau varilla a representative of the panama balboa dam canal company.
an american gunboat prevented the canal railroad colombian army from suppressing the rebellion.
gulf of panama panama canal zone upon establishing panamas independence bunau varilla signed a treaty giving the united states both the right to construct and operate a canal and sovereignty over the canal zone a ten mileconstructed in the first years of the wide strip of land through which the route would run.
a remarkable feat of twentieth century after theodore engineering the canal was the largest construction project in history to roosevelt helped engineer panamas that date.
like the building of the transcontinental railroad in the 1860s independence from colombia the panama and much construction work today it involved the widespread use of canal drastically reduced the time it took immigrant labor.
most of the 60 000 workers came from the caribbean for commercial and naval vessels to sail islands of barbados and jamaica but others hailed from europe asia and from the atlantic to the pacific oceans.
the united states.
in keeping with american segregation policies the best jobs were reserved for white americans who lived in their own communities complete with schools churches and libraries.
it also required a massive effort to eradicate the mosquitoes that carried the tropical diseases responsible in part for the failure of earlier french efforts.
when completed in 1914 the canal reduced the sea voyage between the east and west coasts of the united states by 8 000 miles.
i took the canal zone roosevelt exulted.
but the manner in which the canal had been initiated and the continued american rule over the canal zone would long remain a source of tension.
in 1977 president jimmy carter negotiated treaties that led to turning over the canals operation and control of the canal zone to panama in the year 2000 see chapter 18 john d rockefeller himself had hired a public relations firm to repair his tarnished image.
now persuaded by the success of world war is committee on public information that it was possible as an advertising magazine put it to sway the minds of whole populations numerous firms established public relations departments.
they aimed to justify corporate practices to the public and counteract its long standing distrust of big business.
they succeeded in changing popular attitudes toward wall street.
congressional hearings of 1912 1914 headed by louisiana congressman arsne pujo had laid bare the manipulation of stock prices by a wall street money trust the pujo investigation had reinforced the widespread view river rouge plant by the artist charles sheeler exemplifies the machine age aesthetic of the 1920s.
sheeler found artistic beauty in henry fords giant automobile assembly factory.
who benefited and who suffered in the new consumer society of the 1920s.
of the stock market as a place where insiders fleeced small investors as indeed they frequently did.
but in the 1920s as the steadily rising price of stocks made front page news the market attracted more investors.
many assumed that stock values would rise forever.
by 1928 an estimated 1 5 million americans owned stock still a small minority of the countrys 28 million families but far more than in the past.
figure 20 2 the stock market 1919 1939 decline of labor with the defeat of the labor upsurge of 1919 and the dismantling of the wartime regulatory state business appropriated the rhetoric of americanism and industrial freedom as weapons against labor unions.
some corporations during the 1920s implemented a new style of management.
they provided their employees with private pensions and medical insurance plans job security and greater workplace safety.
they established sports programs to occupy their employees leisure time.
they spoke of welfare capitalism a more socially conscious kind of business leadership and trumpeted the fact that they now paid more attention to the human factor in employment.
at the same time however employers in the 1920s embraced the american plan at whose core stood the open shop a workplace free of both government regulation and unions except in some cases company unions created and controlled by management.
collective bargaining declared one group of employers represented an infringement of personal liberty and a menace to the institutions of a free people prosperity they insisted depended on giving business complete freedom of action.
this message was reinforced in a propaganda campaign that linked unionism and socialism as examples of the sinister influence of foreigners on american life.
even the most forward looking companies continued to employ strikebreakers private detectives and the blacklisting of union organizers to prevent or defeat strikes.
during the 1920s organized labor lost more than 2 million members and unions agreed to demand after demand by employers in an effort to stave off complete elimination.
in cities like minneapolis new orleans and seattle once centers of thriving labor movements unions all but disappeared.
uprisings by the most downtrodden workers did occur sporadically throughout the decade.
southern textile mills witnessed desperate strikes by workers who charged employers with making slaves out of the men and women who labored there.
facing the combined opposition of business local politicians and the courts as well as the threat of violence such strikes were doomed to defeat.
the equal rights amendment the idealistic goals of world war i wrote the young protestant minister reinhold niebuhr seemingly had been abandoned we are rapidly becoming the most conservative nation on earth like the labor movement feminists struggled to adapt to the new political situation.
the achievement of suffrage in 1920 eliminated the bond of unity between various activists each struggling for her own conception of freedom in the words of labor reformer juliet stuart poyntz.
black feminists insisted that the movement must now demand enforcement of the fifteenth amendment in the south price index the index of common stock prices 1919 1939 volume of sales on the new york stock exchange in millions of shares 1919 1923 1927 1931 year this graph illustrates the rapid rise and dramatic collapse of stock prices and the number of shares traded during the 1920s and early 1930s.
20 from business culture to great depression tipsy a 1930 painting by the japanese artist kobayakawa kiyoshi illustrates the global appeal of the new woman of the 1920s.
the subject a moga modern girl in japanese sits alone in a nightclub wearing western clothing makeup and hairstyle accompanied by a cigarette and a martini.
the title of the work suggests that kiyoshi does not entirely approve of her behavior but he presents her as selfconfident and alluring.
japanese police took a dim view of modern women arresting those who applied makeup in public.
many american authorities were no more welcoming to new women the superintendent of public buildings and grounds in washington d c decreed that womens bathing suits must fall no higher than six inches above the knee.
here in 1922 he enforces his edict.
the business of america but they won little support from white counterparts.
a few prominent feminists including elizabeth cady stantons daughter harriot stanton blatch joined the rapidly diminishing socialist party convinced that women should support an independent electoral force that promoted governmental protection of vulnerable workers.
the long standing division between two competing conceptions of womans freedom one based on motherhood the other on individual autonomy and the right to work now crystallized in the debate over an equal rights amendment era to the constitution promoted by alice paul and the national womens party.
this amendment proposed to eliminate all legal distinctions on account of sex in pauls opinion the era followed logically from winning the right to vote.
having gained political equality she insisted women no longer required special legal protection they needed equal access to employment education and all the other opportunities of citizens.
to supporters of mothers pensions and laws limiting womens hours of labor which the era would sweep away the proposal represented a giant step backward.
apart from the national womens party every major female organization from the league of women voters to the womens trade union league opposed the era.
in the end none of these groups achieved success in the 1920s.
the era campaign failed and only six states ratified a proposed constitutional amendment giving congress the power to prohibit child labor which farm groups and business organizations opposed.
in 1929 congress repealed the sheppard towner act of 1921 a major achievement of the maternalist reformers that had provided federal assistance to programs for infant and child health.
womens freedom if political feminism faded the prewar feminist demand for personal freedom survived in the vast consumer marketplace and in the actual behav who benefited and who suffered in the new consumer society of the 1920s.
ior of the decades much publicized liberated young women.
female liberation resurfaced as a lifestyle the stuff of advertising and mass entertainment stripped of any connection to political or economic radicalism.
no longer one element in a broader program of social reform sexual freedom now meant individual autonomy or personal rebellion.
with her bobbed hair short skirts public smoking and drinking and unapologetic use of birth control methods such as the diaphragm the young single flapper epitomized the change in standards of sexual behavior at least in large cities.
she frequented dance halls and music clubs where white people now performed wild dances like the charleston that had long been popular in black communities.
she attended sexually charged hollywood films featuring stars like clara bow the provocative it girl and rudolph valentino the original on screen latin lover when valentino died of a sudden illness in 1926 crowds of grieving women tried to storm the funeral home.
what had been scandalous a generation earlier womens self conscious pursuit of personal pleasure became a device to market goods from automobiles to cigarettes.
in 1904 a woman had been arrested for smoking in public in new york city.
two decades later edward bernays the father of modern public relations masterminded a campaign to persuade women to smoke dubbing cigarettes womens torches of freedom the new freedom however was available only during one phase of a womans life.
once she married what jane addams had called the family claim still ruled.
and marriage according to one advertisement remained the one pursuit that stands foremost in the mind of every girl and woman having found a husband women were expected to seek freedom within the confines of the home finding liberation according to the advertisements in the use of new labor saving appliances.
left advertisers marketed cigarettes to women as symbols of female independence.
this 1929 ad for lucky strike reads legally politically and socially woman has been emancipated from those chains which bound her.
gone is that ancient prejudice against cigarettes right an ad for procter gamble laundry detergent urges modern women to modernize the methods of their employees.
the text relates how a white woman in the southwest persuaded felipa her mexicanamerican domestic worker to abandon her primitive washing methods felipa according to the ad agrees that the laundry is now whiter cleaner and fresher ch.
20 from business culture to great depression business and government business and government the retreat from progressivism in 1924 a social scientist remarked that the united states had just passed through one of the most critical ten year periods in its history.
among the changes was the disintegration of progressivism as a political movement and body of thought.
the governments success in whipping up mass hysteria during the war seemed to undermine the very foundation of democratic thought the idea of the rational self directed citizen.
followers of sigmund freud emphasized the unconscious instinctual motivations of human behavior scientists pointed to wartime iq tests allegedly demonstrating that many americans were mentally unfit for self government.
the great bulk of people are stupid declared one advertising executive explaining why advertisements played on the emotions rather than providing actual information.
during the 1920s walter lippmann published two of the most penetrating indictments of democracy ever written public opinion and the phantom public which repudiated the progressive hope of applying intelligence to social problems in a mass democracy.
instead of acting out of careful consideration of the issues or even individual self interest lippmann claimed the american voter was ill informed and prone to fits of enthusiasm.
not only were modern problems beyond the understanding of ordinary men and women a sentiment that had earlier led lippmann to favor administration by experts but the independent citizen was nothing but a myth.
like advertising copywriters and journalists he continued the government had perfected the art of creating and manipulating public opinion a process lippmann called the manufacture of consent in 1929 the sociologists robert and helen lynd published middletown a classic study of life in muncie indiana a typical community in the american heartland.
the lynds found that new leisure activities and a new emphasis on consumption had replaced politics as the focus of public concern.
elections were no longer lively centers of public attention as in the nineteenth century and voter participation had fallen dramatically.
national statistics bore out their point the turnout of eligible voters over 80 percent in 1896 had dropped to less than 50 percent in 1924 many factors helped to explain this decline including the consolidation of oneparty politics in the south the long period of republican dominance in national elections and the enfranchisement of women who for many years voted in lower numbers than men.
but the shift from public to private concerns also played a part.
the american citizens first importance to his country declared a muncie newspaper is no longer that of a citizen but that of a consumer the the policies of president calvin coolidge were music to the ears of big business according to one 1920s cartoonist.
republican era government policies reflected the pro business ethos of the 1920s.
recalling the eras prosperity one stockbroker later remarked god j p morgan and the republican party were going to keep everything going forever business lobbyists dominated national conventions of the in what ways did the government promote business interests in the 1920s.
republican party.
they called on the federal government to lower taxes on personal incomes and business profits maintain high tariffs and support employers continuing campaign against unions.
the administrations of warren g harding and calvin coolidge obliged.
never before here or anywhere else declared the wall street journal has a government been so completely fused with business the two presidents appointed so many pro business members of the federal reserve board the federal trade commission and other progressive era agencies that complained nebraska senator george w norris they in effect repealed the regulatory system.
the harding administration did support secretary of commerce herbert hoovers successful effort to persuade the steel industry to reduce the workday from twelve to eight hours.
but it resumed the practice of obtaining court injunctions to suppress strikes as in a 1922 walkout of 250 000 railroad workers protesting a wage cut.
under william howard taft appointed chief justice in 1921 the supreme court remained strongly conservative.
a resurgence of laissezfaire jurisprudence eclipsed the progressive ideal of a socially active national state.
the court struck down a federal law that barred goods produced by child labor from interstate commerce.
it even repudiated muller v oregon see chapter of the naacp directed national attention to the injustices of segregation disenfranchisement and lynching.
in 1939 eleanor roosevelt resigned from the daughters of the american revolution when the organization refused to allow the black singer marian anderson to present a concert at constitution hall in washington.
the presidents wife arranged for anderson to sing on the steps of the lincoln memorial and for the concert to be broadcast nationally on the radio.
thanks to the new deal bethune proclaimed a new day had dawned when blacks would finally reach the promised land of liberty the decade witnessed a historic shift in black voting patterns.
in the north and west where they enjoyed the right to vote blacks in 1934 and 1936 abandoned their allegiance to the party of lincoln and emancipation in favor of democrats and the new deal.
but their hopes for broad changes in the nations race system were disappointed.
despite a massive lobbying campaign southern congressmen prevented passage of a federal antilynching law.
fdr offered little support.
i did not choose the tools with which i must work he told walter white of the naacp he could not jeopardize his economic programs by alienating powerful members of congress.
the ccc established segregated work camps.
because of the exclusion of agricultural and domestic workers social securitys old age pensions and unemployment benefits and the minimum wages established by the fair labor standards act left uncovered 60 percent of all employed blacks and 85 percent of black women.
federal discrimination federal housing policy which powerfully reinforced residential segregation revealed the limits of new deal freedom.
as in the case of social security local officials put national housing policy into practice in a way that reinforced existing racial boundaries.
nearly all municipalities north as well as south insisted that housing built or financially aided by the federal government be racially segregated.
in texas some communities financed three sets of housing projects for whites blacks and mexicans.
the federal housing administration moreover had no hesitation about insuring mortgages that contained clauses barring future sales to nonwhite buyers and it refused to channel money into integrated neighborhoods.
in some cases the presence of a single black family led the agency to declare an entire block off limits for federal mortgage insurance.
along with discriminatory practices by private banks and real estate companies federal policy became a major factor in further entrenching housing segregation in the united states.
federal employment practices also discriminated on the basis of race.
as late as 1940 of the 150 000 blacks holding federal jobs only 2 percent occupied positions other than clerk or custodian.
in the south many new deal construction projects refused to hire blacks at all.
they give all the work to white people and give us nothing a black resident of mississippi wrote to fdr in 1935 the new deal began the process of modernizing southern agriculture but tenants black and white footed much of the bill.
tens of thousands of sharecroppers as noted earlier were driven off the land as a result a black clergyman carrying a sign outside peoples drugstore in washington d c in the late 1930s.
the dont buy where you cant work campaign targeted stores that served black customers but refused to hire black employees.
21 the new deal 1932 1940 a new conception of america of the aaa policy of raising crop prices by paying landowners to reduce cotton acreage.
support for civil rights would eventually become a test of liberal credentials.
but in the 1930s one could advocate roosevelts economic program and oppose antilynching legislation and moves to incorporate black workers within social security.
theodore bilbo the notoriously racist senator from mississippi was one of the new deals most loyal backers.
not until the great society of the 1960s would those left out of social security and other new deal programs racial minorities many women migrants and other less privileged workers win inclusion in the american welfare state.
a new conception of america a map of charlotte north carolina prepared by the home owners loan corporation illustrates how federal agencies engaged in redlining of neighborhoods containing blue collar and black residents.
wealthy areas coded green were given the best credit ratings and white collar districts in blue the second best.
residents of red districts found it almost impossible to obtain government housing loans.
but if the new deal failed to dismantle the barriers that barred non whites from full participation in american life the 1930s witnessed the absorption of other groups into the social mainstream.
with catholics and jews occupying prominent posts in the roosevelt administration and new immigrant voters forming an important part of its electoral support the new deal made ethnic pluralism a living reality in american politics.
the election of the italian american fiorello la guardia as mayor of new york city in 1933 symbolized the coming to power of the new immigrants.
although elected as a republican la guardia worked closely with fdr and launched his own program of spending on housing parks and public works.
la guardias was one of numerous little new deals that brought ethnic working class voters to power in communities throughout the industrial heartland.
thanks to the virtual cutoff of southern and eastern european immigration in 1924 the increasing penetration of movies chain stores and mass advertising into ethnic communities and the common experience of economic crisis the 1930s witnessed an acceleration of cultural assimilation.
but the process had a different content from the corporate sponsored americanization plans of the preceding years.
for the children of the new immigrants labor and political activism became agents of a new kind of americanization.
one could participate fully in the broader society without surrendering ones ideals and ethnic identity.
unionism is americanism became a cio rallying cry.
the mesabi range a minnesota miner wrote to secretary of labor perkins complaining of low wages and management hostility to unions in the iron rich region isnt americanized yet the heyday of american communism in the mid 1930s for the first time in american history the left an umbrella term for socialists communists labor radicals and many new deal liberals enjoyed a shaping influence on the nations politics and culture.
the cio and communist party became focal points for a broad social h o w d i d t h e po p u l a r f r o n t i n f l u e n c e a m e r i c a n c u l t u r e i n t h e 1 9 3 0 s.
and intellectual impulse that helped to redraw the boundaries of american freedom.
an obscure faction ridden organization when the depression began the communist party experienced remarkable growth during the 1930s.
the partys membership never exceeded 100 000 but several times that number passed through its ranks.
the partys commitment to socialism resonated with a widespread belief that the depression had demonstrated the bankruptcy of capitalism.
but it was not so much the partys ideology as its vitality its involvement in a mind boggling array of activities including demonstrations of the unemployed struggles for industrial unionism and a renewed movement for black civil rights that for a time made it the center of gravity for a broad democratic upsurge.
at the height of the popular front a period during the mid 1930s when the communist party sought to ally itself with socialists and new dealers in movements for social change urging reform of the capitalist system rather than revolution communists gained an unprecedented respectability.
earl browder the partys leader even appeared on the cover of time magazine.
it is one of the eras ironies that an organization with an undemocratic structure and closely tied to stalins dictatorial regime in russia should have contributed to the expansion of freedom in the united states.
but the communist party helped to imbue new deal liberalism with a militant spirit and a more pluralistic understanding of americanism.
redefining the people in theater film and dance the popular front vision of american society sank deep roots and survived much longer than the political moment from which it sprang.
in this broad left wing culture social and economic radicalism not support for the status quo defined true americanism ethnic and racial diversity was the glory of american society and the american way of life meant unionism and social citizenship not the unbridled pursuit of wealth.
the american people viewed by many intellectuals in the 1920s as representing mean spirited fundamentalism and crass commercialism were suddenly rediscovered as embodiments of democratic virtue.
a card issued by the communist party during the 1936 campaign illustrates the partys attempt at americanization note the images of the american revolution and abraham lincoln as well as its emphasis on interracialism.
james ford an african american was the partys vice presidential candidate.
21 the new deal 1932 1940 history of southern illinois a mural sponsored by the illinois federal art project illustrates the widespread fascination during the 1930s with american traditions and the lives of ordinary americans.
on the left a man strums a guitar while workers labor on the waterfront.
a new conception of america the common man roosevelt proclaimed embodied the heart and soul of our country during the 1930s artists and writers who strove to create socially meaningful works eagerly took up the task of depicting the daily lives of ordinary farmers and city dwellers.
art about the people such as dorothea langes photographs of migrant workers and sharecroppers and art created by the people such as black spirituals came to be seen as expressions of genuine americanism.
the federal music project dispatched collectors with tape recorders to help preserve american folk music.
films celebrated populist figures who challenged and defeated corrupt businessmen and politicians as in mr deeds goes to town 1936 and mr smith goes to washington 1939.
new immigrants especially jews and italians played a prominent role in producing and directing hollywood films of the 1930s.
their movies however glorified not urban ethnic communities but ordinary small town middle class americans.
promoting diversity a new conception of america is necessary wrote the immigrant labor radical louis adamic in 1938 despite bringing ethnic and northern black voters into its political coalition the democratic party said little about ethnocultural issues fearful of rekindling the divisive battles of the 1920s.
but the popular front forthrightly sought to promote the idea that the countrys strength lay in diversity tolerance and the rejection of ethnic prejudice and class privilege.
the cio avidly promoted the idea of ethnic and racial inclusiveness.
it broke decisively with the afls tradition of exclusionary unionism.
the cio embraced cultural pluralism an idea as noted in chapter 17.
at first the naacp sought to gain admission to white institutions of higher learning for which no black equivalent existed.
in 1938 the supreme court ordered the university of missouri law school to admit lloyd gaines a black student because the state had no such school for blacks.
missouri responded by setting up a segregated law school satisfying the courts.
but in 1950 the supreme court unanimously ordered heman sweatt admitted to the university of texas law school even though the state had established a school for him in a basement containing three classrooms and no library.
there was no way the court declared that this hastily constructed law school could be equal to the prestigious all white institution.
the brown case marshall now launched a frontal assault on segregation itself.
he brought the naacps support to local cases that had arisen when black parents challenged unfair school policies.
to do so required remarkable courage.
in clarendon county south carolina levi pearson a black farmer who what were the major thrusts of the civil rights movement in this period.
brought a lawsuit on behalf of his children saw his house burned to the ground.
the clarendon case attacked not segregation itself but the unequal funding of schools.
the local school board spent 179 per white child and 43 per black and unlike white pupils black children attended class in buildings with no running water or indoor toilets and were not provided with buses to transport them to classes.
five such cases from four states and the district of columbia were combined in a single appeal that reached the supreme court late in 1952 when cases are united they are listed alphabetically and the first case gives the entire decision its name.
in this instance the first case arose from a state outside the old confederacy.
oliver brown went to court because his daughter a third grader was forced to walk across dangerous railroad tracks each morning rather than being allowed to attend a nearby school restricted to whites.
his lawsuit became brown v board of education of topeka kansas.
thurgood marshall decided that the time had come to attack not the unfair applications of the separate but equal principle but the doctrine itself.
even with the same funding and facilities he insisted segregation was inherently unequal since it stigmatized one group of citizens as unfit to associate with others.
drawing on studies by new york psychologists kenneth and mamie clark marshall argued that segregation did lifelong damage to black children undermining their self esteem.
in its legal brief the eisenhower administration did not directly support marshalls position but it urged the justices to consider the problem of racial discrimination.
in the context of the present world struggle between freedom and tyranny other peoples it noted cannot understand how such a practice can exist in a country which professes to be a staunch supporter of freedom justice and democracy the new chief justice earl warren managed to create unanimity on a divided court some of whose members disliked segregation but feared that a decision to outlaw it would spark widespread violence.
on may 17 1954 warren himself read aloud the decision only eleven pages long.
segregation in public education he concluded violated the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by the fourteenth amendment.
in the field of education the doctrine of separate but equal has no place.
separate educational facilities are inherently unequal the black press hailed the brown decision as a second emancipation proclamation and like its predecessor it was in many ways a limited document.
the decision did not address segregation in institutions other than public schools or ban all racial classifications in the law such as statutes prohibiting interracial marriage.
it did not address the de facto school segregation of the north which rested on housing patterns rather than state law.
it did not order immediate implementation but instead called for hearings as to how segregated schooling should be dismantled.
but brown marked the emergence of the warren court as an active agent of social change.
and it inspired a wave of optimism that discrimination would soon disappear.
what a wonderful world of possibilities are unfolded for the children wrote the black novelist ralph ellison.
the montgomery bus boycott brown did not cause the modern civil rights movement which as noted in the previous two chapter 22.
in 1971 for the first time in the twentieth century the united states experienced a merchandise trade deficit that is it imported more goods than it exported.
by 1980 nearly three quarters of goods produced in the united states were competing with foreign made products and the number of manufacturing workers 38 percent of the american workforce in 1960 had fallen to 28 percent.
moreover the war in vietnam produced ever higher federal deficits and rising inflation.
in 1971 nixon announced the most radical change in economic policy since the great depression.
he took the united states off the gold standard ending the bretton woods agreement that fixed the value of the dollar and other currencies in terms of gold.
henceforth the worlds currencies would float in relation to one another their worth determined not by treaty but by international currency markets.
nixon hoped that lowering the dollars value in terms of the german mark and japanese yen would promote exports by making american goods cheaper overseas and reduce imports since foreign products would be more expensive in the united states.
but the end of fixed currency rates injected a new element of instability into the world economy.
nixon also ordered wages and prices frozen for ninety days.
stagflation during the oil crisis of 1973 americans confronted rising gasoline prices and widespread shortages.
some gas stations closed and were turned to other uses like this one in potlatch washington which became a religious meeting hall the pumps now offering salvation rather than gasoline.
these policies temporarily curtailed inflation and reduced imports.
but in 1973 a brief war broke out between israel and its neighbors egypt and syria.
middle eastern arab states retaliated for western support of israel by quadrupling the price of oil and suspending the export of oil to the united states for several months.
long lines of cars appeared at american gas stations which either ran out of fuel or limited how much a customer could buy.
a second oil shock occurred in 1979 as a result of the revolution that overthrew the shah of iran discussed later.
because the rapidly growing demand for fuel by cars and factories outstripped domestic supplies by 1973 the united states imported one third of its oil.
europe and japan depended even more heavily on oil imports.
to promote energy conservation congress lowered the speed limit on interstate highways to fiftyfive miles per hour and many public buildings reduced heat and lighting.
the energy crisis of the 1970s drew increased attention to domestic energy resources like oil coal and natural gas.
while the rest of the economy stagnated western energy production grew apace.
oil was discovered in alaska in 1968 and in 1977 a pipeline opened to facilitate its shipment to the rest of the country.
coal production in wyoming boomed.
western energy companies benefited from the high oil prices set by opec the organization of petroleum exporting countries.
in what ways did the opportunities of most americans diminish in the 1970s.
but rising oil prices rippled through the world economy contributing to the combination of stagnant economic growth and high inflation known as stagflation between 1973 and 1981 the rate of inflation in developed countries was 10 percent per year and the rate of economic growth only 2 4 percent a sharp deterioration from the economic conditions of the 1960s.
the so called misery index the sum of the unemployment and inflation rates stood at 10 8 when the decade began.
by 1980 it had almost doubled.
as oil prices rose many americans shifted from large domestically produced cars known for high gasoline consumption to smaller more fuel efficient imports.
by the end of the decade japan had become the worlds leading automobile producer and imports accounted for nearly 25 percent of car sales in the united states.
the beleaguered social compact the economic crisis contributed to a breakdown of the postwar social compact.
faced with declining profits and rising overseas competition corporations stepped up the trend already under way before 1970 toward eliminating well paid manufacturing jobs through automation and shifting production to low wage areas of the united states and overseas.
the effects on older industrial cities were devastating.
by 1980 detroit and chicago had lost more than half the manufacturing jobs that had existed three decades earlier.
smaller industrial cities suffered even sharper declines.
as their tax bases shriveled many found themselves unable to maintain public services.
in paterson new jersey where great silk factories had arisen in the early twentieth century deindustrialization left a landscape of abandoned manufacturing plants.
the poverty rate reached 20 percent the city sold off public library buildings to raise cash and the schools became so run down and overcrowded that the state government took control.
the accelerating flow of jobs investment and population to the nonunion low wage states of the sunbelt increased the political influence of this conservative region.
table 26 2 the misery index 1970 1980 year rate of inflation rate of unemployment misery index 5 9 4 9 10 8 4 3 5 9 10 2 3 3 5 6 8 9 6 2 4 9 11 1 11 0 5 6 16 6 9 1 8 5 17 6 5 8 7 7 13 5 6 5 7 1 13 6 7 7 6 1 13 8 11 3 5 8 17 1 13 5 7 1 20 6 ch.
26 the triumph of conservatism 1969 1988 the end of the golden age of population growth in metropolitan areas during the 1970s 96 percent occurred in the south and west.
san jose and phoenix with populations around 100 000 in 1950 neared 1 million by 1990 in some manufacturing centers political and economic leaders welcomed the opportunity to remake their cities as finance information and entertainment hubs.
in new york the construction of the world trade center completed in 1977 symbolized this shift in the economy.
until destroyed by terrorists twenty four years later the 110 story twin towers stood as a symbol of new yorks grandeur.
but to make way for the world trade center the city displaced hundreds of small electronics printing and other firms causing the loss of thousands of manufacturing jobs.
labor the world trade center under construction in new york city in the 1970s.
figure 26 2 real average weekly wages 1955 1990 1982 dollars 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 year because of economic dislocations and deindustrialization americans real wages wages adjusted to take account of inflation peaked in the early 1970s and then began a sharp prolonged decline.
the defensive always a junior partner in the democratic coalition the labor movement found itself forced onto the defensive.
it has remained there ever since.
one example of the weakening of unions power came in 1975 with the new york city fiscal crisis.
deeply in debt and unable to market its bonds the city faced the prospect of bankruptcy.
the solution to the crisis required a reduction of the citys workforce severe cuts in the budgets of schools parks and the subway system and an end to the century old policy of free tuition at the city university.
even in this center of unionism workingclass new yorkers had no choice but to absorb job losses and a drastic decline in public services.
the weakening of unions and the continuation of the economys longterm shift from manufacturing to service employment had an adverse impact on ordinary americans.
between 1953 and 1973 median family income had doubled.
but beginning in 1973 real wages essentially did not rise for twenty years.
the 1970s was one of only two decades in the twentieth century the other being the 1930s that ended with americans on average poorer than when it began.
the popular song the river by bruce springsteen captured the woes of blue collar workers is a dream a lie if it dont come true or is it something worse ford on as president economic problems dogged the presidencies of nixons successors.
gerald ford who had been appointed to replace vice president agnew succeeded to the white house when nixon resigned.
ford named nelson rockefeller of new york as his own vice president.
thus for the only time in american history both offices were occupied by persons for whom no one had actually voted.
among his first acts as president ford pardoned nixon shielding him from prosecution for obstruction of justice.
ford claimed that he wanted the country to put the watergate scandal behind it.
but the pardon proved to be widely unpopular.
in domestic policy fords presidency lacked significant accomplishment.
ford and his chief economic adviser alan greenspan believed that americans spent too much on consumption and saved too little leaving business with insufficient money for investment.
they called for cutting taxes on business and lessening government regulation of the economy.
but the democratic majority in congress was in no mood to accept these in what ways did the opportunities of most americans diminish in the 1970s.
traditional republican policies.
to combat inflation ford urged americans to shop wisely reduce expenditures and wear win buttons for whip inflation now.
although inflation fell joblessness continued to rise.
during the steep recession of 1974 1975 unemployment exceeded 9 percent the highest level since the depression.
in the international arena 1975 witnessed the major achievement of fords presidency.
in a continuation of nixons policy of dtente the united states and soviet union signed an agreement at helsinki finland that recognized the permanence of europes post world war ii boundaries including the division of germany.
in addition both superpowers agreed to respect the basic liberties of their citizens.
secretary of state kissinger and his soviet counterpart andrey gromyko assumed that this latter pledge would have little practical effect.
but over time the helsinki accords inspired movements for greater freedom within the communist countries of eastern europe.
the carter administration in the presidential election of 1976 jimmy carter a former governor of georgia narrowly defeated ford.
a graduate of the u s naval academy who president gerald ford tried to enlist later became a peanut farmer carter was virtually unknown outside his state americans in his whip inflation now when he launched his campaign for the democratic nomination.
but realizprogram.
it did not succeed.
ing that watergate and vietnam had produced a crisis in confidence in the federal government he turned his obscurity into an advantage.
carter ran for president as an outsider making a virtue of the fact that he had never held federal office.
a devout born again baptist he spoke openly of his religious convictions.
his promise ill never lie to you resonated with an electorate tired of official dishonesty.
carter had much in common with progressives of the early twentieth century.
his passions were making government more efficient protecting the environment and raising the moral tone of politics.
unlike the progressives however he embraced the aspirations of the presidential black americans.
his inaugural address as governor of election of 1976 georgia in 1971 had apologized for past mistreatment of the states black population.
as president carter appointed an unprecedented number of blacks to important positions including andrew young a former lieutenant of martin luther king jr as ambassador to the united nations.
and the economic crisis although his party controlled both houses carter often found himself at odds with congress.
he viewed inflation not unemployment as the countrys main economic problem and to combat it he promoted cuts in spending on domestic programs.
in the hope that increased competition would reduce prices his administration deregulated the trucking and airline industries.
carter supported the federal reserve banks decision to raise interest rates to curtail economic activity until both wages and prices fell traditionally a republican policy.
but oil prices kept rising carter candidate party carter democrat ford republican other candidates 26 13 6 12 7 9 12 electoral vote popular vote share share 297 55 40 825 839 50 240 45 39 147 770 48 1 577 333 2 ch.
26 the triumph of conservatism 1969 1988 the deregulation of the airline industry produced lower fares but also a drastic decline in service.
before deregulation with prices fixed airlines sought to attract customers by providing good service.
today fares are low but passengers are jammed in like sardines and have to pay for checked baggage onboard meals and other amenities.
the end of the golden age thanks to the overthrow of the shah of iran discussed later and inflation did not decline.
carter also believed that expanded use of nuclear energy could help reduce dependence on imported oil.
for years proponents of nuclear power had hailed it as an inexpensive way of meeting the countrys energy needs.
by the time carter took office more than 200 nuclear plants were operating or on order.
but in 1979 the industry suffered a near fatal blow when an accident at the three mile island plant in pennsylvania released a large amount of radioactive steam into the atmosphere.
the rise of the environmental movement had promoted public skepticism about scientific experts who touted the miraculous promise of technological innovations without concern for their social consequences.
the three mile island mishap reinforced fears about the environmental hazards associated with nuclear energy and put a halt to the industrys expansion.
since the new deal democrats had presented themselves as the party of affluence and economic growth.
but carter seemed to be presiding over a period of national decline.
it did not help his popularity when in a speech in 1979 he spoke of a national crisis of confidence and seemed to blame it on the american people themselves and their mistaken idea of freedom as self indulgence and consumption the emergence of human rights politics under carter a commitment to promoting human rights became a centerpiece of american foreign policy for the first time.
he was influenced by the proliferation of information about global denials of human rights spread by nongovernmental agencies like amnesty international and the international league for human rights.
the american membership of amnesty international a london based organization grew from 6 000 to the 1979 accident at the three mile island nuclear plant in pennsylvania brought a halt to the industrys expansion.
in what ways did the opportunities of most americans diminish in the 1970s.
35 000 between 1970 and 1976 its reports marked a significant break with dominant ideas about international affairs since world war ii which had viewed the basic division in the world as between communist and noncommunist countries.
such reports along with congressional hearings factfinding missions and academic studies of human rights exposed misdeeds not only by communist countries but also by american allies especially the death squads of latin american dictatorships.
information is the core work of the movement amnesty international declared.
its findings aroused widespread indignation and pressured elected officials in the united states to try to do something to promote human rights abroad.
in 1978 carter cut off aid to the brutal military dictatorship governing argentina which in the name of anticommunism had launched a dirty war against its own citizens kidnapping off the streets and secretly murdering an estimated 10 000 to 30 000 persons.
carters action was a dramatic gesture as argentina was one of the most important powers in latin america and previous american administrations had turned a blind eye to human rights abuses by cold war allies.
by the end of his presidency the phrase human rights had acquired political potency.
its very vagueness was both a weakness and a strength.
it was difficult to define exactly what rights should and should not be considered universally applicable but various groups could and did unite under the umbrella of global human rights.
carter believed that in the post vietnam era american foreign policy should de emphasize cold war thinking.
combating poverty in the third world preventing the spread of nuclear weapons and promoting human rights should take priority over what he called the inordinate fear of communism that once led us to embrace any dictator who joined us in that fear in one of his first acts as president he offered an unconditional pardon to vietnam era draft resisters.
in a 1977 address he insisted that foreign policy could not be separated from questions of justice equity and human rights carters emphasis on pursuing peaceful solutions to international problems and his willingness to think outside the cold war framework yielded important results.
in 1979 he brought the leaders of egypt and israel to the presidential retreat at camp david and brokered a historic peace agreement between the two countries.
he improved american relations with latin america by agreeing to a treaty ratified by the senate in 1978 that provided for the transfer of the panama canal to local control by the year 2000 in 1979 he resisted calls for intervention when a popular revolution led by the left wing sandinista movement overthrew nicaraguan dictator anastasio somoza a longtime ally of the united states.
carter attempted to curb the murderous violence of death squads allied to the right wing government of el salvador and in 1980 he suspended military aid after the murder of four american nuns by members of the countrys army.
he signed the salt ii agreement with the president jimmy carter center egyptian president anwar sadat left and israeli prime minister menachem begin right celebrating the signing of the 1979 peace treaty between israel and egypt.
26 the triumph of conservatism 1969 1988 the end of the golden age soviets which reduced the number of missiles bombers and nuclear warheads.
both conservative cold warriors and foreign policy realists severely criticized carters emphasis on human rights.
he himself found it impossible to translate rhetoric into action.
he criticized american arms sales to the rest of the world.
but with thousands of jobs and billions of dollars in corporate profits at stake he did nothing to curtail them.
the united states continued its support of allies with records of serious human rights violations such as the governments of guatemala the philippines south korea and iran.
indeed the american connection with the shah of iran whose secret police regularly jailed and tortured political opponents proved to be carters undoing.
the television gave extensive coverage to the plight of american hostages in iran in 1979 1980 leading many americans to view the carter administration as weak and inept.
iran crisis and afghanistan occupying a strategic location on the southern border of the soviet union iran was a major supplier of oil and an importer of american military equipment.
at the end of 1977 carter traveled there to help celebrate the shahs rule causing the internal opposition to become more and more antiamerican.
early in 1979 a popular revolution inspired by the exiled muslim cleric ayatollah khomeini overthrew the shah and declared iran an islamic republic.
the iranian revolution marked an ideological shift in opposition movements in the middle east from socialism and arab nationalism to religious fundamentalism.
this would have important long term consequences for the united states.
more immediately when carter in november 1979 allowed the deposed shah to seek medical treatment in the united states khomeinis followers invaded the american embassy in tehran and seized fifty three hostages.
they did not regain their freedom until january 1981 on the day carters term as president ended.
events in iran made carter seem helpless and inept and led to a rapid fall in his popularity.
another crisis that began in 1979 undermined american relations with moscow.
at the end of that year the soviet union sent thousands of troops into afghanistan to support a friendly government threatened by an islamic rebellion.
in the long run afghanistan became the soviet vietnam an unwinnable conflict whose mounting casualties seriously weakened the government at home.
initially however it seemed another example of declining american power.
declaring the invasion the greatest crisis since world war ii a considerable exaggeration the president announced the carter doctrine declaring that the united states would use military force if necessary to protect its interests in the persian gulf.
he placed an embargo on grain exports to the soviet union and organized a western boycott of the 1980 olympics which took place in moscow.
he withdrew the salt ii treaty from consideration by the senate and dramatically increased american military spending.
in a reversion to the cold war principle that any opponent of the soviet union deserved american support the united states funneled aid to fundamentalist muslims in afghanistan who fought a decade long guerrilla war against the soviets.
the alliance had unforeseen consequences.
a faction of islamic fundamentalists known as the taliban eventually came to power in afghanistan.
tragically they would prove as hostile to the united states as to moscow.
in what ways did the opportunities of most americans diminish in the 1970s.
in an unsuccessful attempt to bring down inflation carter had abandoned the keynesian economic policy of increased government spending to combat recession in favor of high interest rates.
he had cut back on social spending and the federal governments economic regulations while projecting a major increase in the military budget.
by 1980 dtente had been eclipsed and the cold war reinvigorated.
thus many of the conservative policies associated with his successor ronald reagan were already in place when carters presidency ended.
t h e r i s i n g t i d e o f c o n s e r vat i s m the combination of domestic and international dislocations during the 1970s created a widespread sense of anxiety among americans and offered conservatives new political opportunities.
economic problems heightened the appeal of lower taxes reduced government regulation and cuts in social spending to spur business investment.
fears about a decline of american power in the world led to calls for a renewal of the cold war.
the civil rights and sexual revolutions produced resentments that undermined the democratic coalition.
rising urban crime rates reinforced demands for law and order and attacks on courts considered too lenient toward criminals.
these issues brought new converts to the conservative cause.
as the 1970s went on conservatives abandoned overt opposition to the black struggle for racial justice.
the fiery rhetoric and direct confrontation tactics of bull connor george wallace and other proponents of massive resistance were succeeded by appeals to freedom of association local control and resistance to the power of the federal government.
this language of individual freedom resonated throughout the country appealing especially to the growing predominantly white suburban population that was fleeing the cities and their urban problems.
the suburbs would become one of the bastions of modern conservatism.
but it was not just a reaction to the 1960s and the spread of conservative ideas that nourished the movement.
like predecessors as diverse as the civil rights and labor movements conservatives organized at the grass roots.
in order to spread conservative doctrines they ran candidates for office even when they had little chance of winning and worked to change the policies of local institutions like school boards town councils and planning commissions.
one set of recruits was the neoconservatives a group of intellectuals who charged that the 1960s had produced a decline in moral standards and respect for authority.
once supporters of liberalism they had come to believe that even well intentioned government social programs did more harm than good.
welfare for example not only failed to alleviate poverty but also encouraged single motherhood and undermined the work ethic.
high taxes and expensive government regulations drained resources from productive enterprises stifling economic growth.
neoconservatives repudiated the attempts by nixon ford and carter to reorient foreign policy away from the cold war.
carters focus on human rights and alleged blindness to the soviet threat they argued endangered the survival of freedom conservative think tanks created during the 1970s like the heritage foundation and the american enterprise institute refined and spread these ideas.
26 the triumph of conservatism 1969 1988 the rising tide of conservatism the the reverend jerry falwell leader of the moral majority with some of his followers.
religious right the rise of religious fundamentalism during the 1970s expanded conservatisms popular base.
challenged by the secular and material concerns of american society some denominations tried to bring religion into harmony with these interests others reasserted more traditional religious values.
the latter approach seemed to appeal to growing numbers of americans.
even as membership in mainstream denominations like episcopalianism and presbyterianism declined evangelical protestantism flourished.
some observers spoke of a third great awakening like those of the 1740s and early nineteenth century.
the election of carter the first born again christian to become president highlighted the growing influence of evangelical religion.
but unlike carter most fundamentalists who entered politics did so as conservatives.
evangelical christians had become more and more alienated from a culture that seemed to them to trivialize religion and promote immorality.
they demanded the reversal of supreme court decisions banning prayer in public schools protecting pornography as free speech and legalizing abortion.
although it spoke of restoring traditional values the religious right proved remarkably adept at using modern technology including mass mailings and televised religious programming to raise funds for their crusade and spread their message.
in 1979 jerry falwell a virginia minister created the self styled moral majority devoted to waging a war against sin and electing pro life pro family pro america candidates to office.
falwell identified supporters of abortion rights easy divorce and military unpreparedness as the forces of satan who sought to undermine gods special plans for this great free country of ours christian conservatives seemed most agitated by the ongoing sexual revolution which they saw as undermining the traditional family and promoting immorality.
as a result of the 1960s they believed american freedom was out of control.
the growing assertiveness of the new gay movement spurred an especially fierce reaction.
in 1977 after a campaign led by the popular singer anita bryant a familiar fixture in televised orange juice commercials dade county florida passed an anti gay ordinance under the banner save our children the battle over the equal rights amendment during the 1970s family values moved to the center of conservative politics nowhere more so than in the battle over the equal rights amendment era.
originally proposed during the 1920s by alice paul and the womens party the era had been revived by second wave feminists.
in the wake of the rights revolution the amendments affirmation that what were the roots of the rise of conservatism in the 1970s.
doug marlettes cartoon comments on the continuing gap in pay between men and women the kind of inequality that inspired support for the proposed equal rights amendment.
equality of rights under the law could not be abridged on account of sex hardly seemed controversial.
in 1972 with little opposition congress approved the era and sent it to the states for ratification.
designed to eliminate obstacles to the full participation of women in public life it aroused unexpected protest from those who claimed it would discredit the role of wife and homemaker.
the era debate reflected a division among women as much as a battle of the sexes.
to its supporters the amendment offered a guarantee of womens freedom in the public sphere.
to its foes freedom for women still resided in the divinely appointed roles of wife and mother.
phyllis schlafly who helped to organize opposition to the era insisted that the free enterprise system was the real liberator of women since labor saving home appliances offered more genuine freedom than whining about past injustices or seeking fulfillment outside the home.
opponents claimed that the era would let men off the hook by denying their responsibility to provide for their wives and children.
polls consistently showed that a majority of americans male and female favored the era.
but thanks to the mobilization of conservative women the amendment failed to achieve ratification by the required thirty eight states.
the abortion controversy an even more bitter battle emerged in the 1970s over abortion rights another example to conservatives of how liberals in office promoted sexual immorality at the expense of moral values.
the movement to reverse the 1973 roe v wade decision began among roman catholics whose church condemned abortion under any circumstances.
but it soon enlisted evangelical protestants and social conservatives more generally.
life the movement insisted begins at conception and abortion is nothing less than murder.
between this position and the feminist insistence that a womans right to control her body includes the right to a safe legal abortion compromise was impossible.
ironically both sides showed how the rights revolution had reshaped the language of politics.
defenders of abortion exalted the right to ch.
26 the triumph of conservatism 1969 1988 the rising tide of conservatism a 1979 anti abortion rally in washington d c on the sixth anniversary of the supreme courts decision in roe v wade which barred states from limiting a womans right to terminate a pregnancy.
choose as the essence of freedom.
opponents called themselves the right to life movement and claimed to represent the rights of the unborn child the abortion issue drew a bitter sometimes violent line through american politics.
it affected battles over nominees to judicial positions and led to demonstrations at family planning and abortion clinics.
the anti abortion movement won its first victory in 1976 when congress over president fords veto ended federal funding for abortions for poor women through the medicaid program.
by the 1990s a few fringe anti abortion activists were placing bombs at medical clinics and murdering doctors who terminated pregnancies.
to the end of the century most women would continue to have the legal right of access to abortion.
but in many areas the procedure became more and more difficult to obtain as hospitals and doctors stopped providing it.
the women demonstrating in support for abortion rights.
tax r e v o lt with liberals unable to devise an effective policy to counteract deindustrialization and declining real wages economic anxieties also created a growing constituency for conservative economics.
unlike during the great depression economic distress inspired a critique of government rather than of business.
new environmental regulations led to calls for less government intervention in the economy.
these were most strident in the west where measures to protect the environment threatened irrigation projects and private access to public lands.
but everywhere the economys descent from affluence to stagflation increased the appeal of the conservative argument that government regulation raised business costs and eliminated jobs.
economic decline also broadened the constituency receptive to demands for lower taxes.
to conservatives tax reductions served the dual purpose of enhancing business profits and reducing the resources available to visions of freedom phyllis schlafly campaigning against the equal rights amendment.
the activist phyllis schlafly pictured here leading a rally at the illinois state capitol in 1978 was instrumental in grassroots organization of conservative men and women in opposition to the proposed equal rights amendment to the constitution which would have barred all legal inequalities based on sex.
she claimed that the amendment would take away the right to be a housewife the amendments defeat was a major victory for the conservative movement.
questions 1 what does the image suggest about conflicting ideas of the role of women in american society in the wake of the social and political divisions created by the feminist movement of the 1960s and 1970s.
2 why do opponents claim that the proposed amendment was a blow against american families.
26 the triumph of conservatism 1969 1988 the rising tide of conservatism government thus making new social programs financially impossible.
many americans found taxes increasingly burdensome.
on paper their incomes were rising although the gains were nullified by inflation.
rising wages pushed families into higher tax brackets increasing the percentage of their income they had to pay the government.
in 1978 conservatives sponsored and california voters approved proposition 13 a ban on further increases in property taxes.
the vote demonstrated that the level of taxation could be a powerful political issue.
proposition 13 proved to be a windfall for businesses and home owners while reducing funds available for schools libraries and other public services.
many voters however proved willing to accept this result of lower taxes.
as anti tax sentiment flourished throughout the country many states followed californias lead.
a parallel upsurge of grassroots conservatism was reflected in the sagebrush rebellion the name given to a bill passed by the nevada legislature in 1979.
using the language of freedom from government tyranny leaders in western states denounced control of large areas of land by the bureau of land management in washington d c and insisted that the states themselves be given decision making power over issues like grazing rights mining development and whether public lands should be closed to fishing and hunting.
with the federal government reluctant to give up control over public lands in the west the sagebrush rebellion had few concrete accomplishments but it underscored the rising tide of antigovernment sentiment.
the election of by 1980 carters approval rating had fallen to 21 percent lower than nixons at the time of his resignation.
a conservative tide seemed to be rising throughout the western world.
in 1979 margaret thatcher became prime minister of great britain.
she promised to restore economic competitiveness by curtailing the power of unions reducing taxes selling state owned industries to the presidential private owners and cutting back the welfare state.
in the election of 1980 united states ronald reagans 1980 campaign for the presidency brought together the many strands of 1970s conser9 vatism.
he pledged to end stagflation and restore the coun4 trys dominant role in the world and its confidence in itself.
lets make america great again he proclaimed.
the era of self doubt is over 3 17 26 13 6 12 reagan also appealed skillfully to white backlash he kicked off his campaign in philadelphia mississippi where three civil rights workers had been murdered in 7 9 12 1964 with a speech emphasizing his belief in states rights.
many white southerners understood this doctrine as including opposition to federal intervention on behalf of civil rights.
during the campaign reagan repeatedly conelectoral vote popular vote demned welfare cheats school busing and affirmative candidate share share party 489 91 43 901 812 51 reagan republican action.
the republican platform reversed the partys long49 9 35 483 820 41 carter democrat standing support for the equal rights amendment and 5 720 437 7 anderson independent condemned moral permissiveness.
although not personal1 155 593 1 other candidates ly religious and the first divorced man to run for president what were the roots of the rise of conservatism in the 1970s.
reagan won the support of the religious right and conservative upholders of family values riding a wave of dissatisfaction with the countrys condition reagan swept into the white house.
he carried such democratic strongholds as illinois texas and new york.
because moderate republican john anderson running for president as an independent received about 7 percent of the popular vote reagan won only a bare majority although he commanded a substantial margin in the electoral college.
carter received 41 percent a humiliating defeat for a sitting president.
jimmy carters reputation improved after he left the white house.
he went to work for habitat for humanity an organization that constructs homes for poor families.
in the 1990s he negotiated a cease fire between warring muslim and serb forces in bosnia and arranged a peaceful transfer of power from the military to an elected government in haiti.
in 2002 carter was awarded the nobel peace prize.
his presidency however is almost universally considered a failure.
and his defeat in 1980 launched the reagan revolution which completed the transformation of freedom from the rallying cry of the left to a possession of the right.
the reagan revolution ronald reagan followed a most unusual path to the presidency.
originally a new deal democrat and head of the screen actors guild the only union leader ever to reach the white house he emerged in the 1950s as a spokesman for the general electric corporation preaching the virtues of unregulated capitalism.
his nominating speech for barry goldwater at the 1964 republican convention brought reagan to national attention.
two years later california voters elected reagan as governor establishing him as conservatives best hope of capturing the presidency.
in 1976 he challenged president ford for the republican nomination and came close to winning it.
his victory in 1980 brought to power a diverse coalition of old and new conservatives sunbelt suburbanites and urban working class ethnics antigovernment crusaders and advocates of a more aggressive foreign policy libertarians who believed in freeing the individual from restraint and the christian right which sought to restore what they considered traditional moral values to american life.
reagan and american freedom reagans opponents often underestimated him.
by the time he left office at the age of seventy seven he had become the oldest man ever to serve as president.
he rose at the crack of noon as one reporter put it and relied on his wife to arrange his official schedule.
unlike most modern presidents he was content to outline broad policy themes and leave their implementation to others.
reagan however was hardly a political novice having governed california during the turbulent 1960s.
an excellent public speaker his optimism and affability appealed to large numbers of americans.
reagan made conservatism seem progressive rather than an attempt to turn back the tide of progress.
he frequently quoted thomas paine we have it in our voices of freedom from redstockings manifesto 1969 redstockings was one of the radical feminist movements that arose in the late 1960s.
based in new york it issued this manifesto which in language typical of the era illustrates how at its most radical edge feminism had evolved from demands for equal treatment for women to a total critique of male power and a call for womens liberation after centuries of individual and preliminary political struggle women are uniting to achieve their final liberation from male supremacy.
redstockings is dedicated to building this unity and winning our freedom.
women are an oppressed class.
our oppression is total affecting every facet of our lives.
we are exploited as sex objects breeders domestic servants and cheap labor.
we are considered inferior beings whose only purpose is to enhance mens lives.
our humanity is denied.
our prescribed behavior is enforced by the threat of physical violence.
because we have lived so intimately with our oppressors in isolation from each other we have been kept from seeing our personal suffering as a political condition.
we identify the agents of our oppression as men.
male supremacy is the oldest most basic form of domination.
men have controlled all political economic and cultural institutions and backed up this control with physical force.
our chief task at present is to develop female class consciousness through sharing experience and publicly exposing the sexist foundation of all our institutions.
consciousness raising is not therapy which implies the existence of individual solutions and falsely assumes that the male female relationship is purely personal but the only method by which we can ensure that our program for liberation is based on the concrete realities of our lives.
the first requirement for raising class consciousness is honesty in private and in public with ourselves and other women.
we identify with all women.
we define our best interest as that of the poorest most brutally exploited women.
we call on all our sisters to unite with us in struggle.
we call on all men to give up their male privileges and support womens liberation in the interest of our humanity and their own.
july 7 1969 new york city f r o m j e r r y f a lw e l l listen america.
1980 the reverend jerry falwell a virginia minister who in 1979 founded the self proclaimed moral majority was one of the leading conservative are still held in reverence by the vast majority of the american public.
i believe there is still a vast number of americans who love their country are decline of moral values falwell helped to patriotic and are willing to sacrifice for her.
i believe that americans want to see this country come back to basics back to values back to biblical morality back to sensibility and back to mobilize evangelical christians to ally with the patriotism.
activists of the 1970s and 1980s.
in language reminiscent of puritan jeremiads about the republican party.
we must reverse the trend america finds herself in today.
young people between the ages of twenty five and forty have been born and reared in a different world than americans of years past.
the television set has been their primary baby sitter.
from the television set they have learned situation ethics and immorality they have learned a loss of respect for human life.
they have learned to disrespect the family as god has established it.
they have been educated in a public school system that is permeated with secular humanism.
they have been taught that the bible is just another book of literature.
they have been taught that there are no absolutes in our world today.
they have been introduced to the drug culture.
they have been reared by the family and the public school in a society that is greatly void of discipline and character building.
every american who looks at the facts must share a deep concern and burden for our country.
if americans will face the truth our nation can be turned around and can be saved from the evils and the destruction that have fallen upon every other nation that has turned its back on god.
i personally feel that the home and the family it is now time to take a stand on certain moral issues and we can only stand if we have leaders.
we must stand against the equal rights amendment the feminist revolution and the homosexual revolution.
the hope of reversing the trends of decay in our republic now lies with the christian public in america.
we cannot expect help from the liberals.
they certainly are not going to call our nation back to righteousness and neither are the pornographers the smut peddlers and those who are corrupting our youth.
moral americans must be willing to put their reputations their fortunes and their very lives on the line for this great nation of ours.
would that we had the courage of our forefathers who knew the great responsibility that freedom carries with it.
questions 1 how do the authors of the redstockings manifesto seem to define womens freedom.
2 what does falwell see as the main threats to moral values.
3 how do the two documents differ in their views about the role of women in american society.
26 the triumph of conservatism 1969 1988 a delegate to the republican national convention of 1980 wears a hat festooned with the flags of the united states and texas and a button with a picture of her hero ronald reagan.
the reagan revolution power to begin the world over again reagan repeatedly invoked the idea that america has a divinely appointed mission as a beacon of liberty and freedom freedom indeed became the watchword of the reagan revolution.
in his public appearances and state papers reagan used the word more often than any president before him.
reagan reshaped the nations agenda and political language more effectively than any president since franklin d roosevelt.
like fdr he seized on the vocabulary of his opponents and gave it new meaning.
reagan promised to free government from control by special interests but these were racial minorities unionists and others hoping to use washingtons power to attack social inequalities not businessmen seeking political favors the traditional target of liberals.
his justice department made the principle that the constitution must be color blind a remark hurled at the supreme court majority by justice john marshall harlan in 1896 to challenge a system of legal segregation a justification for gutting civil rights enforcement.
overall reagan proved remarkably successful at seizing control of the terms of public debate.
on issues ranging from taxes to government spending national security crime welfare and traditional values he put democrats on the defensive.
but he also proved to be a pragmatist recognizing when to compromise so as not to fragment his diverse coalition of supporters.
reaganomics like roosevelt and johnson before him reagan spoke of economic freedom and proposed an economic bill of rights but in contrast to his predecessors who used these phrases to support combating poverty and strengthening economic security economic freedom for reagan meant curtailing the power of unions dismantling regulations and radically reducing taxes.
taxation he declared violated the principle that the right to earn your own keep and keep what you earn was what it means to be free in 1981 reagan persuaded congress to reduce the top tax rate from 70 percent to 50 percent and to index tax brackets to take inflation into account.
five years later the tax reform act reduced the rate on the wealthiest americans to 28 percent.
these measures marked a sharp retreat from the principle of progressivity the idea that the wealthy should pay a higher percentage of their income in taxes than other citizens one of the ways twentieth century societies tried to address the unequal distribution of wealth.
reagan also appointed conservative heads of regulatory agencies who cut back on environmental protection and workplace safety rules about which business had complained for years.
since the new deal liberals had tried to promote economic growth by using the power of the government to bolster ordinary americans purchasing power.
reagans economic program known as supply side economics by proponents and trickle down economics by critics relied on high interest rates to curb inflation and lower tax rates especially for businesses and high income americans to stimulate private investment.
the policy assumed that cutting taxes would inspire americans at all income levels to work harder since they would keep more of the money they earned.
everyone would benefit from increased business profits and because of a growing economy government receipts would rise despite lower tax rates.
how did the reagan presidency affect americans both at home and abroad.
reagan and labor reagan inaugurated an era of hostility between the federal government and organized labor.
in august 1981 when 13 000 members of patco the union of air traffic controllers began a strike in violation of federal law reagan fired them all.
he used the military to oversee the nations air traffic system until new controllers could be trained.
reagans action inspired many private employers to launch anti union offensives.
the hiring of workers to replace permanently those who had gone on strike a rare occurrence before 1980 became widespread.
manufacturing employment where union membership was concentrated meanwhile continued its long term decline.
by the mid1990s the steel industry employed only 170 000 persons down from 600 000 in 1973 when reagan left office both the service and retail sectors employed more americans than manufacturing and only 11 percent of workers with non government jobs were union members.
reaganomics as critics dubbed the administrations policies initially produced the most severe recession since the 1930s.
a long period of economic expansion however followed the downturn of 1981 1982.
as companies downsized their workforces shifted production overseas and took advantage of new technologies such as satellite communications they became more profitable.
at the same time the rate of inflation 13 5 percent at the beginning of 1981 declined to 3 5 percent in 1988 partly because a period of expanded oil production that drove down prices succeeded the shortages of the 1970s.
the stock market rose substantially.
in october 1987 the market suffered its sharpest drop since 1929 but stocks soon resumed their upward climb.
the problem of inequality together reagans policies rising stock prices and deindustrialization resulted in a considerable rise in economic inequality.
by the mid 1990s the richest 1 percent of americans owned 40 percent of the nations wealth twice their share twenty years earlier.
most spent their income not on productive investments and charity as supply side economists had promised but on luxury goods real estate speculation and corporate buyouts that often led to plant closings as operations were consolidated.
the income of middle class families especially those with a wife who did not work outside the home stagnated while that of the poorest one fifth of the population declined.
because of falling investment in public housing the release of mental patients from state hospitals and cuts in welfare homeless persons became a visible fixture on the streets of cities from new york to los angeles.
deindustrialization and the decline of the labor movement had a particularly devastating impact on minority workers who had only recently this photograph of the remains of the sprague electric company in north adams massachusetts which closed in 1985 depicts the aftermath of deindustrialization.
today the building is the site of the massachusetts museum of contemporary art.
26 the triumph of conservatism 1969 1988 a homeless los angeles family forced to live in their car photographed in 1983 the reagan revolution gained a foothold in better paying manufacturing jobs.
thanks to the opening of colleges and professional schools to minority students as a result of the civil rights movement and affirmative action programs the black middle class expanded considerably.
but black workers traditionally the last hired and first fired were hard hit by economic changes.
during the 1970s jim crow had finally ended in many workplaces and unions.
but just as decades of painful efforts to obtain better jobs bore fruit hundreds of thousands of black workers lost their jobs when factories closed their doors.
in south gate a working class suburb of los angeles for example the giant firestone tire factory shut down in 1980 only a few years after black and latino workers had made their first breakthroughs in employment.
when the national unemployment rate reached 8 9 percent at the end of 1981 the figure for blacks exceeded 20 percent.
nor did black workers share fully in the recovery that followed.
few had the education to take advantage of job openings in growing knowledge based industries like technology and information services.
overall during the 1980s black males fell farther than any other group in the population in terms of wages and jobs.
the second gilded age in retrospect the 1980s like the 1890s would be widely remembered as a decade of misplaced values.
buying out companies generated more profits than running them making deals not making products became the way to get rich.
the merger of nabisco and r j reynolds tobacco company in 1988 produced close to 1 billion in fees for lawyers economic advisers and stockbrokers.
greed is healthy declared wall street financier ivan boesky who ended up in prison for insider stock trading.
yuppie the young a family of affluent yuppies young urban professionals posing in their new york city apartment with their child care worker and baby.
how did the reagan presidency affect americans both at home and abroad.
conservatives and reagan while he implemented their economic policies reagan in some ways disappointed ardent conservatives.
the administration sharply reduced funding for great society antipoverty programs such as food stamps school lunches and federal financing of low income housing.
but it left intact core elements of the welfare state such as social security medicare and medicaid which many conservatives wished to curtail significantly or repeal.
the reagan era did little to advance the social agenda of the christian right.
abortion remained legal women continued to enter the labor force in unprecedented numbers and reagan even appointed the first female member of the supreme court sandra day oconnor.
in 1986 in bowers v hardwick in a rare victory for cultural conservatives the supreme court did uphold the constitutionality of state laws outlawing homosexual acts.
in 2003 the justices would reverse the bowers decision declaring laws that criminalized homosexuality unconstitutional.
reagan gave verbal support to a proposed constitutional amendment restoring prayer in public schools but did little to promote its passage.
the administration launched a just say no campaign against illegal drug use.
but this failed to halt the spread in urban areas of crack a potent inexpensive form of cocaine that produced an upsurge of street crime and family breakdown.
reagans justice department cut back on civil rights enforcement and worked to curtail affirmative action programs.
but to the end of reagans presidency the supreme court continued to approve plans by private employers and city and state governments to upgrade minority employment.
figure 26 3 changes in families real income 1980 1990 15 6 percentage change in real income urban professional who earned a high income working in a bank or stock brokerage firm and spent lavishly on designer clothing and other trappings of the good life became a household word.
television shows like dallas and dynasty chronicled the activities of the very rich for a mass audience.
taxpayers footed the bill for some of the consequences.
the deregulation of savings and loan associations banks that had generally confined themselves to financing home mortgages allowed these institutions to invest in unsound real estate ventures and corporate mergers.
losses piled up and the federal savings and loan insurance corporation which insured depositors accounts faced bankruptcy.
after reagan left office the federal government bailed out the savings and loan institutions at a cost to taxpayers estimated at 250 billion.
supply side advocates insisted that lowering taxes would enlarge government revenue by stimulating economic activity.
but spurred by large increases in funds for the military federal spending far outstripped income producing large budget deficits despite assurances by supply siders that this would not happen.
during reagans presidency the national debt tripled to 2 7 trillion.
nonetheless reagan remained immensely popular.
he took credit for economic expansion while blaming congressional leaders for the ballooning federal deficit.
he won a triumphant reelection in 1984 his opponent walter mondale best remembered for choosing congresswoman geraldine ferraro of new york as his running mate the first woman candidate on a major party presidential ticket carried only his home state of minnesota and the district of columbia.
9 3 5 2 9 8 0 5 5 10 poorest next to middle next to wealthiest wealthiest americans americans poorest income level the wealthiest american families benefited the most from economic expansion during the 1980s while the poorest 40 percent of the population saw their real incomes decline.
real income indicates income adjusted to take account of inflation.
26 the triumph of conservatism 1969 1988 the reagan revolution the drug crack being openly sold on the streets of new york city in 1986 reagan and the cold war in foreign policy reagan breathed new life into the rhetorical division of the world into a free west and unfree east.
he resumed vigorous denunciation of the soviet union calling it an evil empire and sponsored the largest military buildup in american history including new long range bombers and missiles.
in 1983 he proposed an entirely new strategy the strategic defense initiative based on developing a space based system to intercept and destroy enemy missiles.
the idea was not remotely feasible technologically and if deployed it would violate the anti ballistic missile treaty of 1972 but it appealed to reagans desire to reassert americas worldwide power.
he persuaded nato over much opposition to introduce short range nuclear weapons into europe to counter soviet forces.
but the renewed arms race and reagans casual talk of winning a nuclear war caused widespread alarm at home and abroad.
in the early 1980s a movement for a nuclear freeze a halt to the development of nuclear weapons attracted millions of supporters in the united states and europe.
in 1983 half of the american population watched the day after a television program that unflinchingly depicted the devastation that would be caused by a nuclear war.
reagan came into office determined to overturn the vietnam syndrome as widespread public reluctance to commit american forces overseas was called.
he sent american troops to the caribbean island of grenada to oust a pro cuban government and he ordered the bombing of libya in retaliation for the countrys alleged involvement in a terrorist attack on a west berlin nightclub in which an american died.
in 1982 reagan dispatched marines as a peacekeeping force to lebanon where a civil war raged between the christian government supported by israeli forces and muslim insurgents.
but he quickly withdrew them after a bomb exploded at their barracks killing 241 americans.
the public reagan realized would support minor operations like grenada but remained unwilling to sustain heavy casualties abroad.
how did the reagan presidency affect americans both at home and abroad.
reagan generally relied on military aid rather than american troops to pursue his foreign policy objectives.
abandoning the carter administrations emphasis on human rights reagan embraced the idea advanced in 1979 by neoconservative writer jeane kirkpatrick that the united states should oppose totalitarian communists but assist authoritarian noncommunist regimes.
kirkpatrick became the american ambassador to the united nations and the united states stepped up its alliances with third world anticommunist dictatorships like the governments of chile and south africa.
the administration poured in funds to combat insurgencies against the governments of el salvador and guatemala whose armies and associated death squads committed flagrant abuses against their own citizens.
when el salvadors army massacred hundreds of civilians in the town of el mozote in 1981 the state department denied that the event widely reported in the press had taken place.
the iran contra a f fa i r american involvement in central america produced the greatest scandal of reagans presidency the iran contra affair.
in 1984 congress banned military aid to the contras derived from the spanish word for against fighting the sandinista government of nicaragua which as noted earlier had ousted the american backed dictator anastasio somoza in 1979 in 1985 reagan secretly authorized the sale of arms to iran now involved in a war with its neighbor iraq in order to secure the release of a number of american hostages held by islamic groups in the middle east.
cia director william casey and lieutenant colonel oliver north of the national security council set up a system that diverted some of the proceeds to buy military supplies for the contras in defiance of the congressional ban.
the scheme continued for nearly two years.
hollywood joined enthusiastically in the revived cold war.
the 1984 film red dawn depicted a soviet invasion of the united states.
26 the triumph of conservatism 1969 1988 the united states in america 1954 2004 united states the caribbean the reagan revolution and central u s military bases overt military actions u s naval blockade united states and u s possessions sites of u s military intervention possessions of european countries ca pe ca n a v era l gulf of mexico miami nassau key west b a h a m a s b r al blockade during u s nav miss ile c havana risis 19 atl anti c o cean cuba cia sponsored revolution 1964 bay of pigs invasion u s fails 1961 interventions dominican puerto mexico 1961 1962 guantanamo bay haiti republic rico u s u s.
v i rgb rii nt iisshlavnidrgs i n i s l a nd s batista dictatorship overthrown san juan fidel castro assumes power 1959 santo ramey roosevelt kingston portbelize city domingo afb au prince roads afb jamaica belize leeward u s intervention islands u s marine landing guatemala 1994 2004 honduras guatemala barbados windward san salvador tegucigalpa caribbean sea islands u s intervention el u s intervention 1983 1981 1987 salvador nicaragua gren a d a managua u s intervention 1954 u s intervention 1981 costa rica san jose pa cific oce a n canal zone riots 1964 panama 500 miles 500 kilometers caracas panama city venezuela rodman ns albrook afb colombia u s intervention 1989 as in the first part of the twentieth century the united states intervened frequently in caribbean and central american countries during and immediately after the cold war.
trinidad tobago guyana brazil in 1987 after a middle eastern newspaper leaked the story congress held televised hearings that revealed a pattern of official duplicity and violation of the law reminiscent of the nixon era.
eleven members of the administration eventually were convicted of perjury or destroying documents or pleaded guilty before being tried.
reagan denied knowledge of the illegal proceedings but the iran contra affair undermined confidence that he controlled his own administration.
reagan and gorbachev in his second term to the surprise of both his foes and supporters reagan softened his anticommunist rhetoric and established good relations with soviet premier mikhail gorbachev.
gorbachev had come to power in 1985 bent on reforming the soviet unions repressive political system and reinvigorating its economy.
the country had fallen farther and farther how did the reagan presidency affect americans both at home and abroad.
behind the united states in the production and distribution of consumer goods and it relied increasingly on agricultural imports to feed itself.
gorbachev inaugurated policies known as glasnost political openness and perestroika economic reform.
gorbachev realized that significant change would be impossible without reducing his countrys military budget.
reagan was ready to negotiate.
a series of talks between 1985 and 1987 yielded more progress on arms control than in the entire postwar period to that point including an agreement to eliminate intermediate and short range nuclear missiles in europe.
in 1988 gorbachev began pulling soviet troops out of afghanistan.
having entered office as an ardent cold warrior reagan left with hostilities between the superpowers much diminished.
he even repudiated his earlier comment that the soviet union was an evil empire saying that it referred to another era reagans legacy reagans presidency revealed the contradictions at the heart of modern conservatism.
rhetorically he sought to address the concerns of the religious right advocating a return to spiritual values as a way to strengthen traditional families and local communities.
but in some ways the reagan revolution undermined the very values and institutions conservatives held dear.
intended to discourage reliance on government handouts by rewarding honest work and business initiative reagans policies inspired a speculative frenzy that enriched architects of corporate takeovers and investors in the stock market while leaving in their wake plant closings job losses and devastated communities.
nothing proved more threatening to local traditions or family stability than deindustrialization insecurity about employment and the relentless downward pressure on wages.
nothing did more to undermine a sense of common national purpose than the widening gap between rich and poor.
because of the iran contra scandal and the enormous deficits the government had accumulated reagan left the presidency with his reputation somewhat tarnished.
nonetheless few figures have so successfully changed the landscape and language of politics.
reagans vice president george h w bush defeated michael dukakis the governor of massachusetts in the 1988 election partly because dukakis could not respond effectively to the charge that he was a liberal now a term of political abuse.
conservative assumptions about the virtues of the free market and the evils of big government dominated the mass media and political debates.
those receiving public assistance had come to be seen not as citizens entitled to help in coping with economic misfortune but as a drain on taxes.
during the 1990s these and other conservative ideas would be embraced almost as fully by president bill clinton a democrat as by reagan and the republicans.
the election of the 1988 election seemed to show politics sinking to new lows.
television advertisements and media exposs now dominated political campaigns.
the race for the democratic nomination had hardly begun before the president reagan visited moscow in 1988 cementing his close relationship with soviet leader mikhail gorbachev.
they were photographed in red square.
26 the triumph of conservatism 1969 1988 conservatives celebrate the inauguration of george h w bush january 1989 suggested reading front runner senator gary hart of colorado withdrew after a newspaper reported that he had spent the night at his washington town house with a woman other than his wife.
both parties ran negative campaigns.
democrats ridiculed the republican vice presidential nominee senator dan quayle of indiana for factual and linguistic mistakes.
republicans spread unfounded rumors that michael dukakiss wife had burned an american flag during the 1960s.
the low point of the campaign came in a republican television ad depicting the threatening image of willie horton a black murderer and rapist who had been furloughed from prison during dukakiss term as governor of massachusetts.
rarely in the modern era had a major party appealed so blatantly to racial fears.
before his death in 1991 lee atwater who masterminded bushs campaign apologized for the horton ad.
although he did not match reagans landslide victory of 1984 bush achieved a substantial majority winning 54 percent of the popular vote.
democratic success in retaining control of congress suggested that an electoral base existed for a comeback.
but this would only occur if the party fashioned a new appeal to replace traditional liberalism which had been eclipsed by the triumph of conservatism.
suggested reading books adler william m mollies job a story of life and work on the global assembly line 2000.
tracks how a manufacturing job moved from the north to the south and eventually out of the country and what happened to the workers who held it.
allitt patrick.
religion in america since 1945 2003.
a survey of the main trends of religious development since world war ii.
anderson terry h the pursuit of fairness a history of affirmative action 2004.
a careful study of the origins and development of affirmative action policies.
suggested reading busch andrew e ronald reagan and the politics of freedom 2001.
discusses how ronald reagan interpreted the idea of freedom and how it influenced his presidency.
dallek matthew.
the right moment ronald reagans first victory and the decisive turning point in american politics 2000.
an examination of the causes of reagans election in 1980 and its impact on american politics.
fitzgerald frances.
way out there in the blue reagan star wars and the end of the cold war 2000.
a critical appraisal of one of the key military initiatives of reagans presidency.
greenberg david.
nixons shadow the history of an image 2003.
explores how nixons supporters and enemies thought about him during his long political career.
himmelstein jerome l to the right the transformation of american conservatism 1990.
studies the development of conservative ideas since world war ii.
kruse kevin.
white flight atlanta and the making of modern conservatism 2005.
explores how conservative politics took root in the predominantly white suburbs of atlanta with implications for similar communities across the country.
kutler stanley i the wars of watergate the last crisis of richard nixon 1990.
the most thorough analysis of the watergate scandal that brought down president nixon.
luker kristin.
abortion and the politics of motherhood 1984.
describes how the abortion issue affected american politics and the ideas about gender relations that lay behind the debate.
martin william.
with god on our side the rise of the religious right in america 1996.
traces the development of religious conservatism and its impact on american society.
mathews donald g and jane s de hart.
sex gender and the politics of era 1990.
an in depth examination of the debate over the equal rights amendment and why its opponents were successful.
mcgirr lisa.
suburban warriors the origins of the new american right 2001.
an influential study of the rise of conservatism in orange county california once one of its more powerful centers.
schulman bruce j the seventies the great shift in american culture society and politics 2001.
a survey of the numerous political social and economic changes that took place during the 1970s.
stein judith.
running steel running america race economic policy and the decline of liberalism 1998.
examines the decline of the american steel industry and how the cold war and presidential policies from eisenhower to carter contributed to it.
wilentz sean.
the age of reagan a history 1974 2008 2008.
explores how ronald reagan set the terms of public debate during and after his presidency.
websites china and the united states from hostility to engagement nsarchiv nsaebb nsaebb19 national security archive c hapter r eview review questions 1 which of nixons domestic policies did other conservatives oppose and why.
2 how did the burger court modify but not overturn the rights revolution of the 1960s.
3 what were the main features of nixons policy of realism in dealing with china and the soviet union.
4 describe the basic events and the larger significance of the watergate scandal.
5 what were the major causes for the decline of the u s economy in the 1970s.
6 compare carters and reagans explanations for the severe recession of the late 1970s.
7 identify the groups and their agendas that combined to create the new conservative base in the 1970s and 1980s.
8 what impact did ronald reagan have on the american political scene.
9 why was there growth in economic inequality in the 1980s.
freedom questions 1 how did conservatives introduce competing definitions of freedom into the fights for womens rights especially into the struggle over the equal rights amendment and abortion.
2 what impact did the reagan revolution have on the meanings of american freedom.
3 explain how its supporters defended reaganomics as a promotion of human liberty.
4 assess the decisions of the burger court on the issue of affirmative action.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e block grants p 1084 triumph of conservatism family assistance plan p 1084 event dates background significance san antonio independent school district v rodriguez p 1086 sharon statement platform of the young americans for freedom conservative students emerged as a force in politics goldwater campaign barry goldwater r lost presidential election to lyndon johnson d his victory in the southern states identified a growing conservative electorate frustrated with civil rights and big government equal rights amendment battle 1972 ten year battle over ratification of the era by the states conservatives who saw the era as antifamily succeeded in its defeat moral majority organized by jerry falwell to wage a war against sin it was used as a vehicle for political influence helping elect ronald reagan sagebrush rebellion bill passed by nevada legislature denouncing federal control over land grassroots initiative that argued the states not d c ought to determine grazing rights mining development and land use reagan election ronald reagan r defeated jimmy carter d his overwhelming victory marked the high tide of conservatism air traffic controllers strike atc strikers demands go unmet and all are fired who did not return to work ronald reagans actions inspired other employers to take anti union offensives bowers v hardwick held that state laws outlawing homosexual acts were constitutional victory for cultural conservatives reverse discrimination p 1086 regents of the university of california v bakke p 1086 title ix p 1087 nixon and china p 1089 strategic arms limitation talks p 1089 dtente p 1089 my lai massacre p 1091 war powers act p 1091 stagflation p 1095 misery index p 1095 the nixon pardon p 1096 helsinki accords p 1097 camp david peace treaty p 1099 iran hostage crisis p 1100 neoconservatives p 1101 reagan revolution p 1107 reaganomics p 1111 iran contra affair p 1115 c hapter 27 native american rights fund established communism falls in eastern europe u s led panamanian coup patterson v mclean credit union germany reunifies americans with disabilities act gulf war dissolution of the soviet union william jefferson clinton elected president casey v planned parenthood of pennsylvania north american free trade agreement approved israel and palestinian liberation organization sign the oslo accords republican victory in congress contract with america rwandan genocide timothy mcveigh bombs a federal building in oklahoma city clinton eliminates aid to families with dependent children telecommunications act clinton impeached protests in seattle against the world trade organization kosovo war repeal of the glasssteagall act bush v gore george w bush elected president globalization and its discontents 1989 2000 the post cold war world the crisis of communism a new world order.
the gulf war visions of americas role the election of clinton clinton in office the freedom revolution clintons political strategy clinton and world affairs the balkan crisis human rights african americans in the 1990s the role of the courts the spread of imprisonment the burden of imprisonment the continuing rights revolution native americans in 2000 multiculturalism the identity debate cultural conservatism family values in retreat the antigovernment extreme a new economy.
the computer revolution global economic problems the stock market boom and bust the enron syndrome fruits of deregulation rising inequality impeachment and the election of 2000 the impeachment of clinton the disputed election the 2000 result a challenged democracy culture wars freedom and the new century the newest immigrants the new diversity exceptional america varieties of freedom the goddess of democracy and freedom a statue reminiscent of the statue of liberty was displayed by pro democracy advocates during the 1989 demonstrations in beijings tiananmen square.
after allowing it to continue for two months the chinese government sent troops to crush the peaceful occupation of the square.
to this day it is difficult in china to discuss openly the events of 1989 f ocus q uestions what were the major international initiatives of the clinton administration in the aftermath of the cold war.
what forces drove the economic resurgence of the 1990s.
what cultural conflicts emerged in the 1990s.
how did a divisive political partisanship affect the election of 2000.
what were the prevailing ideas of american freedom at the end of the century.
protesters dressed as sea turtles an endangered species at the demonstrations against the world trade organization in seattle december 1999 l i n december 1999 delegates from around the world gathered in seattle for a meeting of the world trade organization wto a 135 nation group created five years earlier to reduce barriers to international commerce and settle trade disputes.
to the astonishment of residents of the city more than 30 000 persons gathered to protest the meeting.
their marches and rallies brought together factory workers who claimed that global free trade encouraged corporations to shift production to low wage centers overseas and tree huggers as some reporters called environmentalists who complained about the impact on the earths ecology of unregulated economic development.
some of the latter dressed in costumes representing endangered species monarch butterflies whose habitats were disappearing because of the widespread destruction of forests by lumber companies and sea turtles threatened by unrestricted ocean fishing.
protesters drew attention to the depletion of ozone in the atmosphere which shields the earth from harmful solar radiation.
the heightened use of aerosol sprays and refrigerants containing damaging chemicals had caused a large hole in the ozone layer.
a handful of self proclaimed anarchists embarked on a window breaking spree at local stores.
the police sealed off the downtown and made hundreds of arrests and the wto gathering disbanded.
once a center of labor radicalism the seattle area in 1999 was best known as the home of microsoft developer of the windows operating system used in most of the worlds computers.
the companys worldwide reach symbolized globalization the process by which people investment goods information and culture increasingly flowed across national what were the major international initiatives of the clinton administration i n t h e a f t e r m a t h o f t h e c o l d wa r.
boundaries.
globalization has been called the concept of the 1990s during that decade the media resounded with announcements that a new era in human history had opened with a borderless economy and a global civilization that would soon replace traditional cultures.
some commentators claimed that the nation state itself had become obsolete in the globalized world.
globalization of course was hardly a new phenomenon.
the internationalization of commerce and culture and the reshuffling of the worlds peoples had been going on since the explorations of the fifteenth century.
but the scale and scope of late twentieth century globalization was unprecedented.
thanks to satellites and the internet information and popular culture flowed instantaneously to every corner of the world.
manufacturers and financial institutions scoured the world for profitable investment opportunities.
perhaps most important the collapse of communism between 1989 and 1991 opened the entire world to the spread of market capitalism and to the idea that government should interfere as little as possible with economic activity.
the free world triumphed over its communist rival the free market over the idea of a planned economy and the free individual over ideas of shared community and social citizenship.
american politicians and social commentators increasingly criticized the regulation of wages and working conditions assistance to the less fortunate and environmental protections as burdens on international competitiveness.
during the 1990s presidents george h w bush a republican and bill clinton a democrat both spoke of an american mission to create a single global free market as the path to rising living standards the spread of democracy and greater worldwide freedom.
similar demonstrations at economic summits overseas followed the seattle protests.
the media called the loose coalition of groups who organized the protests the antiglobalization movement.
in fact they challenged not globalization itself but its social consequences.
globalization the demonstrators claimed accelerated the worldwide creation of wealth but widened gaps between rich and poor countries and between haves and have nots within societies.
decisions affecting the day to day lives of millions of people were made by institutions the world trade organization international monetary fund world bank and multinational corporations that operated without any democratic input.
these international organizations required developing countries seeking financial aid to open their economies to penetration from abroad while reducing spending on domestic social concerns.
demonstrators demanded not an end to global trade and capital flows but the establishment of international standards for wages labor conditions and the environment and greater investment in health and education in poor countries.
douglas harps 1993 lithograph drew attention to the development of a hole in the atmospheres ozone layer exposing human beings to increased solar radiation.
27 globalization and its discontents 1989 2000 the post cold war world even president clinton a staunch advocate of free trade told the seattle delegates that the protesters were telling us in the streets that weve been silent about the effects of globalization.
the battle of seattle placed on the national and international agendas a question that promises to be among the most pressing concerns of the twenty first century the relationship between globalization economic justice and freedom.
t h e p o s t c o l d wa r w o r l d the demonstrators dancing atop the berlin wall on november 10 1989 the next day crowds began dismantling it in the most dramatic moment of the collapse of communist rule in eastern europe.
crisis of communism the year 1989 was one of the most momentous of the twentieth century.
in april tens of thousands of student demonstrators occupied tiananmen square in the heart of beijing demanding greater democracy in china.
workers teachers and even some government officials joined them until their numbers swelled to nearly 1 million.
both the reforms mikhail gorbachev had introduced in the soviet union and the example of american institutions inspired the protesters.
the students erected a figure reminiscent of the statue of liberty calling it the goddess of democracy and freedom in june chinese troops crushed the protest killing an unknown number of people possibly thousands.
in the fall of 1989 pro democracy demonstrations spread across eastern europe.
gorbachev made it clear that unlike in the past the soviet union would not intervene.
the climactic event took place on november 9 when what were the major international initiatives of the clinton administration i n t h e a f t e r m a t h o f t h e c o l d wa r.
crowds breached the berlin wall which since 1961 had stood as the cold wars most prominent symbol.
one by one the regions communist governments agreed to give up power.
in 1990 a reunified german nation absorbed east germany.
the remarkably swift and almost entirely peaceful collapse of communism in eastern europe became known as the velvet revolution meanwhile the soviet union itself slipped deeper and deeper into crisis.
gorbachevs attempts at economic reform produced only chaos and his policy of political openness allowed long suppressed national and ethnic tensions to rise to the surface.
in 1990 the baltic republics of estonia latvia and lithuania which had been absorbed into the soviet union in 1940 declared their independence.
in august 1991 a group of military leaders attempted to seize power to overturn the governments plan to give greater autonomy to the various parts of the soviet union.
russian president boris yeltsin mobilized crowds in moscow that restored gorbachev to office.
gorbachev then resigned from the communist party ending its eighty four year rule.
one after another the republics of the soviet union declared themselves sovereign states.
at the end of 1991 the soviet union ceased to exist in its place were fifteen new independent nations.
the sudden and unexpected collapse of communism marked the end of the cold war and a stunning victory for the united states and its allies.
for the first time since 1917 there existed a truly worldwide capitalist system.
even china while remaining under communist party rule had already embarked on market reforms and rushed to attract foreign investment.
other events suggested that the 1990s would also be a decade of democracy in 1990 south africa released nelson mandela head of the african national congress from prison.
four years later as a result of the first democratic elections in the countrys history mandela became president ending the system of state sponsored racial inequality known as apartheid and white minority government.
peace came to central america with negotiated ends to the civil war in el salvador and an election in nicaragua won by opponents of the sandinistas in 1990 throughout latin america and africa civilian governments replaced military rule.
a new world order.
the sudden shift from a bipolar world to one of unquestioned american predominance promised to redefine the countrys global role.
president george h w bush spoke of the coming of a new world order but no one knew what its characteristics would be.
bushs first major foreign policy action was a throwback to the days of american interventionism in the western hemisphere.
at the end of 1989 he dispatched troops to panama to overthrow the government of general manuel antonio noriega a former ally of the united states who had become involved in the international drug trade.
although the invasion cost the lives of over 3 000 panamanians and was condemned by the united nations general assembly as a violation of international law the administration deemed it a great success.
the united states installed a new government and flew noriega to florida where he was tried and convicted on drug charges.
president bill clinton with nelson mandela during clintons visit to south africa in 1998 mandelas election as president of south africa in 1994 ending decades of white minority rule was one of the most significant triumphs of democracy in the 1990s.
27 globalization and its discontents 1989 2000 eastern norway europe after oslo stockholm north sweden sea denmark the cold the post cold war world war finland helsinki 500 miles 500 kilometers tallinn se a estonia copenhagen lt ba ic russia riga latvia lithuania rus.
vilnius berlin moscow minsk germany warsaw belarus poland czech republic vienna slovakia austria bratislava prague budapest ljubljana hungary slovenia zagreb kazakhstan kiev ukraine aral sea moldova chisinau romania croatia italy bosnia herzegovina sarajevobelgrade rome serbia bucharest podgorica montenegro skopje sofia bulgaria tiran macedonia albania uzbekistan baku armenia azerbaijan yerevan sea the ankara gulf an the end of the cold war and breakup of the soviet union czechoslovakia and yugoslavia redrew the map of eastern europe compare this map with the map of cold war europe in.

chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
the aztec metropolis rose from an island in the center of a lake surrounded by oating gardens of extraordinary beauty.
it was connected to the mainland by a series of causeways and supplied with fresh water by an artfully designed aqueduct.
moctezuma treated corts hospitably at rst but soon the spaniards hunger for gold and power exhausted their welcome.
they thirsted mightily for gold they stuffed themselves with it they starved for it they lusted for it like pigs said one aztec.
on the noche triste sad night of june 30 1520 the aztecs attacked driv ing the spanish down the causeways from tenochtitln in a frantic bloody retreat.
corts then laid siege to the city and it capitulated on august 13 1521 that same year a smallpox epidemic burned through the valley of mexico.
the combination of conquest and disease took a grisly toll.
the aztec empire gave way to three centuries of spanish rule.
the temples of tenochtitln were destroyed to make way for the christian cathedrals of mexico city built on the site of the ruined indian capital.
and the native population of mexico winnowed mercilessly by the invaders dis eases shrank from some 20 million to 2 million people in less than a century.
yet the invader brought more than conquest and death.
he brought his crops and his animals his language and his laws his customs and his religion all of which proved adaptable to the peoples of mexico.
he intermarried with the surviving indians creating a distinctive culture of mestizos people of mixed indian and european heritage.
to this day mexican civilization remains a unique blend of the old world and the new producing both ambivalence and pride among people of mexican heritage.
cortss translator malinche for example has given her name to the mexican language in the word malinchista or traitor but mexicans also celebrate columbus day as the dia de la raza the birthday of a wholly new race of people.
the spread of spanish america spains colonial empire grew swiftly and impressively.
within about half a century of columbuss landfall artists rendering of tenochtitln amid tribal strife in the fourteenth century the aztecs built a capital on a small island in a lake in the central valley of mexico.
from here they oversaw the most powerful empire yet to arise in mesoamerica.
two main temples stood at the citys sacred center one dedicated to tlaloc the ancient rain god and the other to huitzilopochtli the tribal god who was believed to require human hearts for sustenance.
spain s new world empire corts and malinche ca.
1540 detail though done by an indian artist this drawing identies malinche by her christian name marina.
she eventually married one of cortss soldiers with whom she traveled to spain and was received at the spanish court.
hundreds of spanish cities and towns ourished in the americas especially in the great silver producing centers of peru and mexico.
some 160 000 spaniards mostly men had subjugated millions of indians.
majestic cathedrals dotted the land printing presses turned out books and scholars studied at distinguished universities including those at mexico city and lima peru both founded in 1551 eighty ve years before harvard the rst college established in the eng lish colonies.
but how secure were these imperial possessions.
other powers were already snif ng around the edges of the spanish domain eager to bite off their share of the promised wealth of the new lands.
the upstart eng lish sent giovanni caboto known in eng lish as john cabot to explore the northeastern coast of north america in 1497 and 1498 the french king dispatched another italian mariner giovanni da verrazano to probe the eastern seaboard in 1524 ten years later the frenchman jacques cartier journeyed hundreds of miles up the st lawrence river.
to secure the northern periphery of their new world domain against such encroachments and to convert more indian souls to christianity the spanish began to fortify and settle their north american borderlands.
in a move to block french ambitions and to protect the sea lanes to the caribbean the spanish erected a fortress at st augustine florida in 1565 thus founding the oldest continually inhabited european settlement in the future united states.
in mexico the tales of coronados expedition of the 1540s to the upper rio grande and colorado river regions continued to beckon the conquistadores northward.
a dust begrimed expeditionary column with eighty three rumbling wagons and hundreds of grumbling men traversed the bare sonora desert from mexico into the rio grande valley in 1598 led by don juan de oate the spaniards cruelly abused the pueblo peoples they encountered.
in the battle of acoma in 1599 the spanish severed one foot of each survivor.
they proclaimed the area to be the province of new mexico in 1609 and founded its capital at santa f the following year see map 1 6.
the spanish settlers in new mexico found a few furs and precious little gold but they did discover a wealth of souls to be harvested for the christian religion.
the roman catholic mission became the central institution in colonial new mexico until the missionaries efforts to suppress native religious customs provoked an indian uprising called pops rebellion in 1680 the pueblo rebels destroyed every catholic church in the province and killed a score of priests and hundreds of spanish settlers.
in a reversal of cortss treatment of the aztec temples more than a century earlier the indians rebuilt a kiva or ceremonial religious chamber on the ruins of the spanish plaza at santa f.
it took nearly half a century for the spanish fully to reclaim new mexico from the insurrectionary indians.
meanwhile as a further hedge against the everthreatening french who had sent an expedition under robert de la salle down the mississippi river in the 1680s the spanish began around 1716 to establish settlements in texas.
some refugees from the pueblo uprising trickled into texas and a few missions were established there including the one at san antonio later known as the alamo.
but for at least another century the spanish presence remained weak in this distant northeastern outpost of spains mexican empire.
to the west in cal i fornia no serious foreign threat loomed and spain directed its attention there only belatedly.
juan rodriguez cabrillo had explored the cal ifornia coast in 1542 but he failed to nd san francisco bay or anything else of much interest.
for some two centuries thereafter cal i fornia slumbered undisturbed by european intruders.
then in 1769 spanish missionaries led by father junipero serra founded at san diego the rst of a chain of twenty one missions that wound chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 ared forth in the colonies often directed at propertyowning women.
but the reign of horror in salem grew not only from the superstitions and prejudices of the age but also from the turmoil of the wars with the indians as well as the unsettled social and religious conditions of the rapidly evolving massachusetts village.
most of the accused witches came from families associated with salems burgeoning market economy their accusers came largely from subsistence farming families in salems hinterland.
the salem witch trials thus reected the widening social stratication of new eng land as well as the fear of many religious traditionalists that the puritan heritage was being eclipsed by yankee commercialism.
the witchcraft hysteria eventually ended in 1693 when the governor alarmed by an accusation against his own wife and supported by the more responsible members of the clergy prohibited any further trials and pardoned those already convicted.
twenty years later a penitent massachusetts legislature annulled the convictions of the witches and made reparations to their heirs.
the salem witchcraft delusion marked an all time high in the american experience of popular passions run wild.
witch hunting passed into the american vocabulary as a metaphor for the often dangerously irrational urge to nd a scapegoat for social resentments.
the new england way of life oddly enough the story of new eng land was largely written by rocks.
the heavily glaciated soil was strewn with countless stones many of which were forced to the surface after a winter freeze.
in a sense the puritans did not possess the soil it possessed them by shaping their character.
scratching a living from the protesting earth was an early american success story.
backbending toil put a premium on industry and pennypinching frugality for which new eng landers became famous.
traditionally sharp yankee traders some of them palming off wooden nutmegs made their mark.
connecticut came in time to be called good humoredly the nutmeg state cynics exaggerated when they said that the three stages of progress in new eng land were to get on to get honor to get honest the grudging land also left colonial new eng land less ethnically mixed than its southern neighbors.
noneng lish immigrants were less attracted to a site where the soil was so stony and the sermons so sulfurous.
climate likewise molded new eng land where the summers were often uncomfortably hot and the winters cruelly cold.
many early immigrants complained of the regions extremes of weather.
yet the soil and climate of new eng land eventually encouraged a diversied agriculture and industry.
staple products like tobacco did not ourish as in the south.
black slavery although attempted could not exist protably on small farms especially where the surest crop was stones.
no broad fertile expanses comparable to those in the tidewater south beckoned people inland.
the mountains ran fairly close to the shore and the rivers were generally short and rapid.
and just as the land shaped new eng landers so they shaped the land.
the native americans had left an early imprint on the new eng land earth.
they traditionally beat trails through the woods as they migrated seasonally for hunting and shing.
they periodically burned the woodlands to restore leafy rst growth forests that would sustain the deer population.
the indians recognized the right to use the land but the concept of exclusive individual ownership of the land was alien to them.
the eng lish settlers had a different philosophy.
they condemned the indians for wasting the earth by underutilizing its bounty and used this logic to justify their own expropriation of the land from the native inhabitants.
consistent with this outlook the europeans felt a virtual duty to improve the land by clearing woodlands for pasturage and tillage building roads and fences and laying out permanent settlements.
some of the greatest changes resulted from the introduction of livestock.
the eng lish brought pigs horses sheep and cattle from europe to the settlements.
because the growing herds needed ever more pastureland the colonists were continually clearing forests.
the animals voracious appetites and heavy hooves compacted the soil speeding erosion and ooding.
in some cases the combined effect of these developments actually may have changed local climates and made some areas even more susceptible to extremes of heat and cold.
repelled by the rocks the hardy new eng landers turned instinctively to their ne natural harbors.
hacking timber from their dense forests they became experts in shipbuilding and commerce.
they also ceaselessly exploited the self perpetuating codsh lode off the coast of newfoundland the shy gold mines of new eng land which have yielded more wealth than all the trea sure chests of the aztecs.
during colonial the early settlers and the land days the wayfarer seldom got far from the sound of the ax and hammer or the swift rush of the ship down the ways to the sea or the smell of rotting sh.
as a reminder of the importance of shing a handsome replica of the sacred cod is proudly displayed to this day in the massachusetts statehouse in boston.
the combination of calvinism soil and climate in new eng land made for energy purposefulness sternness stubbornness self reliance and resourcefulness.
righteous new eng landers prided themselves on being gods chosen people.
they long boasted that boston was the hub of the universe at least in spirit.
a famous jingle of later days ran i come from the city of boston the home of the bean and the cod where the cabots speak only to lowells and the lowells speak only to god.
new eng land has had an incalculable impact on the rest of the nation.
ousted by their sterile soil thousands of new eng landers scattered from ohio to oregon and even hawaii.
they sprinkled the land with new communities modeled on the orderly new eng land town with its central green and tidy schoolhouse and its simple town meeting democracy.
yankee ingenuity originally fostered by the inty elds and comfortless climate of new eng land came to be claimed by all americans as a proud national trait.
and the fabled new eng land conscience born of the steadfast puritan heritage left a legacy of high idealism in the national character and inspired many later reformers.
the early settlers days and ways the cycles of the seasons and the sun set the schedules of all the earliest american colonists men as well as women northerners as well as southerners blacks as well as whites.
the overwhelming majority of colonists were farmers.
they planted in the spring tended their crops in the summer harvested in the fall and prepared in the winter to begin the cycle anew.
they usually rose at dawn and went to bed at dusk.
chores might be performed after nightfall only if they were worth the candle a phrase that has persisted in american speech.
women slave or free on southern plantations or northern farms wove cooked cleaned and cared for children.
men cleared land fenced planted and cropped it cut rewood and butchered livestock as needed.
children helped with all these tasks while picking up such schooling as they could.
life was humble but comfortable by contemporary standards.
compared to most seventeenth century europeans americans lived in afuent abundance.
life and death in colonial america by prudence punderson note the artists initials p p on the cofn.
this embroidery suggests the stoic resolve of a colonial woman calmly depicting the inevitable progression of her own life from the cradle to the grave.
chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 driven from every other corner of the earth freedom of thought and the right of private judgment in matters of conscience direct their course to this happy country as their last asylum.
t he common term thirteen original colonies is misleading.
britain ruled thirty two colonies in north america by 1775 including canada the floridas and various caribbean islands.
but only thirteen of them unfurled the standard of rebellion.
a few of the nonrebels such as canada and jamaica were larger wealthier or more populous than some of the revolting thirteen.
why then did some british colonies eventually strike for their independence while others did not.
part of the answer is to be found in the distinctive social economic and political structures of the thirteen atlantic seaboard colonies and in the halting gradual appearance of a recognizably american way of life.
conquest by the cradle among the distinguishing characteristics that the eventually rebellious settlements shared was lusty population growth.
in 1700 they contained fewer than 300 000 souls about 20 000 of whom were black.
by 1775 2 5 million people inhabited the thirteen colonies of whom about half a million were black.
white immigrants made up nearly 400 000 of the increased number and black forced immigrants accounted for almost as many again.
but most of the spurt stemmed from the remarkable natural fertility of all americans white and black.
to the amazement and dismay of europeans the colonists were doubling their numbers every twenty ve years.
unfriendly dr samuel johnson back in eng land growled that the americans were multiplying like their own rattlesnakes.
they were also a youthful people whose average age in 1775 was about sixteen.
this population boom had political consequences.
in 1700 there were twenty eng lish subjects for each american colonist.
by 1775 the eng lish advantage in numbers had fallen to three to one setting the stage for a momentous shift in the balance of power between the colonies and britain.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website immigration to the colonies ce r en st l aw abenaki maine mass.
n h 200 mi.
new york de er i e l pennsylvania n 70w new york n j hi o sh aw ne e or.
mo un tai ns philadelphia n md.
r i newport conn la se mass.
ra ario tu wa sca ro re nt l o a mingling of the races del.
virginia to philadelphia germans scots irish to the chesapeake africans british convicts at l a n t i c oc ean ta ch north carolina ca ero ap kee pal ach ian n 35 w ba south carolina to charleston africans germans charleston scots irish scots cr colonial america was a melting pot and had been from the outset.
the population although basically eng lish in stock and language was picturesquely mottled with numerous foreign groups see map 5 1.
heavy accented germans constituted about 6 percent of the total population or 150 000 by 1775 fleeing religious persecution economic oppression and the ravages of war they had ocked to america in the early 1700s and had settled chiey in pennsylvania.
they belonged to several different protestant sects primarily lutheran and thus further enhanced the religious diversity of the colony.
known popularly but erroneously as the pennsylvania dutch a corruption of the german word deutsch for german they totaled about onethird of the colonys population.
in parts of philadelphia the street signs were painted in both german and eng lish.
these german newcomers moved into the backcountry of pennsylvania where their splendid stone barns gave and still give mute evidence of industry and prosperity.
not having been brought up eng lish they had no deep rooted loyalty to the british crown and they clung tenaciously to their german language and customs.
the scots irish who in 1775 numbered around 175 000 or 7 percent of the population were an important non eng lish group although they spoke eng lish.
they were not irish at all but turbulent scots lowlanders.
over many decades they had been transplanted to northern ireland where they had not prospered.
the irish catholics already there hating scottish presbyterianism resented the intruders and still do the source of many of the modern day troubles in the northern ireland province of ulster.
the economic life of the scots irish was severely hampered especially when the eng lish government placed burdensome restrictions on their production of linens and woolens.
n r ne ca ca yu on ga on on dag ei a mo da ha wk the bulk of the population was cooped up east of the alleghenies although by 1775 a vanguard of pioneers had trickled into the stump studded clearings of tennessee and kentucky.
the most populous colonies in 1775 were virginia massachusetts pennsylvania north carolina and maryland in that order.
only four communities could properly be called cities philadelphia including suburbs was rst with about 34 000 residents trailed by new york boston and charleston.
about 90 percent of the people lived in rural areas.
ee k 80w georgia savannah creek indian lands 30n 75w predominant immigrant group african scots irish dutch english and welsh german scottish no european settlement map 5 1 immigrant groups in 1775 america was already a nation of diverse nationalities in the colonial period.
this map shows the great variety of immigrant groups especially in pennsylvania and new york.
it also illustrates the tendency of later arrivals particularly the scots irish to push into the backcountry.
interactive map chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 andrew hamilton ca.
1676 1741 concluded his eloquent plea in the zenger case with these words the question before the court and you gentlemen of the jury is not of small nor private concern.
it is not the cause of a poor printer nor of new york alone which you are now trying.
it may in its consequence affect every freeman that lives under a british government on the main land of america.
it is the best cause.
it is the cause of liberty.
swayed by his eloquence the jurors deed the bewigged judges and daringly returned a verdict of not guilty.
cheers burst from the spectators.
the zenger decision was a banner achievement for freedom of the press and for the health of democracy.
it pointed the way to the kind of open public discussion required by the diverse society that colonial new york already was and that all america was to become.
although contrary to existing law and not immediately accepted by other judges and juries in time it helped establish the doctrine that true statements about public ofcials could not be prosecuted as libel.
newspapers were thus eventually free to print responsible criticisms of powerful ofcials though full freedom of the press was unknown during the prerevolutionary era.
the great game of politics american colonists may have been backward in natural or physical science but they were making noteworthy contributions to political science.
the thirteen colonial governments took a variety of forms.
by 1775 eight of the colonies had royal governors who were appointed by the king.
three maryland pennsylvania and delaware were under proprietors who themselves chose the governors.
and two connecticut and rhode island elected their own governors under self governing charters.
practically every colony utilized a two house legislative body.
the upper house or council was normally appointed by the crown in the royal colonies and by the proprietor in the proprietary colonies.
it was chosen by the voters in the self governing colonies.
the lower house as the popular branch was elected by the people or rather by those who owned enough property to qualify as voters.
in several of the colonies the backcountry elements were seriously underrepresented and they hated the ruling colonial clique perhaps more than they did kingly authority.
legislatures in which the people enjoyed direct representation voted such taxes as they chose for the necessary expenses of colonial government.
self taxation through representation was a precious privilege that americans had come to cherish above most others.
governors appointed by the king were generally able men sometimes outstanding gures.
some unfortunately were incompetent or corrupt broken down politicians badly in need of jobs.
the worst of the group was probably impoverished lord cornbury rst cousin of queen anne who was made governor of new york and new jersey in 1702 he proved to be a drunkard a spendthrift a grafter an embezzler a religious bigot and a vain fool who was accused probably inaccurately of dressing like a woman.
even the best appointees had trouble with the colonial legislatures basically because the royal governor embodied a bothersome transatlantic authority some three thousand miles away.
the colonial assemblies found various ways to assert their authority and independence.
some of them employed the trick of withholding the governors salary unless he yielded to their wishes.
he was normally in need of money otherwise he would not have come to this godforsaken country so the power of the purse usually forced him to terms.
but one governor of north carolina died with his salary eleven years in arrears.
the london government in leaving the colonial governor to the tender mercies of the legislature was guilty of poor administration.
in the interests of simple efciency the british authorities should have arranged to pay him from independent sources.
as events turned out control over the purse by the colonial legislatures led to prolonged bickering which proved to be one of the persistent irritants that generated a spirit of revolt.
administration at the local level was also varied.
county government remained the rule in the plantation south town meeting government predominated in new eng land and a modication of the two developed in the middle colonies.
in the town meeting with parliament nally arranged for separate payment of the governors through the townshend taxes of 1767 but by then the colonists were in such an ugly mood over taxation that this innovation only added fresh fuel to the ames.
governance in the colonies junius the pseudonym for a critic or critics of the british government from 1768 to 1772 published a pointed barb in criticizing one new appointee it was not virginia that wanted a governor but a court favorite that wanted a salary.
its open discussion and open voting direct democracy functioned at its best.
in this unrivaled cradle of selfgovernment americans learned to cherish their privileges and exercise their duties as citizens of the new world commonwealths.
yet the ballot was by no means a birthright.
religious or property qualications for voting with even stiffer qualications for ofceholding existed in all the colonies in 1775 the privileged upper classes fearful of democratic excesses were unwilling to grant the ballot to every biped of the forest perhaps half of the adult white males were thus disfranchised.
but because of the ease of acquiring land and thus satisfying property requirements the right to vote was not beyond the reach of most industrious and enterprising colonists.
yet somewhat surprisingly eligible voters often did not exercise this precious privilege.
they frequently acquiesced in the leadership of their betters who ran colonial affairs though always reserving the right to vote misbehaving rascals out of ofce.
by 1775 america was not yet a true democracy socially economically or politically.
but it was far more democratic than eng land and the european continent.
colonial institutions were giving freer rein to the democratic ideals of tolerance educational advantages equality of economic opportunity freedom of speech freedom of the press freedom of assembly and representative government.
and these democratic seeds planted in rich soil were to bring forth a lush harvest in later years.
colonial folkways everyday life in the colonies may now seem glamorous especially as reected in antique shops.
but judged by modern standards it was drab and tedious.
for most people the labor was heavy and constant from can see to cant see food was plentiful though the diet could be coarse and monotonous.
americans probably ate more boun tifully especially of meat than any people in the old world.
lazy or sickly was the person whose stomach was empty.
basic comforts now taken for granted were lacking.
churches were not heated at all except for charcoal foot warmers that the women carried.
during the frigid new eng land winters the preaching of hell re may not have seemed altogether unattractive.
drafty homes were poorly heated chiey by inefcient replaces.
there was no running water in the houses no indoor plumbing and probably not a single bathtub in all of colonial america.
candles and whale oil lamps provided faint and ickering illumination.
garbage disposal was primitive.
long snouted hogs customarily ranged the streets to consume refuse while buzzards protected by law apped greedily over tidbits of waste.
amusement was eagerly pursued where time and custom permitted.
the militia assembled periodically for musters which consisted of several days of drilling liberally interspersed with merrymaking and irting.
on the frontier plea sure was often combined with work at house raisings quilting bees husking bees and apple parings.
funerals and weddings every where afforded opportunities for social gatherings which customarily involved the swilling of much strong liquor.
winter sports were common in the north whereas in the south card playing horse racing cockghting and fox hunting were favorite pastimes.
george washington not surprisingly was a superb rider.
in the nonpuritanical south dancing was the rage jigs square dances the virginia reel and the agile washington could swing his fair partner with the best of them.
other diversions beckoned.
lotteries were universally approved even by the clergy and were used to raise money for churches and colleges including harvard.
stage plays became popular in the south but were frowned upon in quaker and puritan colonies and in some places forbidden by law.
many of the new england clergy saw playacting as time consuming and immoral they preferred religious lectures from which their ocks derived much spiritual satisfaction.
holidays were every where celebrated in the american colonies but christmas was frowned upon in new eng land as an offensive reminder of popery yuletide is fooltide was a common puritan sneer.
thanksgiving day came to be a truly american festival for it combined thanks to god with an opportunity for jollication gorging and guzzling.
by the mid eighteenth century britains several north american colonies despite their differences chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 the popular game of billiards most likely brought over by dutch and english settlers billiards provided amusement in local taverns throughout the colonies.
by the nineteenth century americans like the british and french who had long dominated the sport had become obsessed with these games of cues and balls.
the most popular form of pool eight ball was not invented until 1900 revealed some striking similarities.
all were basically eng lish in language and customs and protestant in religion while the widespread presence of other peoples and faiths compelled every colony to cede at least some degree of ethnic and religious toleration.
compared with contemporary europe they all afforded to enterprising individuals unusual opportunities for social mobility.
they all possessed some mea sure of selfgovernment though by no means complete democracy.
communication and transportation among the colo nies were improving.
british north america by 1775 looked like a patchwork quilt each part slightly different but stitched together by common origins common ways of life and common beliefs in toleration economic development and above all self rule.
fatefully all the colonies were also separated from the seat of imperial authority by a vast ocean moat some three thousand miles wide.
these simple facts of shared history culture and geography set the stage for the colonists struggle to unite as an independent people.
chronology college of william and mary founded princeton college founded yale college founded britain vetoes south carolina anti slave trade mea sures smallpox inoculation introduced first edition of franklins poor richards almanack paxton boys march on philadelphia brown college founded rutgers college founded jonathan edwards begins great awakening 1734 1768 regulator protests zenger free press trial in new york dartmouth college founded george whiteeld spreads great awakening varying viewpoints key terms people to know paxton boys 90 regulator movement 90 triangular trade 94 molasses act 96 arminianism 98 great awakening 98 old lights 100 new lights 100 poor richards almanack 102 zenger trial 103 royal colonies 104 proprietary colonies 104 michel guillaume jean de crvecoeur jacobus arminius jonathan edwards george whiteeld john trumbull john singleton copley phillis wheatley john peter zenger colonial america communities of conict or consensus.
t he earliest historians of colonial society portrayed close knit homogeneous and hierarchical communities.
richard bushmans from puritan to yankee 1967 challenged that traditional view when he described colonial new eng land as an expanding opening society.
in this view the colonists gradually lost the religious discipline and social structure of the founding generations as they poured out onto the frontier or sailed the seas in search of fortune and adventure.
rhys isaac viewed the great awakening in the south as similar evidence of the erosion of the social constraints and deference that once held colonial society together.
unbridled religious enthusiasm directed by itinerant preachers both north and south encouraged the sort of quest for personal autonomy that eventually led americans to demand national independence.
other scholars have focused on the negative aspects of this alleged breakdown in the traditional order particularly on the rise of new social inequalities.
social historians like kenneth lockridge have argued that the decline of cohesive communities population pressure on the land and continued dominance of church and parental authority gave rise to a landless class forced to till tenant plots in the countryside or nd work as manual laborers in the cities.
gary nash in the urban crucible 1979 likewise traced the rise of a competitive individualistic social order in colonial cities marking the end of the patronage and paternalism that had once bound communities together.
increasingly nash contended class antagonisms split communities.
the wealthy abandoned their traditional obligations toward the poor for more selsh capitalistic social relations that favored their class peers.
the consequent politicization of the laboring classes helped motivate their participation in the american revolution.
some scholars have disputed that declension undermined colonial communities.
christine heyrman in particular has argued in commerce and culture 1984 that the decline of traditional mores has been overstated religious beliefs and commercial activities coexisted throughout the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
similarly jack greene has suggested that the obsession with the decline of deference has obscured the fact that colonies outside of new england like virginia and maryland actually experienced a consolidation of religious and social authority throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries becoming more hierarchical and paternalistic.
like greene many historians have focused on sectional differences between the colonies and the peculiar nature of social equality and inequality in each.
much of the impetus for this inquiry stems from an issue that has long perplexed students of early america the simultaneous evolution of a rigid racial caste system alongside democratic political institutions.
decades ago when most historians came from yankee stock they resolved the apparent paradox by locating the seeds of democracy in new eng land.
the aggressive independence of the people best expressed by the boisterous town meetings spawned chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 though slight and sickly wolfe combined a mixture of dash with painstaking attention to detail.
the british attackers were making woeful progress when wolfe in a daring night move sent a detachment up a poorly guarded part of the rocky eminence protecting qubec.
this vanguard scaled the cliff pulling itself upward by the bushes and showing the way for the others.
in the morning the two armies faced each other on the plains of abraham on the outskirts of qubec the british under wolfe and the french under the marquis de montcalm.
both commanders fell fatally wounded but the french were defeated and the city surrendered.
the battle of qubec in 1759 ranks as one of the most signicant engagements in british and american history.
when montral fell in 1760 the french ag had uttered in canada for the last time.
by the peace settlement at paris 1763 french power was thrown completely off the continent of north america leaving behind a fertile french population that is to this day a strong minority in canada.
this bitter pill was sweet ened somewhat when the french were allowed to retain several small but valuable sugar islands in the west indies and two never to be fortied islets in the gulf of st lawrence for shing stations.
a nal blow came when the french to compensate their luckless spanish ally for its losses ceded to spain all transmississippi louisiana plus the outlet of new orleans.
spain for its part turned florida over to britain in return for cuba where havana had fallen to british arms see map 6 7.
great britain thus emerged as the dominant power in north america while taking its place as the leading naval power of the world.
restless colonists britains colonists baptized by re emerged with increased condence in their military strength.
they had borne the brunt of battle at rst they had fought bravely 180 20w 160w 140w 120w n 140w 120w 100w 40w 60w 80w 160w 100w 20w 40w 60w 80w n 180 hudson bay hudson bay n r n m pi r do o ra col.
r io oh atlantic ocean territorial claims n 20 new york philadelphia richmond territorial claims at l a n t i c ocean savannah san new orleans antonio g ul f of me x i co saintdomingue n 20 car i bbe an sea french mexico city br.
c a rib b e a n honduras sea spanish french russian io oh r british br.
honduras british st louis santa f e nd nd e gul f of mexi co spanish pac i f ic ocean r rio gra ra ri o g pacific ocean r n boston.
pi r ip iss iss c ol do ora qubec montral missouri r.
n ip iss is s m a missouri r.
columbi 500 1000 km.
map 6 7 north america before 1754 russian proclamation line of 1763 500 1000 km.
north america after 1763 after french losses interactive map impact of the global struggle alongside the crack british regulars and they had gained valuable experience ofcers and men alike.
in the closing days of the con ict some twenty thousand american recruits were under arms.
the french and indian war while bolstering colonial self esteem simultaneously shattered the myth of british invincibility.
on braddocks bloody eld the buckskin militia had seen the demoralized regulars huddling helplessly together or eeing their unseen enemy.
ominously friction had developed during the war between arrogant british ofcers and the raw colonial boors displaying the contempt of the professional soldier for amateurs the british refused to recognize any american militia commission above the rank of captain a demotion humiliating to colonel george washington.
they also showed the usual condescension of snobs from the civilized old country toward the scum who had confessed failure by eeing to the outhouses of civilization general wolfe referred to the colonial militia with exaggeration as in general the dirtiest most contemptible cowardly dogs that you can conceive energetic and hard working american settlers in contrast believed themselves to be the cutting edge of british civilization.
they felt that they deserved credit rather than contempt for risking their lives to secure a new world empire.
british ofcials were further distressed by the reluctance of the colonists to support the common cause wholeheartedly.
american shippers using fraudulent papers developed a golden trafc with the enemy ports of the spanish and french west indies.
this treason the reverend andrew burnaby an observant church of england clergyman who visited the colonies in the closing months of the seven years war scoffed at any possibility of unication 1760.
for re and water are not more heterogeneous than the different colonies in north america.
nothing can exceed the jealousy and emulation which they possess in regard to each other.
were they left to themselves there would soon be a civil war from one end of the continent to the other while the indians and negros would.
impatiently watch the opportunity of exterminating them all together.
able trade in foodstuffs actually kept some of the hostile islands from starving at the very time when the british navy was trying to subdue them.
in the nal year of the war the british authorities forced to resort to drastic mea sures forbade the export of all supplies from new eng land and the middle colonies.
other colonists self centered and alienated by distance from the war refused to provide troops and money for the con ict.
they demanded the rights and privileges of eng lishmen without the duties and responsibilities of eng lishmen.
not until pitt had offered to reimburse the colonies for a substantial part of their expenditures some 900 000 did they move with some enthusiasm.
if the americans had to be bribed to defend themselves against a relentless and savage foe would they ever unite to strike the mother country.
the curse of intercolonial disunity present from early days had continued throughout the recent hostilities.
it had been caused mainly by enormous distances by geographical barriers like rivers by con icting religions from catholic to quaker by varied nationalities from german to irish by differing types of colonial governments by many boundary disputes and by the resentment of the crude backcountry settlers against the aristocratic bigwigs.
yet unity received some encouragement during the french and indian war.
when soldiers and statesmen from widely separated colonies met around common camp res and council tables they were often agreeably surprised by what they found.
despite deep seated jealousy and suspicion they discovered that they were all fellow americans who generally spoke the same language and shared common ideals.
barriers of disunity began to melt although a long and rugged road lay ahead before a coherent nation would emerge.
wars fateful aftermath the removal of the french menace in canada profoundly affected american attitudes.
while the french hawk had been hovering in the north and west the colonial chicks had been forced to cling close to the wings of their british mother hen.
now that the hawk was killed they could range far aeld with a new spirit of independence.
the french humiliated by the british and saddened by the fate of canada consoled themselves with one wishful thought.
perhaps the loss of their american empire would one day result in britains loss of its american empire.
in a sense the history of the united chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 washington crossing the delaware by emanuel gottlieb leutze 1851 on christmas day 1776 george washington set out from pennsylvania with twenty four hundred men to surprise the british forces chiey hessians in their quarters across the river in new jersey.
the subsequent british defeat proved to be a turning point in the revolution as it checked the british advance toward philadelphia and restored american morale.
seventy ve years later leutze a german american immigrant who had returned to germany mythologized the heroic campaign in this painting.
imbued with the liberal democratic principles of the american revolution leutze intended his painting to inspire europeans in their revolutions of 1848 to that end he ignored the fact that the stars and stripes held by lieutenant james monroe was not adopted until 1777 that washington could not possibly have stood so long on one leg that the colonists crossed the delaware at night not during the day and that no african american would have been present.
what leutze did capture was the importance of ordinary men in the revolutionary struggle and the tremendous urgency they felt at this particular moment in 1776 when victory seemed so elusive.
washington who was now almost counted out stealthily recrossed the ice clogged delaware river.
at trenton on december 26 1776 he surprised and captured a thousand hessians who were sleeping off the effects of their christmas celebration.
a week later leaving his camp res burning as a ruse he slipped away and inicted a sharp defeat on a smaller british detachment at princeton.
this brilliant new jersey campaign crowned by these two lifesaving victories revealed old fox washington at his military best.
burgoynes blundering invasion london ofcials adopted an intricate scheme for capturing the vital hudson river valley in 1777 if successful the british would sever new eng land from the rest of the states and paralyze the american cause.
the main invading force under an actor playwright soldier general john gentleman johnny burgoyne would bagging burgoyne in this sermon published in the pennsylvania gazette on april 18 1778 a minister decried the brutality of the british army the waste and ravage produced by this unhappy war are every where felt.
whereever our foes pervade ruin and devastation follow after them or rather they march in their front and on their right and on their left and in their rear they rage without controul.
no house is sacred no person secure.
age or sex from blooming youth to decrepit age they regard or spare not.
and in the eld how many of our countrymen and friends have fallen.
push down the lake champlain route from canada.
general howes troops in new york if needed could advance up the hudson river to meet burgoyne near albany.
a third and much smaller british force commanded by colonel barry st leger would come in from the west by way of lake ontario and the mohawk valley.
british planners did not reckon with general benedict arnold.
after his repulse at qubec in 1775 he had retreated slowly along the st lawrence river back to the lake champlain area by heroic efforts keeping an army in the eld.
the british had pursued his tattered force to lake champlain in 1776 but they could not move farther south until they had won control of the lake which in the absence of roads was indispensable for carrying their supplies.
while the british stopped to construct a sizable eet the tireless arnold assembled and tted out every oatable vessel.
his tiny otilla was nally destroyed after desperate ghting but time if not the battle had been won.
winter was descending and the british were forced to retire to canada.
general burgoyne had to start anew from this base the following year.
if arnold had not contributed his daring and skill the british invaders of 1776 almost certainly would have recaptured fort ticonderoga.
if burgoyne had started from this springboard in 1777 instead of from montral he almost certainly would have succeeded in his venture.
at last the apparently futile american invasion of canada in 1775 was beginning to pay rich dividends.
revolutionary standard of the light horse of the city of philadelphia by john folwell and james claypoole 1775 silk ags like this were used to identify military units.
in an exercise known as trooping the colors such ags were regularly paraded before the troops so that soldiers could recognize their own units in the confusion of battle.
general burgoyne began his fateful invasion with seven thousand regular troops.
he was encumbered by a heavy baggage train and a considerable number of women many of whom were wives of his ofcers.
progress was painfully slow for sweaty axmen had to chop a path through the forest while american militiamen began to gather like hornets on burgoynes anks.
general howe meanwhile was causing astonished eyebrows to rise.
at a time when it seemed obvious that he should be starting up the hudson river from new york to join his slowly advancing colleague he deliberately embarked with the main british army for an attack on philadelphia the rebel capital.
as scholars now know he wanted to force a general engagement with washingtons army destroy it and leave the path wideopen for burgoynes thrust.
howe apparently assumed that he had ample time to assist burgoyne directly should he be needed.
general washington keeping a wary eye on the british in new york hastily transferred his army to the vicinity of philadelphia.
there late in 1777 he was defeated in two pitched battles at brandywine creek and chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 table 8 1 britain against the world britain and allies enemy or unfriendly powers great britain some loyalists and indians 30 000 hired hessians total population on britains side ca.
8 million belligerents total population ca.
39 5 million united states 1775 1783 france 1778 1783 spain 1779 1783 holland 1779 1783 ireland restive members of the armed neutrality with dates of joining russia 1780 denmark norway 1780 sweden 1780 holy roman empire 1781 prussia 1782 portugal 1782 two sicilies 1783 after peace signed independence until the con ict erupted into a multipower world war that was too big for britain to handle.
from 1778 to 1783 france provided the rebels with guns money immense amounts of equipment about one half of americas regular armed forces and practically all of the new nations naval strength.
frances entrance into the con ict forced the british to change their basic strategy in america.
hitherto they could count on blockading the colonial coast and commanding the seas.
now the french had powerful eets in american waters chiey to protect their own valuable west indies islands but in a position to jeopardize britains blockade and lines of supply.
the british therefore decided to evacuate philadelphia and concentrate their strength in new york city.
in june 1778 the withdrawing redcoats were attacked by general washington at monmouth new jersey on a blisteringly hot day.
scores of men collapsed or died from sunstroke.
but the battle was indecisive and the british escaped to new york although about one third of their hessians deserted.
henceforth except for the yorktown interlude of 1781 washington remained in the new york area hemming in the british.
blow and counterblow in the summer of 1780 a powerful french army of six thousand regular troops commanded by the comte de rochambeau arrived in newport rhode island.
the americans were somewhat suspicious of their former enemies in fact several ugly are ups involving minor bloodshed had already occurred between the new allies.
but french gold and goodwill melted hard hearts.
dancing parties were arranged with the prim puritan maidens one french ofcer related doubtless with exaggeration the simple innocence of the garden of eden prevailed no real military advantage came immediately from this french reinforcement although preparations were made for a franco american attack on new york.
improving american morale was staggered later in 1780 when general benedict arnold turned traitor.
a leader of undoubted dash and brilliance he was ambitious greedy unscrupulous and suffering from a wellgrounded but petulant feeling that his valuable ser vices were not fully appreciated.
he plotted with the british to sell out the key stronghold of west point which commanded the hudson river for 6 300 and an ofcers commission.
by the sheerest accident the plot was detected in the nick of time and arnold ed to the british.
whom can we trust now cried general washington in anguish.
the british meanwhile had devised a plan to roll up the colonies beginning with the south where the loyalists were numerous see map 8 2.
the colony of georgia was ruthlessly overrun in 1778 1779 charleston south carolina fell in 1780 the surrender of the city to the british involved the capture of ve thousand men and four hundred cannon and was a heavier loss war on the frontier g 1 new york new york washing american movements british movements american victory b 40n philadelphia new jersey delaware virginia british victory charlottesville la fa elk hill richmond petersburg norfolk portsmouth e een hillsboro cornwallis salisbury may salem tte charlotte yorktown aug 30 oct.
19 1781 surrender of cornwallis north carolina 35n lis 1 cheraw elizabethtown al fort charlotte co rn orangeburg wilmington nw r south wa carolina llis cl georgetown in to n an d co charleston may 12 1780 georgia savannah oct 9 1779 battle of the capes sept 5 1781 gr kings mountain oct 7 1780 ye atlantic ocean fort moultrie beaufort 100 km.
fort sunbury 80w 100 mi.
de grasse fr.
from wes t indies 1 fort cowpens jan 17 1781 r am t on maryland h oc an d ea u au pennsylvania n 75w map 8 2 war in the south 1780 1781 interactive map to the americans in relation to existing strength than that of burgoyne was to the british.
warfare now intensied in the carolinas where patriots bitterly fought their loyalist neighbors.
it was not uncommon for prisoners on both sides to be butch ered in cold blood after they had thrown down their arms.
the tide turned later in 1780 and early in 1781 when american riemen wiped out a british detachment at kings mountain and then defeated a smaller force at cowpens.
in the carolina campaign of 1781 chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 the revolution enhanced the expectations and power of women as wives and mothers.
as one matrimonial republican wrote in 1792 i object to the word obey in the marriageservice because it is a general word without limitations or denition.
the obedience between man and wife i conceive is or ought to be mutual.
marriage ought never to be considered a contract between a superior and an inferior but a reciprocal union of interest an implied partnership of interests where all differences are accommodated by conference and where the decision admits of no retrospect.
revolutionary era were still doing traditional womens work.
yet women did not go untouched by revolutionary ideals.
central to republican ideology was the concept of civic virtue the notion that democracy depended on the unselsh commitment of each citizen to the public good.
and who could better cultivate the habits of a virtuous citizenry than mothers to whom society entrusted the moral education of the young.
indeed the seless devotion of a mother to her family was often cited as the very model of proper republican behavior.
the idea of republican motherhood thus took root elevating women to a newly prestigious role as the special keepers of the nations conscience.
educational opportunities for women expanded in the expectation that educated wives and mothers could better cultivate the virtues demanded by the republic in their husbands daughters and sons.
republican women now bore crucial responsibility for the survival of the nation.
constitution making in the states the continental congress in 1776 called upon the colonies to draft new constitutions.
in effect the continental congress was actually asking the colonies to summon themselves into being as new states.
the sovereignty of these new states according to the theory of republicanism would rest on the authority of the people.
for a time the manufacture of governments was even more pressing than the manufacture of gunpowder.
although the states of connecticut and rhode island merely retouched their colonial charters constitution writers elsewhere worked tirelessly to capture on black inked parchment the republican spirit of the age.
massachusetts contributed one especially noteworthy innovation when it called a special convention to draft its constitution and then submitted the nal draft directly to the people for ratication.
once adopted in 1780 the massachusetts constitution could be changed only by another specially called constitutional convention.
this procedure was later imitated in the drafting and ratication of the federal constitution.
adopted almost a decade before the federal constitution the massachusetts constitution remains the longest lived constitution in the world.
the newly penned state constitutions had many features in common.
their similarity as it turned out made easier the drafting of a workable federal charter when the time was ripe.
in the british tradition a constitution was not a written document but rather an accumulation of laws customs and precedents.
americans invented something different.
the documents they drafted were contracts that de ned the powers of government as did the old colonial charters but they drew their authority from the people not from the royal seal of a distant king.
as written documents the state constitutions were intended to represent a fundamental law superior to the transient whims of ordinary legislation.
most of these documents included bills of rights specically guaranteeing long prized liberties against later legislative encroachment.
most of them required the annual election of legislators who were thus forced to stay in touch with the mood of the people.
all of them deliberately created weak executive and judicial branches at least by present day standards.
a generation of quarreling with his majestys ofcials had implanted a deep distrust of despotic governors and arbitrary judges.
in all the new state governments the legislatures as presumably the most democratic branch of government were given sweeping powers.
but as thomas jefferson warned 173 despots in a legislature would surely be as oppressive as one many americans soon came to agree with him.
the democratic character of the new state legislatures was vividly reected by the presence of many members from the recently enfranchised poorer west copley family portrait ca.
1776 1777 portrait painting like this one by john singleton copley 1738 1815 documents physical likenesses clothing styles and other material possessions typical of an era.
but it can do more than that.
in the execution of the painting itself the preeminent portrait painter of colonial america revealed important values of his time.
copleys composition and use of light emphasized the importance of the mother in the family.
mrs copley is the visual center of the painting the light falls predominantly on her a ern districts.
their inuence was powerfully felt in their several successful movements to relocate state capitals from the haughty eastern seaports into the less pretentious interior.
in the revolutionary era the capitals of new hampshire new york virginia north carolina south carolina and georgia were all moved westward.
these geographical shifts portended political shifts that deeply discomted many more conser vative americans.
and she provides the focus of activity for the family group.
although copley had moved to eng land in 1774 to avoid the disruptions of war he had made radical friends in his hometown of boston and surely had imbibed the sentiment of the age about republican motherhood a sentiment that revered women as homemakers and mothers the cultivators of good republican values in young citizens.
what other prevailing attitudes about gender and age for example might this painting reveal.
economic crosscurrents economic changes begotten by the war were likewise noteworthy but not overwhelming.
states seized control of former crown lands and although rich speculators had their day many of the large loyalist holdings were conscated and eventually cut up into small farms.
roger morriss huge estate in new york for chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 richard henry lee 1732 1794 a prominent antifederalist attacked the proposed constitution in 1788 tis really astonishing that the same people who have just emerged from a long and cruel war in defense of liberty should now agree to x an elective despotism upon themselves and their posterity.
the same year prominent patriot patrick henry 1736 1799 agreed that the proposed constitution endangered everything the revolution had sought to protect this constitution is said to have beautiful features but when i come to examine these features sir they appear to me horridly frightful among other deformities it has an awful squinting it squints towards monarchy and does not this raise indignation in the breast of every american.
your president may easily become king your senate is so imperfectly constructed that your dearest rights may be sacriced by what may be a small minority.
where are your checks in this government.
debts and at full value.
large numbers of antifederalists saw in the constitution a plot by the upper crust to steal power back from the common folk.
silver buckled federalists had power and inuence on their side.
they enjoyed the support of such commanding gures as george washington and benjamin franklin.
most of them lived in the settled areas along the seaboard not in the raw backcountry.
overall they were wealthier than the antifederalists more educated and better orga nized.
they also controlled the press.
more than a hundred newspapers were published in america in the 1780s only a dozen supported the antifederalist cause.
antifederalists voiced vehement objections to the gilded trap known as the constitution.
they cried with much truth that it had been drawn up by the aristocratic elements and hence was antidemocratic.
they likewise charged that the sovereignty of the states was being submerged and that the freedoms of the indi vidual were jeopardized by the absence of a bill of rights.
they decried the dropping of annual elections for congressional representatives the erecting of a federal stronghold ten miles square later the district of columbia the creation of a standing army the omission of any reference to god and the highly questionable procedure of ratifying with only two thirds of the states.
a philadelphia newspaper added that benjamin franklin was a fool from age and george washington a fool from nature the great debate in the states special elections some apathetic but others hotly contested were held in the various states for members of the ratifying conventions see table 9 3.
the candidates federalist or antifederalist were elected on the basis of their pledges for or against the constitution.
with the ink barely dry on the parchment four small states quickly accepted the constitution for they had come off much better than they expected.
pennsylvania number two on the list of ratiers was the rst large state to act but not until high handed irregularities had been employed by the federalist legislature in calling a convention.
these included the forcible seating of two antifederalist members their clothes torn and their faces red with rage in order to complete a quorum.
massachusetts the second most populous state provided an acid test.
if the constitution had failed in massachusetts the entire movement might easily have bogged down.
the boston ratifying convention at rst contained an antifederalist majority.
it included grudging shaysites and the aging samuel adams as suspicious of government power in 1787 as he had been in 1776 the assembly buzzed with dismaying talk of summoning another constitutional convention as though the nation had not already shot its bolt.
clearly the choice was not between this constitution and a better one but between this constitution and the creaking articles of confederation.
the absence of a bill of rights alarmed the antifederalists.
but the federalists gave them solemn assurances that the rst congress would add such a safeguard by amendment and ratication was then secured in massachusetts by the rather narrow margin of 187 to 168 three more states fell into line.
the last of these was new hampshire whose convention at rst had contained a strong antifederalist majority.
the federal ratifying the constitution table 9 3 ratication of the constitution state date vote in convention rank in population population 1.
6 dec 7 1787 dec 12 1787 dec 18 1787 jan 2 1788 jan 9 1788 feb 7 1788 unanimous 46 to 23 unanimous unanimous 128 to 40 187 to 168 59 096 433 611 184 139 82 548 237 655 475 199 apr.
28 1788 may 23 1788 june 21 1788 june 26 1788 july 26 1788 nov 21 1789 may 29 1790 63 to 11 149 to 73 57 to 46 89 to 79 30 to 27 195 to 77 34 to 32 319 728 249 073 141 899 747 610 340 241 395 005 69 112 7.
13 delaware pennsylvania new jersey georgia connecticut massachusetts incl.
maine maryland south carolina new hampshire virginia new york north carolina rhode island ists cleverly arranged a prompt adjournment and then won over enough waverers to secure ratication.
nine states all but virginia new york north carolina and rhode island had now taken shelter under the new federal roof and the document was ofcially adopted on june 21 1788 francis hopkinson exulted in his song the new roof huzza.
my brave boys our work is complete the world shall admire columbias fair seat.
but such rejoicing was premature so long as the four dissenters conspicuously new york and virginia dug in their heels.
the four laggard states proud virginia the biggest and most populous state provided erce antifederalist opposition.
there the college bred federalist orators for once encountered worthy antagonists including the ery patrick henry.
he professed to see in the fearsome document the death warrant of liberty.
george washington james madison and john marshall on the federalist side lent inuential support.
with new hampshire about to ratify the new union was going to be formed anyhow and virginia could not very well continue comfortably as an independent state.
after exciting debate in the state convention ratication carried 89 to 79 new york also experienced an uphill struggle burdened as it was with its own heavily antifederalist state convention.
alexander hamilton at heart favored a much stronger central government than that under debate but he contributed his sparkling personality and persuasive eloquence to whipping up support for federalism as framed.
he also joined john jay and james madison in penning a masterly series of articles for the new york newspapers.
though designed as propaganda these essays remain the most penetrating commentary ever written on the constitution and are still widely sold in book form as the federalist.
probably the most famous of these is madisons federalist no.
10 which brilliantly refuted the conventional wisdom of the day that it was impossible to extend a republican form of government over a large territory.
new york nally yielded.
realizing that the state could not prosper apart from the union the convention ratied the document by the close count of 30 to 27 at the same time it approved thirty two proposed amendments and vain hope issued a call for yet another convention to modify the constitution.
last ditch dissent developed in only two states.
a hostile convention met in north carolina then adjourned without taking a vote.
rhode island did not even summon a ratifying convention rejecting the constitution by popular referendum.
the two most ruggedly individualist centers of the colonial era homes of the otherwise minded thus ran true to chapter 12 the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 far carried away as to announce that an era of good feelings had been ushered in.
this happy phrase has been commonly used since then to describe the administrations of monroe.
the era of good feelings unfortunately was something of a misnomer.
considerable tranquility and prosperity did in fact smile upon the early years of monroe but the period was a troubled one.
the acute issues of the tariff the bank internal improvements and the sale of public lands were being hotly contested.
sectionalism was crystallizing and the con ict over slavery was beginning to raise its hideous head.
the panic of 1819 and the curse of hard times much of the goodness went out of the good feelings in 1819 when a paralyzing economic panic descended.
it brought deation depression bankruptcies bank failures unemployment soup kitchens and overcrowded pesthouses known as debtors prisons.
this was the rst national nancial panic since president washington took ofce.
many factors contributed to the catastrophe of 1819 but looming large was overspeculation in frontier lands.
the bank of the united states through its western branches had become deeply involved in this popular type of outdoor gambling.
financial paralysis from the panic which lasted in some degree for several years gave a rude setback to the nationalistic ardor.
the west was especially hard hit.
when the pinch came the bank of the united states forced the speculative wildcat western banks to the wall and foreclosed mortgages on countless farms.
all this was technically legal but politically unwise.
in the eyes of the western debtor the nationalist bank of the united states soon became a kind of nancial devil.
the panic of 1819 also created backwashes in the political and social world.
the poorer classes the onesuspender men and their families were severely strapped and in their troubles was sown the seed of jacksonian democracy.
hard times also directed attention to the inhumanity of imprisoning debtors.
in extreme cases often overplayed mothers were torn from their infants for owing a few dollars.
mounting agitation against imprisonment for debt bore fruit in remedial legislation in an increasing number of states.
growing pains of the west the onward march of the west continued nine frontier states had joined the original thirteen between 1791 and 1819 with an eye to preserving the north south sectional balance most of these commonwealths had been admitted alternately free or slave.
see admission of states in the appendix.
why this explosive expansion.
in part it was simply a continuation of the generations old westward movement which had been going on since early colonial days.
in addition the siren song of cheap land the fairview inn or three mile house on old frederick road by thomas coke ruckle ca.
1829 this busy scene on the frederick road leading westward from baltimore was typical as pioneers ooded into the newly secured west in the early 1800s.
economic strains ohio fever had a special appeal to european immigrants.
eager newcomers from abroad were beginning to stream down the gangplanks in impressive numbers especially after the war of boycotts and bullets.
land exhaustion in the older tobacco states where the soil was mined rather than cultivated likewise drove people westward.
glib speculators accepted small down payments making it easier to buy new holdings.
the western boom was stimulated by additional developments.
acute economic distress during the embargo years turned many pinched faces toward the setting sun.
the crushing of the indians in the northwest and south by generals harrison and jackson pacied the frontier and opened up vast virgin tracts of land.
the building of highways improved the land routes to the ohio valley.
noteworthy was the cumberland road begun in 1811 which ran ultimately from western maryland to illinois.
the use of the rst steamboat on western waters also in 1811 heralded a new era of upstream navigation.
but the west despite the inow of settlers was still weak in population and inuence.
not potent enough politically to make its voice heard it was forced to ally itself with other sections.
thus strengthened it demanded cheap acreage and partially achieved its goal in the land act of 1820 which authorized a buyer to purchase eighty virgin acres at a minimum of 1 25 an acre in cash.
the west also demanded cheap transportation and slowly got it despite the constitutional qualms of the presidents and the hostility of easterners.
finally the west demanded cheap money issued by its own wildcat banks and fought the powerful bank of the united states to attain its goal see makers of america settlers of the old northwest pp.
slavery and the sectional balance sectional tensions involving rivalry between the slave south and the free north over control of the beckoning west were stunningly revealed in 1819 in that year the territory of missouri knocked on the doors of congress for admission as a slave state.
this fertile and wellwatered area contained sufcient population to warrant statehood.
but the house of representatives stymied the plans of the missourians by passing the incendiary tallmadge amendment.
it stipulated that no more slaves should be brought into missouri and also provided for the gradual emancipation of children born to slave parents already there.
a roar of anger burst antislavery propaganda in the 1820s these drawstring bags are made of silk and transferprinted with before and after scenes of slavery.
on the left bag an african woman cradles her baby on the right one the grieving mother is childless and in chains while slaves are being whipped in the background.
these bags were purchased at an abolitionist fair held to raise money for the antislavery movement.
purses and the like sold well at these events because women were prominent in the movement.
from slaveholding southerners.
they were joined by many depression cursed pioneers who favored unhampered expansion of the west and by many northerners especially diehard federalists who were eager to use the issue to break the back of the virginia dynasty southerners saw in the tallmadge amendment which they eventually managed to defeat in the senate an ominous threat to sectional balance.
when the constitution was adopted in 1788 the north and south were running neck and neck in wealth and population.
but with every passing decade the north was becoming wealthier and also more thickly settled an advantage reected in an increasing northern majority in the house of representatives.
yet in the senate each state had two votes regardless of size.
with eleven states free and eleven slave the southerners had maintained equality.
they were therefore in a good position to thwart any northern effort to interfere with the expansion of slavery and they did not want to lose this veto.
the future of the slave system caused southerners profound concern.
missouri was the rst state entirely west of the mississippi river to be carved out of the louisiana purchase and the missouri emancipation amendment might set a damaging precedent for all the makers of america settlers of the old the great africannorthwest american migration t he old northwest beckoned to settlers after the war of 1812 the withdrawal of the british protector weakened the indians grip on the territory.
then the transportation boom of the 1820s steamboats on the ohio the national highway stretching from pennsylvania the erie canal opened broad arteries along which the westward movement owed.
the rst wave of newcomers came mainly from kentucky tennessee and the upland regions of virginia and the carolinas.
most migrants were roughhewn white farmers who had been pushed from good land to bad by an expanding plantation economy.
like joseph cress of north carolina they were relieved to relinquish them old red lds where you get nothing in return for acres of new soil that is as black and rich you wold want it some settlers acquired land for the rst time.
john palmer whose family left kentucky for illinois in 1831 recalled his father telling him of land so cheap that we could all be landholders where men were all equal migrants from the south settled mainly in the southern portions of ohio indiana and illinois.
newcom tavern dayton ohio built in 1796 newcom tavern was a typical way station for the pioneers owing into the newly secured old northwest in the early 1800s.
today it is daytons oldest building.
as palmer testied the old northwest offered southern farmers an escape from the lowly social position they had endured as nonslaveholders in a slave society.
not that they objected to slavery or sympathized with blacks.
far from it by enacting black codes in their new territories they tried to prevent blacks from following them to paradise.
they wanted their own democratic community free of rich planters and african americans alike.
if southern butternuts as these settlers were called dominated settlement in the 1820s the next decade brought yankees from the northeast.
they were as land starved as their southern counterparts.
a growing population had gobbled up most of the good land east of the appalachians.
yankee settlers came to the old northwest especially to the northern parts of ohio indiana and illinois eager to make the region a protable breadbasket for the atlantic seaboard.
unlike the butternuts who wanted to quit forever the imposing framework of southern society northerners hoped to re create the world they had left behind.
building the erie canal a major engineering feat the erie canal created an articial waterway through upstate new york from the hudson river to the great lakes allowing people and goods to move to and from the old northwest more quickly and cheaply.
conict soon emerged between yankees and southerners.
as self sufcient farmers with little interest in producing for the market the southerners viewed the northern newcomers as inhospitable greedy and excessively ambitious.
yankee became a term of reproach a person who was cheated was said to have been yankeed northerners in turn viewed the southerners as uncivilized a coon dog and butcher knife tribe with no interest in education self improvement or agricultural innovation.
yankees eager to tame both the land and its people wanted to establish public schools and build roads canals and railroads and they advocated taxes to fund such progress.
southerners opposed all these reforms especially public schooling which they regarded as an attempt to northernize their children.
religion divided settlers as well.
northerners typically congregationalists and presbyterians wanted their ministers to be educated in seminaries.
southerners embraced the more revivalist baptist and methodist denominations.
they preferred poor humble preacher farmers to professionally trained preachers whom they viewed as too distant from the lord and the people.
as the baptist preacher alexander campbell put it the scheme of a learned priesthood.
has long since proved itself to be a grand device to keep men in ignorance and bondage not everyone of course tted neatly into these molds.
abraham lincoln with roots in kentucky came to adopt views more akin to those of the yankees than the southerners whereas his new eng land born archrival stephen douglas carefully cultivated the butternut vote for the illinois democratic party.
as the population swelled and the region acquired its own character the stark contrasts between northerners and southerners started to fade.
by the 1850s northerners dominated numerically and they succeeded in establishing public schools and fashioning internal improvements.
railroads and great lakes shipping tied the region ever more tightly to the northeast.
yankees and southerners sometimes allied as new kinds of cleavages emerged between rich and poor between city dwellers and farmers and once irish and german immigrants started pouring into the region between native protestants and newcomer catholics.
still echoes of the clash between yankees and butternuts persisted.
during the civil war the southern counties of ohio indiana and illinois where southerners had rst settled harbored sympathizers with the south and served as a key area for confederate military in ltration into the north.
decades later these same counties became a stronghold of the ku klux klan.
the old northwest may have become rmly anchored economically to the northeast but vestiges of its early dual personality persisted.
90w 70w or nc re ter l o r n h mass.
new york e pa washington d c r i conn n j del.
n kentucky an n carolina s an mex i c o vt virginia missouri as eri io ntar ohio ind.
ill ark e oc ic pacif l co o ad k l missouri compromise line 3630 r la ron an admitted as slave state 1821 adams ons treaty line 1819 e r hig hu ip maine e lel mic ss r pa r a l ssi pi 42nd mi unorganized territory su per ior r oce an.
ri r oregon country ke aw ou la l ss st mi 60w admitted as free state 1820 lake of the woods an disputed territory occupied jointly by great britain and united states 40n 80w ic 100w british north america canada nt 110w la 120w at 50n la k e m i c h i g 130w tennessee arkansas territory s carolina red r miss.
30n ala georgia r io la.
gr an florida territory de closed to slavery by missouri compromise open to slavery by missouri compromise free states and territories slave states and territories gu l f of m e x i c o ceded by spain 1819 400 km.
map 12 3 the missouri compromise and slavery 1820 1821 note the 36 30 line.
in the 1780s thomas jefferson had written of slavery in america indeed i tremble for my country when i reect that god is just that his justice cannot sleep forever that.
the almighty has no attribute which can take side with us in such a contest now at the time of the missouri compromise jefferson feared that his worst forebodings were coming to pass.
i considered it at once he said of the missouri question as the knell of the union rest of the area.
even more disquieting was another possibility.
if congress could abolish the peculiar institution in missouri might it not attempt to do likewise in the older states of the south.
the wounds of the constitutional convention of 1787 were once more ripped open.
burning moral questions also protruded even though the main issue was political and economic balance.
a small but growing group of antislavery agitators in the north seized the occasion to raise an outcry against the evils of slavery.
they were determined that the plague of human bondage should not spread further into the untainted territories.
the uneasy missouri compromise deadlock in washington was at length broken in 1820 by the time honored american solution of compromise actually a bundle of three compromises.
courtly interactive map henry clay of kentucky gifted conciliator played a leading role.
congress despite abolitionist pleas agreed to admit missouri as a slave state.
but at the same time free soil maine which until then had been a part of massachusetts was admitted as a separate state.
the balance between north and south was thus kept at twelve states each and remained there for fteen years.
although missouri was permitted to retain slaves all future bondage was prohibited in the remainder of the louisiana purchase north of the line of 36 30 the southern boundary of missouri see map 12 3.
this horse trading adjustment was politically evenhanded though denounced by extremists on each side as a dirty bargain both north and south yielded something both gained something.
the south won the prize of missouri as an unrestricted slave state.
the north won the concession that congress could forbid slavery in the remaining territories.
more gratifying to many northerners was the fact that the immense area north of 36 30 except missouri was forever closed to the blight of slavery.
yet the restriction on future the missouri compromise while the debate over missouri was raging thomas jefferson 1743 1826 wrote to a correspondent the missouri question.
is the most portentous one which ever yet threatened our union.
in the gloomiest moment of the revolutionary war i never had any apprehensions equal to what i feel from this source.
the question like a rebell in the night awakened and lled me with terror.
with slavery we have a wolf by the ears and we can neither hold him nor safely let him go.
john quincy adams 1767 1848 conded to his diary i take it for granted that the present question is a mere preamble a title page to a great tragic volume.
slavery in the territories was not unduly offensive to the slaveowners partly because the northern prairie land did not seem suited to slave labor.
even so a majority of southern congressmen still voted against the compromise.
neither north nor south was acutely displeased although neither was completely happy.
the missouri compromise lasted thirty four years a vital formative period in the life of the young republic and during that time it preserved the shaky compact of the states.
yet the embittered dispute over slavery heralded the future breakup of the union.
ever after the morality of the souths peculiar institution was an issue that could not be swept under the rug.
the missouri compromise only ducked the question it did not resolve it.
sooner or later thomas jefferson predicted it will burst on us as a tornado the missouri compromise and the concurrent panic of 1819 should have dimmed the political star of president monroe.
certainly both unhappy events had a dampening effect on the era of good feelings.
but smooth spoken james monroe was so popular and the federalist opposition so weak that in the presidential election of 1820 he received every electoral vote except one.
unanimity was an honor reserved for george washington.
monroe as it turned out was the only president in american history to be reelected after a term in which a major nancial panic began.
john marshall and judicial nationalism the upsurging nationalism of the post ghent years despite the ominous setbacks concerning slavery was further reected and reinforced by the supreme court.
the high tribunal continued to be dominated by the tall thin and aggressive chief justice john marshall.
one group of his decisions perhaps the most famous bolstered the power of the federal government at the expense of the states.
a notable case in this category was mcculloch v maryland 1819.
the suit involved an attempt by the state of maryland to destroy a branch of the bank of the united states by imposing a tax on its notes.
john marshall speaking for the court declared the bank constitutional by invoking the hamiltonian doctrine of implied powers see p 204.
at the same time he strengthened federal authority and slapped at state infringements when he denied the right of maryland to tax the bank.
with ringing emphasis he af rmed that the power to tax involves the power to destroy and that a power to create implies a power to preserve marshalls ruling in this case gave the doctrine of loose construction its most famous formulation.
the constitution he said derived from the consent of the people and thus permitted the government to act for their benet.
he further argued that the constitution was intended to endure for ages to come and consequently to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs finally he declared let the end be legitimate let it be within the scope of the constitution and all means which are appropriate which are plainly adapted to that end which are not prohibited but consist with the letter and spirit of the constitution are constitutional two years later 1821 the case of cohens v virginia gave marshall one of his greatest opportunities to defend the federal power.
the cohen brothers found guilty by the virginia courts of illegally selling lottery tickets appealed to the highest tribunal.
virginia won in the sense that the conviction of the cohens was upheld.
but in fact virginia and all the individual states lost because marshall resoundingly asserted the right of the supreme court to review the decisions of the state supreme courts in all questions involving powers of the federal government.
the states rights proponents were aghast.
hardly less signicant was the celebrated steamboat case gibbons v ogden 1824.
the suit grew out of an attempt by the state of new york to grant to a chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 in the full enjoyment of the gifts of heaven and the fruits of superior industry economy and virtue every man is equally entitled to protection by law but when the laws undertake to add to those natural and just advantages articial distinctions.
and exclusive privileges.
the humble members of society the farmers mechanics and laborers.
have a right to complain of the injustice of their government.
t he so called era of good feelings was never entirely tranquil but even the illusion of national consensus was shattered by the panic of 1819 and the missouri compromise of 1820 economic distress and the slavery issue raised the political stakes in the 1820s and 1830s.
vigorous political con ict once feared came to be celebrated as necessary for the health of democracy.
new political parties emerged.
new styles of campaigning took hold.
a new chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 the trail of tears in the fall and winter of 1838 1839 the u s army forcibly removed about fteen thousand cherokees some of them in manacles from their ancestral homelands in the southeastern united states and marched them to indian territory present day oklahoma.
freezing weather and inadequate food supplies led to unspeakable suffering.
the escorting troops refused to slow the forced march so that the ill could recover and some four thousand cherokees died on the 116 day journey.
written constitution that provided for executive legislative and judicial branches of government.
some cherokees became prosperous cotton planters and even turned to slaveholding.
nearly thirteen hundred black slaves toiled for their native american masters in the cherokee nation in the 1820s.
for these efforts the cherokees along with the creeks choctaws chickasaws and seminoles were numbered by whites among the five civilized tribes all this embrace of civilization apparently was not good enough for whites.
in 1828 the georgia legislature declared the cherokee tribal council illegal and asserted its own jurisdiction over indian affairs and indian lands.
the cherokees appealed this move to the supreme court which thrice upheld the rights of the indians.
but president jackson who clearly wanted to open indian lands to white settlement refused to recognize the courts decisions.
in a cal lous jibe at the indians defender jackson allegedly snapped one hundred sixty years later in 1992 the state government of georgia formally pardoned the two white missionaries samuel austin worcester and elihu butler who gured prominently in the decision jackson condemned.
they had been convicted of living on cherokee lands without a license from the state government of georgia.
they had served sixteen months at hard labor on a chain gang and later had accompanied the cherokees on the trail of tears to oklahoma.
john marshall has made his decision now let him enforce it feeling some obligation to rescue this much injured race jackson proposed a bodily removal of the remaining eastern tribes chiey cherokees creeks choctaws chickasaws and seminoles beyond the mississippi.
emigration was supposed to be voluntary because it would be cruel and unjust to compel the aborigines to abandon the graves of their fathers jackson evidently consoled himself with the belief that one survivor of the indians forced march in 1838 1839 on the trail of tears to indian territory farther west remembered one each day and all are gone.
looks like maybe all dead before we get to new indian country but always we keep marching on.
women cry and make sad wails.
children cry and many men cry and all look sad when friends die but they say nothing and just put heads down and keep on toward west.
she his mother speak no more we bury her and go on.
removal of the indians the indians could preserve their native cultures in the wide open west.
jacksons policy led to the forced uprooting of more than 100 000 indians.
in 1830 congress passed the indian removal act providing for the transplanting of all indian tribes then resident east of the mississippi see map 13 2.
ironically the heaviest blows fell on the five civilized tribes.
in the ensuing decade countless indians died on forced marches notably the cherokees along the notorious trail of tears to the newly established indian territory where they were to be permanently free of white encroachments.
the bureau of indian affairs was established in 1836 to administer relations with americas original inhabitants.
but as the land hungry palefaces pushed west faster than anticipated the governments guarantees went up in smoke.
the permanent frontier lasted about fteen years.
suspicious of white intentions from the start sauk and fox braves from illinois and wisconsin ably led by black hawk resisted eviction.
they were bloodily crushed in the black hawk war of 1832 by regular troops including lieutenant jefferson davis of mississippi and by volunteers including captain abraham lincoln of illinois.
in florida the seminole indians joined by runaway black slaves retreated to the swampy everglades.
for seven years 1835 1842 they waged a bitter guerrilla war that took the lives of some fteen hundred soldiers.
the spirit of the seminoles was broken in 1837 when map 13 2 indian removals 1830 1846 interactive map lake michigan 90w oto and missouri sauk land granted to indians west of the mississippi river iowa sauk and fox 1 kickapoo i lli noi s wea and piankasha peoria and kaskaskia wea and piankasha miami m i ssou r i new york indians cherokee neutral lands quapaw.
ar k an sas ter r n red r.
ft smith ten n essee tenne ssee chickasaw ft towson cherokee r ft chickasaw arbuckle and choctaw ft washita north c aroli na mi s siss ft gibson ippi seneca n sr nsa cherokee vi rgi n ia kentucky a a rk creek and seminole osage r potawatomi a fort io r.
e sauk and fox cherokee outlet oh buffalo range south c aroli na creek al abama georgia la n choctaw at m i ssi ssi p p i c ft leavenworth shawnee i n dian ter r itory forest oh io i n diana o wyandot and delaware indian tribes home territories 1835 date and route of removal fox 40n l e c i r m ich igan ter r itory 80w eri ake ti sour mis omaha m exico lou i siana 30n 200 km.
f lor i da ter r new orleans 200 mi.
gulf of mexico seminole chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 revolutionary advances in manufacturing and transportation brought increased prosperity to all americans but they also widened the gulf between the rich and the poor.
millionaires had been rare in the early days of the republic but by the eve of the civil war several specimens of colossal nancial success were strutting across the national stage.
spectacular was the case of fur trader and real estate speculator john jacob astor who left an estate of 30 million on his death in 1848 cities bred the greatest extremes of economic inequality.
unskilled workers then as always fared worst.
many of them came to make up a oating mass of drifters buffeted from town to town by the shifting prospects for menial jobs.
these wandering workers accounted at various times for up to half the population of the brawling industrial centers.
although their numbers were large they left little behind them but the homely fruits of their transient labor.
largely unstoried and unsung they are among the forgotten men and women of american history.
many myths about social mobility grew up over the buried memories of these unfortunate day laborers.
mobility did exist in industrializing america but not in the proportions that legend often portrays.
ragsto riches success stories were relatively few.
yet america with its dynamic society and wideopen spaces undoubtedly provided more opportu map 14 5 industry and agriculture 1860 still a nation of farmers on the eve of the civil war americans had nevertheless made an impressive start on their own industrial revolution especially in the northeast.
first oil well 1859 titusville pa wis n h manchester mass.
o ky tenn n c knoxville memphis ark.
atlanta n ea oc ala 30n richmond ga industry f flour and meal natchez texas mobile la.
new orleans houston fla mexico g ul f of m ex i c o agriculture corn and wheat dairy cattle and hay tobacco and hemp range and ranch cattle cotton orchard fruits rice and sugar cane lumber and timber 400 km.
n n albuquerque t louisville f a indian territory del.
f va l los angeles oh.
i st louis mo.
n j baltimore t ic pac i f new mexico territory kansas city r i i tphiladelphia cincinnati ill kansas territory f cleveland pittsburgh pa ind.
new bedford t s providence new yorkconn.
newark ic utah territory boston st detroit chicago des moines t s i a salt lake city n y mich milwaukee iowa albany troy rochester f 40n calif vt t minneapolis me.
nebraska territory san francisco 70w a unorg.
terr oregon territory 80w british north america canada g n to portland in 90w e was h 100w c 110w interactive map t textiles s shoes and clothing i iron and steelworks mining principal manufacturing cities product value silver and gold t over 100 000 000 iron ore over 10 000 000 bituminous coal other major city copper anthracite coal social mobility in industrializing america chicago 1857 a modest village of a few hundred souls in the 1830s chicago was a teeming metropolis just two decades later one of the fastest growing cities in the world.
a food and livestock processing center and transportation hub it served the vast farming area of the western plains a remarkably productive agricultural region and breadbasket to the world.
nity than did the contemporary countries of the old world which is why millions of immigrants packed their bags and headed for new world shores.
moreover a rising tide lifts all boats and the improvement in overall standards of living was real.
wages for unskilled workers in a labor hungry america rose about 1 percent a year from 1820 to 1860 this general prosperity helped defuse the potential class con ict that might otherwise have exploded and that did explode in many european countries.
the famed english writer charles dickens 1812 1870 traveled to the united states in 1842 and was sharply critical of certain aspects of the national character another prominent feature is the love of smart dealing which gilds over many a swindle and gross breach of trust many a defalcation embezzlement public and private and enables many a knave to hold his head up with the best who well deserves a halter.
copyright 2010 cengage learning inc all rights reserved.
may not be copied scanned or duplicated in whole or in part.
chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 the women graduates of the oberlin college class of 1855 oberlin was the rst coeducational institution of higher education in the united states accepting women in 1837 two years after it had welcomed african americans.
feminists continued to press for coeducation and by 1872 ninety seven american universities accepted women.
at some of these institutions however such as radcliffe college of harvard university and barnard college of columbia university women were educated in associated schools not alongside male students.
journeyed thousands of miles on the lyceum circuits casting their pearls of civilization before appreciative audiences.
magazines ourished in the pre civil war years but most of them withered after a short life.
the north american review founded in 1815 was the long lived leader of the intellectuals.
godeys ladys book founded in 1830 survived until 1898 and attained the enormous circulation for those days of 150 000 it was devoured devotedly by millions of women many of whom read the dog eared copies of their relatives and friends.
an age of reform as the young republic grew reform campaigns of all types ourished in sometimes bewildering abundance.
some reformers were simply crackbrained cranks.
but most were intelligent inspired idealists usually touched by the re of evangelical religion then licking through the pews and pulpits of american churches.
the opti mistic promises of the second great awakening inspired countless souls to do battle against earthly evils.
these modern idealists dreamed anew the old puritan vision of a perfected society free from cruelty war intoxicating drink discrimination and ultimately slavery.
women were particularly prominent in these reform crusades especially in their own struggle for suffrage.
for many middle class women the reform campaigns provided a unique opportunity to escape the con nes of the home and enter the arena of public affairs.
in part the practical activist christianity of these reformers resulted from their desire to reaf rm traditional values as they plunged ever further into a world disrupted and transformed by the turbulent forces of a market economy.
mainly middle class descendants of pioneer farmers they were often blissfully unaware that they were witnessing the dawn of the industrial era which posed unprecedented problems and called for novel ideas.
they either ignored the factory workers for example or blamed their problems on bad habits.
with naive single mindedness reformers sometimes applied social reform in presenting her case to the massachusetts legislature for more humane treatment for the mentally ill dorothea dix 1802 1887 quoted from the notebook she carried with her as she traveled around the state lincoln.
a woman in a cage.
one idiotic subject chained and one in a close stall for seventeen years.
one often doubly chained hand and foot another violent several peaceable now.
the insane disadvantageously placed in the jail.
in the almshouse two females in stalls.
lie in wooden bunks lled with straw always shut up.
one of these subjects is supposed curable.
the overseers of the poor have declined giving her a trial at the hospital as i was informed on account of expense.
conventional virtue to refurbishing an older order while events hurtled them headlong into the new.
imprisonment for debt continued to be a nightmare though its extent has been exaggerated.
as late as 1830 hundreds of penniless people were languishing in lthy holes sometimes for owing less than one dollar.
the poorer working classes were especially hard hit by this merciless practice.
but as the embattled laborer won the ballot and asserted himself state legislatures gradually abolished debtors prisons.
criminal codes in the states were likewise being softened in accord with more enlightened european practices.
the number of capital offenses was being reduced and brutal punishments such as whipping and branding were being slowly eliminated.
a refreshing idea was taking hold that prisons should reform as well as punish hence reformatories houses of correction and penitentiaries for penance.
sufferers of so called insanity were still being treated with incredible cruelty.
the medieval concept had been that the mentally deranged were cursed with unclean spirits the nineteenth century idea was that they were willfully perverse and depraved to be treated only as beasts.
many crazed persons were chained in jails or poor houses with sane people.
into this dismal picture stepped a formidable new eng land teacher author dorothea dix 1802 1887.
a physically frail woman af icted with persistent lung trouble she possessed in nite compassion and willpower.
she traveled some sixty thousand miles in eight years and assembled her damning reports on insanity and asylums from rsthand observations.
though she the stepping mill auburn prison new york 1823 reformers like dorothea dix believed that idleness was a scourge and prescribed rigorous exercise regimens for prisoners.
at the experimental prison in auburn chained prisoners were obliged to turn this wheel for long periods of time.
chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 of the good homemaker.
but some women increasingly felt that the gloried sanctuary of the home was in fact a gilded cage.
they yearned to tear down the bars that separated the private world of women from the public world of men.
clamorous female reformers most of them white and well to do began to gather strength as the century neared its halfway point.
most were broad gauge battlers while demanding rights for women they joined in the general reform movement of the age ghting for temperance and the abolition of slavery.
like men they had been touched by the evangelical spirit that offered the promise of earthly reward for human endeavor.
neither foul eggs nor foul words when hurled by disapproving men could halt women heartened by these doctrines.
the womens rights movement was mothered by some arresting characters.
prominent among them was lucretia mott a sprightly quaker whose ire had been aroused when she and her fellow female delegates to the london antislavery convention of 1840 were not recognized.
elizabeth cady stanton a mother of seven who had insisted on leaving obey out of her marriage ceremony shocked fellow feminists by going so far as to advocate suffrage for women.
quaker reared susan b anthony a militant lecturer for womens rights fearlessly exposed herself to rotten garbage and vulgar epithets.
she became such a conspicuous advocate of female rights that progressive women every where were called suzy bs what it would be if some ladies had their own way the men in this antifeminist cartoon are sewing tending the baby and washing clothes.
the scene seemed absurd then but not a century later.
other feminists challenged the mans world.
dr elizabeth blackwell a pioneer in a previously forbidden profession for women was the rst female graduate of a medical college.
precocious margaret fuller edited a transcendentalist journal the dial and took part in the struggle to bring unity and republican government to italy.
she died in a shipwreck off new yorks fire island while returning to the united states in 1850 the talented grimk sisters sarah and angelina championed antislavery.
lucy stone retained her maiden name after marriage hence the latter day lucy stoners who follow her example.
amelia bloomer revolted against the current street sweeping female attire by donning a short skirt with turkish trousers bloomers they were called amid much bawdy ridicule about bloomerism and loose habits a jeering male rhyme of the times jabbed gibbey gibbey gab the women had a confab and demanded the rights to wear the tights gibbey gibbey gab.
un inching feminists met in 1848 in a memorable womans rights convention at seneca falls new york.
the deant stanton read a declaration of sentiments which in the spirit of the declaration of independence declared that all men and women are created equal one resolution formally demanded the ballot for females.
amid scorn and denunciation from press and dress as reform mong the many social movements that swept nineteenth century america dress reform emerged in the 1840s as a critique of materialism and the constraints that fashion imposed on women.
medical professionals social reformers and transcendentalist intellectuals all argued that corsets constrict ing vital organs and voluminous skirts dragging along garbage strewn streets unfairly restricted womens mobility prevented women from bearing healthy children and even induced serious sickness and death.
the bloomer costume depicted in this illustration from harpers new monthly magazine in 1851 included turkish style trousers a jacket and a short overskirt that came to the knees.
named after reformer amelia bloomer 1818 1894 who publicized the new style in her magazine the lily the bloomer dress was rst adopted by utopian communities such as the owenites in new harmony indiana and the oneidans in new york.
radical social a critic henry david thoreau also advocated rational dress as a way of rejecting the articial desires created by industrialization.
but while applauded by reformers new style dress was viciously ridiculed by mainstream society as this print demonstrates.
critics claimed that women blurred gender distinctions by adopting male attire endangering the family and even american civilization.
after only a decade practitioners gave up wearing bloomers in public adopting plain and simplied clothing instead.
but owenites some mormons womens rights advocates farmers and travelers on the overland trail continued to wear bloomers in private.
how did dress reform intersect with other religious and social movements of the era.
why did bloomers upset so many antebellum americans.
have there been other historical eras when new styles of dress came to symbolize broader social change.
chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 left passenger pigeons by john audubon right john j audubon 1785 1851 an astute naturalist and a gifted artist audubon drew the birds of america in loving detail.
ironically he had to go to britain in the 1820s to nd a publisher for his pioneering depictions of the unique beauty of american wildlife.
born in haiti and educated in france he achieved fame as americas greatest ornithologist.
the passenger pigeons shown here once numbered in the billions in north america but were extinct by 1900 thanks to aggressive hunting and trapping.
this was perhaps the greatest mass slaughter of wildlife in history.
yellow fever epidemic of 1793 in philadelphia took several thousand lives.
bring out your dead was the daily cry of the corpse wagon drivers.
people every where complained of ill health malaria the rheumatics the miseries and the chills.
illness often resulted from improper diet hurried eating perspiring and cooling off too rapidly and ignorance of germs and sanitation.
we was sick every fall regular wrote the mother of future president james gareld.
life expectancy was still dismayingly short about forty years for a white person born in 1850 and less for blacks.
the suffering from decayed or ulcerated teeth was enormous tooth extraction was often practiced by the muscular village blacksmith.
self prescribed patent medicines were common one dose for people two for horses and included robertsons infallible worm destroying lozenges.
fad diets proved popular including the whole wheat bread and crackers regimen of sylvester graham.
among home remedies was the rubbing of tumors with dead toads.
the use of medicine by regular doctors was often harmful and dr oliver wendell holmes declared in 1860 that if the medicines as then employed were thrown into the sea humans would be better off and the sh worse off.
victims of surgical operations were ordinarily tied down often after a stiff drink of whiskey.
the surgeon then sawed or cut with breakneck speed undeterred by the piercing shrieks of the patient.
a priceless boon landmarks in painting and music early advertising hawkers of patent medicines pioneered the techniques of modern advertising.
here a painkiller is promoted by invoking the totally irrelevant image of molly pitcher.
the legendary subject of a poem by john greenleaf whittier pitcher reputedly took her fallen husbands place at a cannon during the revolutionary war battle of monmouth in 1778 what this exploit had to do with anesthetics is by no means clear but it supposedly sold the product.
for medical progress came in the early 1840s when several american doctors and dentists working independently successfully employed laughing gas and ether as anesthetics.
artistic achievements architecturally america contributed little of note in the rst half of the century.
the rustic republic still under pressure to erect shelters in haste was continu ing to imitate european models.
public buildings and other important structures followed greek and roman lines which seemed curiously out of place in a wilderness setting.
a remarkable greek revival came between 1820 and 1850 partly stimulated by the heroic efforts of the greeks in the 1820s to wrest independence from the terrible turk about midcentury strong interest developed in a revival of gothic forms with their emphasis on pointed arches and large windows.
talented thomas jefferson architect of revolution was probably the ablest american architect of his generation.
he brought a classical design to his virginia hilltop home monticello perhaps the most stately mansion in the nation.
the quadrangle of the university of virginia at charlottesville another of jeffersons creations remains one of the nest examples of classical architecture in america.
the art of painting continued to be handicapped.
it suffered from the dollar grabbing of a raw civilization from the hustle bustle and absence of leisure from the lack of a wealthy class to sit for portraits and then pay for them.
some of the earliest painters were forced to go to eng land where they found both training and patrons.
america exported artists and imported art.
painting like the theater also suffered from the puritan prejudice that art was a sinful waste of time and often obscene.
john adams boasted that he would not give a sixpence for a bust of phidias or a painting by raphael when edward everett the eminent boston scholar and orator placed a statue of apollo in his home he had its naked limbs draped.
competent painters nevertheless emerged.
gilbert stuart 1755 1828 a spendthrift rhode islander and one of the most gifted of the early group wielded his brush in britain in competition with the best artists.
he produced several portraits of washington all of them somewhat idealized and dehumanized.
truth to tell by the time he posed for stuart the famous general had lost his natural teeth and some of the original shape of his face.
charles willson peale 1741 1827 a marylander painted some sixty portraits of washington who patiently sat for about fourteen of them.
john trumbull 1756 1843 who had fought in the revolutionary war recaptured its scenes and spirit on scores of striking canvases.
during the nationalistic upsurge after the war of 1812 american painters of portraits turned increasingly from human landscapes to romantic mirrorings of local landscapes.
the hudson river school excelled in this type of art.
at the same time portrait painters gradually encountered some unwelcome competition chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at part three testing the new nation 1820 1877 t he civil war of 1861 to 1865 was the awesome trial by re of american nationhood and of the american soul.
all americans knew said abraham lincoln that slavery was somehow the cause of this war the war tested in lincolns ringing phrase at gettysburg whether any nation dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
can long endure how did this great and bloody con ict come about.
and what were its results.
american slavery was by any measure a peculiar institution slavery was rooted in both racism and economic exploitation and depended for its survival on brutal repression.
yet the american slave population was the only enslaved population in history that grew by means of its own biological reproduction a fact that suggests to many historians that conditions under slavery in the united states were somehow less punitive than those in other slave societies.
indeed a distinctive and durable african american culture managed to ourish under slavery further suggesting that the slave regime provided some space for african american cultural development.
but however benignly it might be painted slavery still remained a cancer in the heart of american democracy a moral outrage that mocked the nations claim to be a model of social and returning from the cotton fields in south carolina african american slaves planted and picked virtually all the cotton that formed the foundation of the nineteenth century southern economy.
the white south ferociously defended its peculiar institution of slavery which ended at last only in the res of the civil war.
testing the new nation the 1st virginia regiment these virginia militiamen were photographed in 1859 while attending the trial of the abolitionist john brown for treason against the state of virginia.
two years later their regiment formed part of the confederate army that struck for southern independence.
political enlightenment.
as time went on more and more voices called more and more stridently for its abolition.
the nation lived uneasily with slavery from the outset.
thomas jefferson was only one among many in the founding generation who felt acutely the con ict between the high principle of equality and the ugly reality of slavery.
the federal government in the early republic took several steps to check the growth of slavery.
it banned slavery in the old northwest in 1787 prohibited the further importation of slaves after 1808 and declared in the missouri compromise of 1820 that the vast western territories secured in the louisiana purchase were forever closed to slavery north of the state of missouri.
antislavery sentiment even abounded in the south in the immediate post revolutionary years.
but as time progressed and especially after eli whitneys invention of the cotton gin in the 1790s the southern planter class became increasingly dependent on slave labor to wring prots from the sprawling plantations that carpeted the south.
as cotton cultivation spread westward the souths stake in slavery grew deeper and the abolitionist outcry grew louder.
the controversy over slavery signicantly intensied following the war with mexico in the 1840s.
mexico will poison us predicted the philosopher ralph waldo emerson and he proved to be distressingly prophetic.
the lands acquired from mexico most of the present day american southwest from texas to cal i fornia reopened the question of extending slavery into the western territories.
the decade and a half that followed the mexican war from 1846 to 1861 witnessed a series of ultimately ineffective efforts to come to grips with that question including the ill starred compromise of 1850 the con ict breeding kansas nebraska act of 1854 and the supreme courts inammatory decision in the dred scott case of 1857 ultimately the slavery question was settled by force of arms in the civil war itself.
the civil war as lincoln observed was assuredly about slavery.
but as lincoln also repeatedly insisted the war was about the viability of the union as well and about the strength of democracy itself.
could a democratic government built on the principle of popular consent rightfully deny some of its citizens the same right to independence that the american revolutionaries had exercised in seceding from the british empire in 1776.
southern rebels calling the con ict the war for southern independence asked that question forcefully but ultimately it too was answered not in the law courts or in the legislative halls but on the battleeld.
the civil war unarguably established the supremacy of the union and it ended slavery as well.
but as the victorious union set about the task of reconstruction after the wars end in 1865 a combination of weak northern will and residual southern power frustrated the goal of making the emancipated blacks full edged american citizens.
the civil war in the end brought nothing but freedom but over time freedom proved a powerful tool indeed.
the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 those who deny freedom to others deserve it not for themselves and under a just god cannot long retain it.
abraham lincoln 1859 a t the dawn of the republic slavery faced an uncertain future.
touched by revolutionary idealism some southern leaders including thomas jefferson were talking openly of freeing their slaves.
others predicted that the iron logic of economics would eventually expose slaverys unprotability speeding its demise.
but the introduction of eli whitneys cotton gin in 1793 scrambled all those predictions.
whitneys invention made possible the wide scale cultivation of short staple cotton.
the white ber rapidly became the dominant southern crop eclipsing tobacco rice and sugar.
the explosion of cotton cultivation created an insatiable demand for labor chaining the slave to the gin and the planter to the slave.
as the nineteenth century opened the reinvigoration of southern slavery carried fateful implications for blacks and whites alike and threatened the survival of the nation itself.
cotton is king as time passed the cotton kingdom developed into a huge agricultural factory pouring out avalanches of the uffy ber.
quick prots drew planters to the loamy bottomlands of the gulf states.
as long as the soil was still vigorous the yield was bountiful and the rewards were high.
caught up in an economic spiral the planters bought more slaves and land to grow more cotton so as to buy still more slaves and land.
northern shippers reaped a large part of the prots from the cotton trade.
they would load bulging bales of cotton at southern ports transport them to eng land sell their eecy cargo for pounds sterling and buy needed manufactured goods for sale in the united states.
to a large degree the prosperity of both north and south and of eng land too rested on the bent backs of enslaved bondsmen.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the cotton empire so did the young nations growing wealth.
cotton accounted for half the value of all american exports after 1840 and export earnings provided much of the capital that stoked the republics economic growth.
the south produced more than half of the entire worlds supply of cotton a fact that held foreign nations in partial bondage.
britain was then the leading industrial power.
its most important single manufacture in the 1850s was cotton cloth from which about one fth of its population directly or indirectly drew its livelihood.
about 75 percent of this precious supply of ber came from the white carpeted acres of the south.
southern leaders were fully aware that britain was tied to them by cotton threads and this dependence gave them a heady sense of power.
in their eyes cotton was king the gin was his throne and the black bondsmen were his henchmen.
if war should ever break out between north and south northern warships would presumably cut off the outow of cotton.
fiberfamished british factories would then close their gates starving mobs would force the london government to break the blockade and the south would triumph.
cotton was a powerful monarch indeed.
the planter aristocracy before the civil war the south was in some respects not so much a democracy as an oligarchy or a government by the few in this case heavily inuenced by a planter aristocracy.
in 1850 only 1 733 families owned more than 100 slaves each and this select group provided the cream of the political and social leadership of the section and nation.
here was the mint julep south of the tall columned and white painted plantation mansion the big house where dwelt the cottonocracy the planter aristocrats with their blooded horses and chippendale chairs enjoyed a lions share of southern wealth.
they could educate their children in the nest schools often in the north or abroad.
their money provided the leisure for study reection and statecraft as was notably true of men like john c calhoun a yale graduate and jefferson davis a west point graduate.
they felt a keen sense of obligation to serve the public.
it was no accident that virginia and the other southern states produced a higher proportion of front rank statesmen before 1860 than the dollar grubbing north.
but even in its best light dominance by a favored aristocracy was basically undemocratic.
it widened the gap between rich and poor.
it hampered tax supported public education because the rich planters could and did send their children to private institutions.
a favorite author of elite southerners was sir walter scott whose manors and castles graced by brave ivanhoes and fair rowenas helped them idealize a feudal society even when many of their economic activities were undeniably capitalistic.
southern aristocrats who sometimes staged jousting tournaments strove to interior of the cotton bureau in new orleans by edgar degas 1873 although this painting dates from 1873 french impressionist painter edgar degas 1834 1917 captured the insouciant self condence of cotton traders in the pre civil war era.
as cotton cultivation spread into the new states of the trans appalachian southwest the entire cotton kingdom paid tribute to new orleans queen city of the south and the port through which millions of cotton bales owed out to british textile mills.
chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 slavery and he felt that as a matter of principle he could not afford to yield even though gains for slavery in the territories might be only temporary.
larger gains might come later in cuba and mexico.
crittendens proposal said lincoln would amount to a perpetual covenant of war against every people tribe and state owning a foot of land between here and tierra del fuego as for the supposedly spineless old fogy buchanan how could he have prevented the civil war by starting a civil war.
no one has yet come up with a satisfactory answer.
if he had used force on south carolina in december 1860 the ghting almost certainly would have erupted three months sooner than it did and under less favorable circumstances for the union.
the north would have appeared as the heavy handed aggressor.
and the crucial border states so vital to the union probably would have been driven into the arms of their wayward sisters farewell to union secessionists who parted company with their sister states left for a number of avowed reasons mostly relating in some way to slavery.
they were alarmed by the inexorable tipping of the political balance against them the despotic majority of numbers the crime of the north observed james russell lowell was the census returns.
southerners were also dismayed by the triumph of the new sectional republican party which james russell lowell 1819 1891 the northern poet and essayist wrote in the atlantic monthly shortly after the secessionist movement began the fault of the free states in the eyes of the south is not one that can be atoned for by any yielding of special points here and there.
their offense is that they are free and that their habits and prepossessions are those of freedom.
their crime is the census of 1860 their increase in numbers wealth and power is a standing aggression.
it would not be enough to please the southern states that we should stop asking them to abolish slavery what they demand of us is nothing less than that we should abolish the spirit of the age.
our very thoughts are a menace.
seemed to threaten their rights as a slaveholding minority.
they were weary of free soil criticism abolitionist nagging and northern interference ranging from the underground railroad to john browns raid.
all we ask is to be let alone declared confederate president jefferson davis in an early message to his congress.
many southerners supported secession because they felt sure that their departure would be unopposed despite yankee yawp to the contrary.
they were condent that the clodhopping and codshing yankee would not or could not ght.
they believed that northern manufacturers and bankers so heavily dependent on southern cotton and markets would not dare to cut their own economic throats with their own unionist swords.
but should war come the immense debt owed to northern creditors by the south happy thought could be promptly repudiated as it later was.
southern leaders regarded secession as a golden opportunity to cast aside their generations of vassalage to the north.
an independent dixieland could develop its own banking and shipping and trade directly with europe.
the low tariff of 1857 passed largely by southern votes was not in itself menacing.
but who could tell when the greedy republicans would win control of congress and drive through their own oppressive protective tariff.
for decades this fundamental friction had pitted the north with its manufacturing plants against the south with its agricultural exports.
worldwide impulses of nationalism then stirring in italy germany poland and elsewhere were fermenting in the south.
this huge area with its distinctive culture was not so much a section as a subnation.
it could not view with complacency the possibility of being lorded over then or later by what it regarded as a hostile nation of northerners.
the principles of self determination of the declaration of independence seemed to many southern regarding the civil war the london times november 7 1861 editorialized the contest is really for empire on the side of the north and for independence on that of the south and in this respect we recognize an exact analogy between the north and the government of george iii and the south and the thirteen revolted provinces.
chronology ers to apply perfectly to them.
few if any of the seceders felt that they were doing anything wrong or immoral.
the thirteen original states had voluntarily entered the union and now seven ultimately eleven southern states were voluntarily withdrawing from it.
historical parallels ran even deeper.
in 1776 thirteen american colonies led by the rebel george washington had seceded from the british empire by throwing off the yoke of king george iii.
in 1860 1861 eleven american states led by the rebel jefferson davis were seceding from the union by throwing off the yoke of king abraham lincoln.
with that burden gone the south was condent that it could work out its own peculiar destiny more quietly happily and prosperously.
chronology harriet beecher stowe publishes uncle toms cabin 1853 crimean war in russia kansas nebraska act republican party forms buchanan defeats frmont and fillmore for presidency sumner beaten by brooks in senate chamber browns pottawatomie massacre 1856 civil war in bleeding kansas dred scott decision lecompton constitution rejected key terms uncle toms cabin 437 the impending crisis of the south 439 new eng land emigrant aid company 440 lecompton constitution 441 bleeding kansas 442 dred scott v stanford 445 panic of 1857 446 tariff of 1857 447 panic of 1857 tariff of 1857 hinton r helper publishes the impending crisis of the south lincoln douglas debates brown raids harpers ferry lincoln wins four way race for presidency south carolina secedes from union crittenden compromise fails seven seceding states form confederate states of america people to know lincoln douglas debates 448 freeport question 449 freeport doctrine 449 harpers ferry 450 constitutional union party 452 confederate states of america 455 crittenden amendments 456 harriet beecher stowe henry ward beecher james buchanan charles sumner preston s brooks dred scott roger b taney stephen a douglas abraham lincoln john brown john c breckinridge john jordan crittenden chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 the civil war repressible or irrepressible.
f ew topics have generated as much controversy among american historians as the causes of the civil war.
looming over the entire debate is the stark fact the united states was the only slaveowning society that had to ght a war to rid itself of slavery.
the very names employed to describe the con ict notably civil war or war between the states or even war for southern independence reveal much about the various authors points of view.
interpretations of the great con ict have naturally differed according to section and have been charged with both emotional and moral fervor.
yet despite long and keen interest in the origins of the con ict the causes of the civil war remain as passionately debated today as they were a century ago.
the so called nationalist school of the late nineteenth century typied in the work of historian james ford rhodes claimed that slavery caused the civil war.
defending the necessity and inevitability of the war these northern oriented historians credited the con ict with ending slavery and preserving the union.
but in the early twentieth century progressive historians led by charles and mary beard presented a more skeptical interpretation.
the beards argued that the war was not fought over slavery per se but rather was a deeply rooted economic struggle between an industrial north and an agricultural south.
anointing the civil war the second american revolution the beards claimed that the war precipitated vast changes in american class relations and shifted the political balance of power by magnifying the inuence of business magnates and industrialists while destroying the plantation aristocracy of the south.
shaken by the disappointing results of world war i a new wave of historians argued that the civil war too had actually been a big mistake.
rejecting the nationalist interpretation that the clash was inevitable james g randall and avery craven asserted that the war had been a repressible con ict neither slavery nor the economic differences between north and south were sufcient causes for war.
instead craven and others attributed the bloody confrontation to the breakdown of political institutions the passion of overzealous reformers and the ineptitude of a blundering generation of political leaders.
following the second world war however a neonationalist view regained authority echoing the earlier views of rhodes in depicting the civil war as an unavoidable con ict between two societies one slave and one free.
for allan nevins and david m potter irreconcilable differences in morality politics culture social values and economies increasingly eroded the ties between the sections and inexorably set the united states on the road to civil war.
eric foner and eugene genovese emphasized each sections nearly paranoid fear that the survival of its distinctive way of life was threatened by the expansion of the other section.
in free soil free labor free men 1970 foner emphasized that most northerners detested slavery not because it enslaved blacks but because its existence and particularly its rapid extension threatened the position of free white laborers.
this free labor ideology increasingly became the foundation stone upon which the north claimed its superiority over the south.
eugene genovese has argued that the south felt similarly endangered.
convinced that the southern labor system was more humane than the northern factory system southerners saw northern designs to destroy their way of life lurking at every turn and every territorial battle.
some historians have placed party politics at the center of their explanations for the war.
for them no event was more consequential than the breakdown of the jacksonian party system.
when the slavery issue tore apart both the democratic and the whig parties the last ligaments binding the nation together were snapped and the war inevitably came.
more recently historians of the ethnocultural school especially michael holt have acknowledged the signicance of the collapse of the established parties but have offered a different analysis of how that breakdown led to war.
they have noted that the two great national parties before the 1850s focused attention on issues such as the tariff banking and internal improvements thereby muting sectional differences to learn more over slavery.
according to this argument the erosion of the traditional party system was due not to growing differences over slavery but to a temporary consensus between the two parties in the 1850s on almost all national issues other than slavery.
in this peculiar political at mosphere the slavery issue rose to the fore encouraging the emergence of republicans in the north and secessionists in the south.
in the absence of regular national two party con ict over economic issues purely regional parties like the republicans coalesced.
they identied their opponents not simply as competitors for power but as threats to their way of life even to the life of the republic itself.
to learn more frederick j blue charles sumner and the conscience of the north 1994 nicole etcheson bleeding kansas contested liberty in the civil war era 2004 paul finkelman ed and his soul goes marching on responses to john brown and the harpers ferry raid 1995 joan hedrick harriet beecher stowe a life 1994 ward m mcafee ed the slaveholding republic 2001 stephen b oates to purge this land with blood 1970 kenneth m stampp america in 1857 a nation on the brink 1990 harriet beecher stowe uncle toms cabin 1852 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 chronology confederate government formed lincoln takes ofce march 4 fort sumter red on april 12 four upper south states secede april june morrill tariff act passed trent affair lincoln suspends writ of habeas corpus confederacy enacts conscription homestead act 1862 alabama raids northern shipping key terms fort sumter 463 border states 464 west virginia 464 trent affair 472 alabama 473 laird rams 473 dominion of canada 474 writ of habeas corpus 475 union enacts conscription new york city draft riots national banking system established 1863 napoleon iii installs archduke maximilian as emperor of mexico alabama sunk by union warship people to know new york draft riots 475 morrill tariff act 476 greenbacks 477 national banking system 477 homestead act 479 u s sanitary commission 479 charles francis adams napoleon iii maximilian jefferson davis elizabeth blackwell clara barton sally tompkins to learn more daniel aaron the unwritten war american writers and the civil war 1973 david w blight race and reunion the civil war in american memory 2001 richard j carwardine lincoln 2003 lawanda cox lincoln and black freedom 1981 david h donald lincoln 1995 ed why the north won the civil war 1960 drew gilpin faust the creation of confederate nationalism 1988 mothers of invention women of the slaveholding south in the american civil war 1996 william freehling the south vs the south how anticonfederate southerners shaped the course of the civil war 2001 doris kearns goodwin team of rivals the political genius of abraham lincoln 2005 elizabeth d leonard yankee women gender battles in the civil war 1994 randall m miller et al religion and the american civil war 1998 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 washington terr.
n h vt u 5 montana terr.
u 5 u 7 minn u 3 mass.
u 4 idaho terr.
dakota terr.
u 12 n y wisc.
u 8 u 33 mich r i u 4 u 8 nev u 2 calif u 5 utah terr.
u 8 ill u 16 colorado terr.
kansas u 3 arizona terr.
pa iowa nebraska terr.
new mexico terr.
u 21 u 13 d 3 w va md.
va ky u 11 u 7 d 7 n c tenn ark.
texas ohio ind.
n j u 6 u 26 u 5 mo.
indian terr.
conn ala ga la.
fla candidate party electoral vote popular vote lincoln union 91 2 206 938 55 0 confederate states 9 1 803 787 45 0 territories no returns etc.
mcclellan democrat map 21 7 presidential election of 1864 showing popular vote by county lincoln also carried california oregon and nevada but there was a considerable mcclellan vote in each.
note mcclellans strength in the border states and in the southern tier of ohio indiana and illinois the so called butternut region.
interactive map grant outlasts lee after gettysburg grant was brought in from the west over meade who was blamed for failing to pursue the defeated but always dangerous lee.
lincoln needed a general who employing the superior resources of the north would have the intestinal stamina to drive ever forward regardless of casualties.
a soldier of bulldog tenacity grant was the man for this meat grinder type of warfare.
his overall basic strategy was to assail the enemys armies simultaneously so that they could not assist one another and hence could be destroyed piecemeal.
his personal motto was when in doubt ght a grimly determined grant with more than 100 000 men struck toward richmond.
he engaged lee in a series of furious battles in the wilderness of virginia during may and june of 1864 notably in the leaden hurricane of the bloody angle and hells half acre in this wilderness campaign grant suffered about 50 000 casualties or nearly as many men as lee commanded at the start.
but lee lost about as heavily in proportion see map 21 8.
in a ghastly gamble on june 3 1864 grant ordered a frontal assault on the impregnable position of cold harbor.
the union soldiers advanced to almost certain death with papers pinned on their backs bearing their names and addresses.
in a few minutes about seven thousand men were killed or wounded.
public opinion in the north was appalled by this blood and guts type of ghting.
critics cried that grant the butcher had gone insane.
but grants reputation was undeserved while lees was overrated.
lees rate of loss at one casualty for every ve soldiers was pittsburgh 1864 1865 illinois 40n philadelphia n j md.
baltimore del.
pa ohio indiana wilderness may 5 7 1864 west richmond io virginia r virginia kentucky arkansas nashville dec 15 16 1864 averasboro march 16 1865 tennessee memphis atlanta sape r ake bay florida nt mobile bay aug 2 23 1864 nn 79w ma.
90w 38n ar nn new orleans 80w olustee feb 20 1864 louisiana 30n che charleston mobile maryland wilderness may 5 7 1864 r n chancellorsville a d pi fredericksburg ra spotsylvania courthouse po toma c may 7 19 1864 north virginia a nn r a ar.
charlottesville sout ha north anna 40 km.
oc may 23 26 1864 k r gr a.
t ta po ni pa james r r mu nk r.
ey amelia richmond courthouse x r cold harbor atto yo june 3 1864 om georgia savannah 77w a ah pp montgomery no clear victor e pleasant hill april 9 1864 jackson confederate victory confederate retreat culpeper courthouse july 22 1864 carolina alabama union victory confederate advance le mississippi tupelo july 14 15 union advance 78w north march 21 1865 carolina south mississippi r jenkins ferry april 30 1864 washington d c cold harbor june 3 1864 bentonville missouri oh st louis at l a n t i c ocean gul f of m ex i c o lynchburg ap 37n 300 km.
le e gr an appomattox courthouse lee surrenders april 9 1865 r saylers creek april 6 1865 rk p n jam e t five forks april 1 1865 sr.
siege of petersburg june 15 1864 april 12 1865 300 mi.
map 21 8 grants virginia campaign 1864 1865 the wilderness campaign pitted soldier against desperate soldier in some of the most brutal and terrifying ghting of the civil war.
no one could see the ght fty feet from him a union private recalled of his month spent ghting in virginia.
the lines were very near each other and from the dense underbrush and the tops of trees came puffs of smoke the ping of the bullets and the yell of the enemy.
it was a blind and bloody hunt to the death in bewildering thickets rather than a battle interactive map the highest of any general in the war.
by contrast grant lost one of ten.
grant had intended to ght battles out in the open a tactic he had perfected in the west.
it was lee not grant who turned the eastern campaign into a war of attrition fought in the trenches.
with fewer men lee could no longer seize the offensive as he had at chancellorsville or gettysburg.
lees new defensive posture in turn forced grant into some brutal arithmetic.
grant could trade two men for one and still beat the enemy to his knees.
i propose to ght it out on this line he wrote if it takes all summer it did and it also took all autumn all winter and a part of the spring.
in february 1865 the confederates tasting the bitter dregs of defeat tried desperately to negotiate for peace between the two countries lincoln himself met with confederate representatives aboard a union ship moored at hampton roads virginia to discuss peace terms.
but lincoln could accept nothing short of union and emancipation and the southerners could accept nothing short of independence.
so the tribulation wore on amid smoke and agony to its terrible climax.
the end came with dramatic suddenness.
rapidly advancing northern troops captured richmond and cornered lee at appomattox courthouse in virginia in april 1865 grant stubble bearded and informally dressed met with lee on the ninth palm sunday and granted generous terms of surrender.
among other concessions the hungry confederates were allowed to keep their horses for spring plowing.
tattered southern veterans lees ragamufns wept as they took leave of their beloved commander.
chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 the burning of richmond april 1865 the proud confederate capital after holding out against repeated union assaults was evacuated and burned in the nal days of the war.
the elated union soldiers cheered but they were silenced by grants stern admonition the war is over the rebels are our countrymen again lincoln traveled to conquered richmond and sat in jefferson daviss evacuated ofce just forty hours after the confederate president had left it.
thank god i have lived to see this he said.
with a small escort of sailors he walked the blasted streets of the city.
freed slaves began to recognize him and crowds gathered to see and touch father abraham one black man fell to his knees before the emancipator who said to him dont kneel to me.
this is not right.
you must kneel to god only and thank him for the liberty you will enjoy hereafter sadly as many freed slaves were to discover the hereafter of their full liberty was a long time coming.
the martyrdom of lincoln on the night of april 14 1865 good friday only ve days after lees surrender fords theater in washington witnessed its most sensational drama.
a halfcrazed fanatically pro southern actor john wilkes booth slipped behind lincoln as he sat in his box and shot him in the head.
after lying unconscious all night the great emancipator died the following morning.
now he belongs to the ages remarked the oncecritical secretary stanton probably the nest words he ever spoke.
lincoln expired in the arms of victory at the very pinnacle of his fame.
from the standpoint of his reputation his death could not have been better timed if he had hired the assassin.
a large number of his countrymen had not suspected his greatness and many the death of lincoln new york mourns lincolns death april 25 1865 lincolns body traveled by train to lie in state in fourteen cities before arriving at his nal resting place of springeld illinois.
in new york city 160 000 mourners accompanied the hearse as the funeral procession slowly made its way down broadway.
scalpers sold choice window seats for four dollars and up.
blacks were barred from participating until the mayor changed his mind at the last minute but only if they marched at the rear.
this souvenir stereo view bringing the scene to three dimensional life when seen through the popular device of a hand held stereopticon allowed many more americans to observe the funeral than could be there in person.
others had even doubted his ability.
but his dramatic death helped to erase the memory of his shortcomings and caused his nobler qualities to stand out in clearer relief.
the full impact of lincolns death was not at once apparent to the south.
hundreds of bedraggled exconfederate soldiers cheered as did some southern civilians and northern copperheads when they learned of the assassination.
this reaction was only natural because lincoln had kept the war grinding on to the bitter end.
if he had only been willing to stop the shooting the south would have won.
as time wore on increasing numbers of southerners perceived that lincolns death was a calamity for them.
belatedly they recognized that his kindliness and moderation would have been the most effective the new york herald editorialized on april 16 1865 that the south had the most to lose from lincolns assassination in the death of president lincoln we feel the pressure of a heavy national calamity but the great and irrevocable decree of the loyal states that union must and shall be preserved will lose nothing of its force but will be immensely if not terribly strengthened.
in striking abraham lincoln and his kindly disposed secretary of state the assassins struck at the best friends in the government to the prostrate rebels of the south.
thinking globally the era of nationalism t he american civil war was rooted in americas peculiar institution of slavery as well as uniquely american controversies about westward expansion.
but it was also part of a wider phenomenon that transformed many parts of the world in the mid nineteenth century nationalism.
to be sure some ancient societies such as the greeks and the hebrews had a sense of themselves as distinct peoples who shared a common culture and history.
but the creation of robust nation states with strong central governments ruling over large populations that considered themselves part of an enduring community was of decidedly modern origin.
nationalism was anchored in the french and american revolutions with their emphasis on popular sovereignty and on a government that expressed the will of a population that saw itself not just as a random assembly of persons but as a distinctive and coherent people often bonded by religion and language.
nationalism also owed much to modern technologies like the steamship railroad and telegraph which extended both the emotional range of fellow feeling and the geographical reach of centralized authority.
the convergence of these several nineteenth century developments intellectual as well as material made possible the creation of the virtual communities called nations.
count camillo di cavour 1810 1861 in the early nineteenth century only britain and france could claim to be nation states in the modern sense.
central europe remained a patchwork of major and minor principalities.
italy in the words of the austrian diplomat klemens von metternich was merely a geographic expression as several small duchies and overgrown city states uneasily coexisted on the italian peninsula.
canada a scattering of disconnected provinces was more a map makers convention than a functioning political entity.
both spain and japan looked united on the map but both notoriously lacked internal cohesion.
and in the united states sectional and state loyalties continued to compete with notions of a national identity.
but within just a dozen years between 1859 and 1871 prince otto von bismarck created modern germany count camillo di cavour united italy we have made italy now we must make italians quipped one italian wit a new meiji emperor launched japan on a dramatic program of rapid modernization the british north america act of 1867 forged a unied canada and the american civil war in abraham lincolns words gave the united states a new birth of freedom as a unied country as well as a signicantly invigorated federal government.
before the civil war prince otto von bismark 1815 1898 it was said the united states were after the civil war the united states was.
these several consolidations created the model for modern states that has prevailed ever since.
the rise of nationalism fostered the growth of unprecedentedly powerful governments able to command deep loyalty from millions of people and consequently to marshal enormous economic and military resources for good or ill nationalism was every where accompanied by some degree of political democratization and the expansion of public ser vices as freshly created or reinvigorated central governments sought to secure the loyalty of peoples newly brought under their sway.
bismarck for example supported universal suffrage and social insurance for german workers establishing precedents that would much later be adopted in the united states.
the new italy and meiji japan adopted fairly liberal voting laws and programs for universal education.
britains reform bill of 1867 enfranchised 1 5 million adult male urban householders effectively doubling the british electorate.
in the united states civil war era constitutional amendments at least nominally guaranteed the right to vote to adult african american males while the federal government adopted ambitious plans to facilitate the construction of transcontinental railroads distribute public lands under the homestead act and support higher education under the morrill land grant college act.
the civil war dened a historic pivot in the role of federal power.
of the twelve amendments to the constitution passed before 1865 eleven were designed to limit the authority of the federal government.
of the fteen amendments passed since the civil war nine contain the phrase congress shall have the power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation the words nation and native derive from the same latin root denoting birth or birthplace.
nationalism is at bottom a sentiment of common feeling or shared identity generally among people born in the same place.
it therefore implies boundaries territorial as well as psychological.
it denes who is included as well as who is excluded.
no nation imagines itself coterminous with mankind writes one scholar of nationalism.
it can breed exclusionary and nativist pathologies as well as chauvinism jingoism and imperialism.
the united states was no exception to these patterns.
nativists mounted increasingly effective antiimmigrant campaigns in the post civil war era beginning with the chinese exclusion act of 1882 and culminating in the highly restrictionist national origins act of 1924 as germany and italy acquired colonies in africa and japan tightened its grip on taiwan korea and parts of manchuria the united states also joined the imperial scramble annexing the philippines puerto rico guam and samoa before the centurys end.
three nation builders count camillo di cavour 1810 1861 prince otto von bismarck 1815 1898 and abraham lincoln 1809 1865 while the two european aristocrats cavour and bismarck were creating the new nations of italy and germany respectively the lowborn lincoln was preserving american nationhood.
abraham lincoln 1809 1865 chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 chronology lincoln announces 10 percent reconstruction plan lincoln vetoes wade davis bill lincoln assassinated johnson issues reconstruction proclamation congress refuses to seat southern congressmen freedmens bureau established southern states pass black codes congress passes civil rights bill over johnsons veto congress passes fourteenth amendment johnson backed candidates lose congressional election ex parte milligan case ku klux klan founded key terms freedmens bureau 518 10 percent reconstruction plan 519 wade davis bill 519 black codes 521 pacic railroad act 522 civil rights bill 522 fourteenth amendment 523 reconstruction act 525 fifteenth amendment 526 reconstruction act tenure of ofce act united states purchases alaska from russia johnson impeached and acquitted johnson pardons confederate leaders fifteenth amendment ratied 1870 force acts freedmens bureau ended reconstruction ends people to know ex parte milligan 526 redeemers 527 womans loyal league 527 union league 527 scalawags 528 carpetbaggers 528 ku klux klan 529 force acts 530 tenure of ofce act 531 sewards folly 532 oliver o howard andrew johnson thaddeus stevens hiram revels edwin m stanton benjamin wade william seward how radical was reconstruction.
f ew topics have triggered as much intellectual warfare as the dark and bloody ground of reconstruction.
the period provoked questions sectional racial and constitutional about which people felt deeply and remain deeply divided even today.
scholarly argument goes back conspicuously to a columbia university historian william a dunning whose students in the early 1900s published a series of histories varying viewpoints of the reconstruction south.
dunning and his disciples were inuenced by the turn of the century spirit of sectional conciliation as well as by current theories about black racial inferiority.
sympathizing with the white south they wrote about the reconstruction period as a kind of national disgrace foisted upon a prostrate region by vindictive and self seeking radical republican politicians.
if the south had wronged the north by seceding the north had wronged the south by reconstructing.
a second cycle of scholarship in the 1920s was impelled by a widespread suspicion that the civil war itself had been a tragic and unnecessary blunder.
attention now shifted to northern politicians.
scholars like howard beale further questioned the motives of the radical republicans.
to beale and others the radicals had masked a ruthless desire to exploit southern labor and resources behind a false front of concern for the freed slaves.
moreover northern advocacy of black voting rights was merely a calculated attempt to ensure a republican political presence in the defeated south.
the unfortunate andrew johnson in this view had valiantly tried to uphold constitutional principles in the face of this cynical northern onslaught.
although ignored by his contemporaries scholar black nationalist and founder of the national association for the advancement of colored people w e b du bois wrote a sympathetic history of reconstruction in 1935 that became the basis for historians interpretations ever since.
following world war ii kenneth stampp and others inuenced by the modern civil rights movement built on du boiss argument and claimed that reconstruction had been a noble though ultimately failed attempt to extend american principles of equity and justice.
the radical republicans and the carpetbaggers were now heroes whereas andrew johnson was castigated for his obsti nate racism.
by the early 1970s this view had become orthodoxy and it generally holds sway today.
yet some scholars such as michael benedict and leon litwack disillusioned with the inability to achieve full racial justice in the 1960s and 1970s began once more to scrutinize the motives of northern politicians immediately after the civil war.
they claimed to discover that reconstruction had never been very radical and that the freedmens bureau and other agencies had merely allowed white planters to maintain their dominance over local politics as well as over the local economy.
more recently eric foner has powerfully reasserted the argument that reconstruction was a truly radical and noble attempt to establish an interracial democracy.
drawing upon the work of du bois foner has emphasized the comparative approach to american reconstruction.
clearly foner has admitted reconstruction did not create full equality but it did allow blacks to form political orga ni zations and churches to vote and to establish some mea sure of economic independence.
in south africa the caribbean and other areas once marked by slavery these opportunities were much harder to come by.
many of the benets of reconstruction were erased by whites in the south during the gilded age but in the twentieth century the constitutional principles and organizations developed during reconstruction provided the focus and foundation for the modern civil rights movement which some have called the second reconstruction.
steven hahns a nation under our feet black political struggles in the rural south from slavery to the great migration 2003 is the latest contribution to the literature on reconstruction.
hahn emphasizes the assertiveness and ingenuity of african americans in creating new political opportunities for themselves after emancipation.
to learn more richard n current those terrible carpetbaggers 1988 eric foner forever free the story of emancipation and reconstruction 2005 nothing but freedom 1983 dewey w grantham life and death of the solid south 1988 steven hahn a nation under our feet black political struggles in the rural south from slavery to the great migration 2003 james m mcpherson ordeal by fire the civil war and reconstruction 1981 michael perman emancipation and reconstruction rev.
ed 2003 lawrence powell new masters northern planters during the civil war and reconstruction 1980 julie saville the work of reconstruction 1994 booker t washington up from slavery 1901 heather andrea williams self taught african american education in slavery and freedom 2005 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 outraged cleveland grudgingly allowed the bill which also contained a 2 percent tax on incomes over 4 000 to become law without his signature.
when the supreme court struck down the income tax provision in 1895 the populists and other disaffected groups found proof that the courts were only the tools of the plutocrats.
democratic political fortunes naturally suffered in the face of these several setbacks.
the tariff dynamite that had blasted the republicans out of the house in 1890 now dislodged the democrats with a strong helping hand from the depression.
the revitalized republicans singing times are mighty hard won the congressional elections of 1894 in a landslide 244 seats to 105 for the democrats.
the republicans be it violated the direct tax clause.
4 in the appendix.
the sixteenth amendment to the constitution adopted in 1913 permitted an income tax.
gan to look forward to the presidential race of 1896 with unconcealed glee.
despite his gruff integrity and occasional courage grover cleveland failed utterly to cope with the serious economic crisis that befell the country in 1893 he was tied down in ofce by the same threads that held all the politicians of the day to lilliputian levels.
grant hayes gareld arthur harrison and cleveland are often referred to as the forgettable presidents bewhiskered and bland in person they left mostly blanks or blots on the nations political record as issues like the tariff the money question and the rights of labor continued to fester.
what little political vitality existed in gilded age america was to be found in local settings or in congress which overshadowed the white house for most of this period.
but before the century ended down and out debtors and disgruntled workers would make one last titanic effort to wring reform out of the political system in the momentous election of 1896 chronology grant defeats seymour for presidency fisk and gould corner gold market tweed scandal in new york crdit mobilier scandal exposed liberal republicans break with grant grant defeats greeley for presidency panic of 1873 whiskey ring scandal civil rights act of 1875 resumption act hayes tilden election standoff and crisis compromise of 1877 reconstruction ends railroad strikes paralyze nation gareld defeats hancock for presidency gareld assassinated arthur assumes presidency chinese exclusion act civil rights cases pendleton act sets up civil service commission cleveland defeats blaine for presidency harrison defeats cleveland for presidency billion dollar congress mckinley tariff act sherman silver purchase act repealed 1893 homestead steel strike coeur dalene idaho silver miners strike peoples party candidate james b weaver wins twenty two electoral votes cleveland defeats harrison and weaver to regain presidency depression of 1893 begins republicans regain house of representatives j p morgans banking syndicate loans 65 million in gold to federal government plessy v ferguson legitimizes separate but equal doctrine varying viewpoints key terms waving the bloody shirt 539 tweed ring 539 crdit mobilier scandal 541 panic of 1873 542 gilded age 543 patronage 544 compromise of 1877 545 people to know civil rights act of 1875 546 sharecropping 547 jim crow 547 plessy v ferguson 547 chinese exclusion act 549 pendleton act 553 homestead strike 557 grandfather clause 559 jay gould horace greeley rutherford b hayes james a gareld chester arthur grover cleveland thomas b reed tom watson william jennings bryan j p morgan the populists radicals or reactionaries.
t aking their cue from contemporary satirical commentaries like mark twain and charles dudley warners the gilded age 1873 the rst historians who wrote about the post civil war era judged it harshly.
they condemned its politicians as petty and corrupt lamented the emergence of a new plutocratic class and railed against the arrogance of corporate power.
such a view is conspicuous in charles and mary beards the rise of american civilization 4 vols 1927 1942 perhaps the most inuential american history textbook ever written.
the beards were leaders of the so called progressive school of historical writing that ourished in the early years of the twentieth century.
progressive historians many of whom grew up in the gilded age shared in a widespread disillusionment that the civil war had failed to generate a rebirth of american idealism.
their political sympathies were chillingly antibusiness and warmly pro labor pro farmer and pro reform.
historians of the progressive persuasion identied populism as virtually the only orga nized opposition to the social economic and political order that took shape in the last decades of the nineteenth century.
the populists thus became heroes to several generations of writers who bemoaned that order and looked back longingly at americans agrarian past.
john d hicks the populist revolt 1931 is the classic portrayal of the populists as embattled farmers hurling deance at wall street and the robber barons in a last ditch defense of their simple honest way of life.
bowed but unbroken by the defeat of their great champion william jennings bryan in the presidential election of 1896 the populists hicks claimed left a reforming legacy that ourished again in the progressive era and the new deal.
hickss point of view was the dominant one until the 1950s when it was sharply criticized by richard hofstadter in the age of reform 1955.
hofstadter charged that the progressive historians had romanticized the populists who were best understood not as picturesque protesters but as harassed little country businessmen bristling with provincial prejudices.
the city born and bred hofstadter argued that the populist revolt was aimed not just at big business and the money power but also somewhat irrationally at urbanism immigrants the east and modernity itself.
hofstadter thus exposed a dark side of populism which contained elements of backwoods antiintellectualism paranoia and even anti semitism.
in the 1960s several scholars inspired by the work of c vann woodward as well as by sympathy with the protest movements of that turbulent decade began to rehabilitate the populists as authentic reformers with genuine grievances.
especially notable in this vein was lawrence goodwyns democratic promise chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at industry comes of age 1865 1900 the wealthy class is becoming more wealthy but the poorer class is becoming more dependent.
the gulf between the employed and the employer is growing wider social contrasts are becoming sharper as liveried carriages appear so do barefooted children.
a s the nineteenth century drew to a close observers were asking why are the best men not in politics one answer was that they were being lured away from public life by the lusty attractions of the booming private economy.
as americas industrial revolution slipped into high gear talented men ached for prots not the presidency.
they dreamed of controlling corporations not the congress.
what the nation lost in civic leadership it gained in an astounding surge of economic growth.
as late as 1870 agriculture was the nations biggest business.
by 1900 its share of the economy was half that.
until the end of the civil war the united states imported more merchandise than it exported.
by 1900 it annually delivered more than 600 million worth of manufactured goods to the worlds marketplace.
americans did not achieve this economic transformation all by themselves.
foreign investment labor trade and technology made it possible.
although in many ways still a political dwarf the united states was about to stand up before the world as an industrial colossus and the lives of millions of working americans would be transformed in the process.
the iron colt becomes an iron horse the government business entanglements that increasingly shaped politics after the civil war also undergirded the industrial development of the nation.
the unparalleled outburst of railroad construction was a crucial case.
when lincoln was shot in 1865 there were only 35 000 miles of steam railways in the united states mostly east of the mississippi.
by 1900 the gure had this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 can products radiated out all over the world notably the ve gallon kerosene can of the standard oil company.
the ag follows trade and empire tends to follow the ag a harsh lesson that america was soon to learn.
in unions there is strength gibson girl 1899 illustrator charles dana gibson created a sensation with his drawings of healthy athletic young women.
the image of the gibson girl inspired new standards of female fashion as the twentieth century opened and came to symbolize womens growing independence and assertiveness.
working class and middle class conditions of life than the precariousness of the laborers lot.
reformers struggled to introduce a mea sure of security job and wage protection and provision for temporary unemployment into the lives of the working class.
finally strong pressures for foreign trade developed as the tireless industrial machine threatened to saturate the domestic market.
aided by developments like the laying of a transatlantic telegraph in 1866 and the opening of the suez canal in 1869 international trade became ever faster cheaper and easier.
ameri the sweat of the laborer lubricated the vast new industrial machine.
yet the wage workers did not share proportionately with their employers in the benets of the age of big business.
the worker suggestive of the roman galley slave was becoming a lever puller in a giant mechanism.
individual originality and creativity were being stied and less value than ever before was being placed on manual skills.
before the civil war the worker might have toiled in a small plant whose owner hailed the employee in the morning by rst name and inquired after the familys health.
but now the factory hand was employed by a corporation depersonalized bodiless soulless and often conscienceless.
the directors knew the worker not and in fairness to their stockholders they were not inclined to engage in large scale private philanthropy.
new machines displaced employees and though in the long run more jobs were created than destroyed in the short run the manual worker was often hard hit.
a glutted labor market moreover severely handicapped wage earners.
employers could take advantage of the vast new railroad network and bring in unemployed workers from the four corners of the country and beyond to beat down high wage levels.
during the 1880s and 1890s several hundred thousand unskilled workers a year poured into the country from europe creating a labor market more favorable to the boss than the worker.
individual workers were powerless to battle singlehandedly against giant industry.
forced to organize and ght for basic rights they found the dice heavily loaded against them.
the corporation could dispense with the individual worker much more easily than the worker could dispense with the corporation.
employers could pool vast wealth through thousands of stockholders retain high priced lawyers buy up the local press and put pressure on the politicians.
they could import strikebreakers scabs and employ thugs to beat up labor organizers.
in 1886 jay gould reputedly boasted i can hire one half of the working class to kill the other half embattled labor unions of blackened coal miners were born in a company house nurtured by a high priced company store and buried in a company graveyard prematurely dead.
the middle class public annoyed by recurrent strikes grew deaf to the outcry of the worker.
american wages were perhaps the highest in the world although a dollar a day for pick and shovel labor does not now seem excessive.
carnegie and rockefeller had battled their way to the top and the view was common that the laborer could do likewise.
somehow the strike seemed like a foreign importation socialistic and hence unpatriotic.
big business might combine into trusts to raise prices but the worker must not combine into unions to raise wages.
unemployment seemed to be an act of god who somehow would take care of the laborer.
labor limps along breaker boys at south pittson pennsylvania 1911 photographer lewis hine captured the grimness of these mine helpers lives.
for hours they sat on benches above a moving belt breathing coal dust deep into their lungs and kicking large pieces of coal with their feet breaking the lumps to uniform size for shipment.
photographs like this one became icons of the reform crusade against child labor a campaign that succeeded only with the passage of the fair labor standards act in 1938 corporations had still other weapons in their arsenals.
they could call upon the federal courts presided over by well fed and conser vative judges to issue injunctions ordering the strikers to cease striking.
if deance and disorder ensued the company could request the state and federal authorities to bring in troops.
employers could lock their doors against rebellious workers a procedure called the lockout and then starve them into submission.
they could compel them to sign ironclad oaths or yellow dog contracts both of which were solemn agreements not to join a labor union.
they could put the names of agitators on a black list and circulate it among fellow employers.
a corporation might even own the company town with its high priced grocery stores and easy credit.
often the worker sank into perpetual debt a status that strongly resembled serfdom.
countless thousands labor unions which had been few and disorga nized in 1861 were given a strong boost by the civil war.
this bloody con ict with its drain on human resources put more of a premium on labor and the mounting cost of living provided an urgent incentive to unionization.
by 1872 there were several hundred thousand orga nized workers and thirty two national unions representing such crafts as bricklayers typesetters and shoemakers.
the national labor union orga nized in 1866 represented a giant bootstride by workers.
one of the earliest national scale unions to organize in the americas or europe it aimed to unify workers across locales and trades to challenge their ever more powerful bosses.
the union lasted six years and attracted the impressive total of some 600 000 members including the skilled unskilled and farmers though in keeping with the times it excluded the chinese and made only nominal efforts to include women and blacks.
black workers orga nized their own colored national labor union as an adjunct but their support for the republican party and the persistent racism of white unionists prevented the two national unions from working together.
the national labor union agitated for the arbitration of industrial disputes and the eight hour workday winning the latter for government workers.
but the devastating depression of the 1870s dealt it a knockout blow.
labor was generally rocked back on its heels during the tumultuous years of the depression but it never completely toppled.
wage reductions in 1877 touched off such disruptive strikes on the railroads that nothing short of federal troops could restore order.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 st petersburg 502 000 1 439 000 moscow 373 000 e u r op e 1 120 000 vienna 426 000 1 662 000 arctic circle 60n london 2 320 000 6 480 000 north america chicago 29 963 1 717 000 los angeles 1 610 107 000 30n tropic of cancer berlin 446 000 2 424 000 paris 1 314 000 3 330 000 new york 682 000 4 242 000 mexico city 170 000 344 000 at l a n t i c ocean o c e an 1 500 3 000 mi.
500 000 to 1 000 000 1 to 2 million n buenos aires 74 000 806 000 3 000 km.
city population under 100 000 so paulo 205 000 30s ocean 100 000 to 500 000 tropic of capricorn 1 500 120e 90e indian south america shanghai 250 000 837 000 calcutta 413 000 1 085 000 lagos 25 000 40 000 pac i f ic tokyo 567 000 1 497 000 beijing 1 648 000 1 100 000 bombay 575 000 780 000 africa 0 equator asi a 2 to 3 million 3 to 5 million over 6 million 150w 120w 90w 60w 30w 0 30e 60e 60s 413 000 population 1 085 000 map 25 1 size of world cities since 1850 sources united nations world urbanization prospects the 2005 revision tertius chandler and gerald fox 3000 years of urban growth new york academic press 1974 u s census spencer h brown public health in lagos 1850 1900 perceptions patterns and perspectives international journal of african historical studies 25 no.
1992 345 josephine olu abiodun the challenges of growth and development in metropolitan lagos in the urban challenge in africa growth and management of its large cities ed.
carole rakodi new york united nations university press 1997 193 195 united nations demographic yearbook.
rst as a ten story building in chicago in 1885 the skyscraper was made usable by the perfecting of the electric elevator.
an opinionated chicago architect louis sullivan 1856 1924 contributed formidably to the further development of the skyscraper with his famous principle that form follows function nesting loftily above city streets in the new steel skeleton high rises that sullivan helped to make popular many americans were becoming modern cliff dwellers.
americans were also becoming commuters carted daily between home and job on the mass transit lines that radiated out from central cities to surrounding suburbs.
electric trolleys powered by wagging antennae from overhead wires propelled city limits explosively outward.
by the end of the century the nations rst subway opened in boston london had led the way interactive map by building a subway as early as 1863 the compact and communal walking city its boundaries xed by the limits of leg power gave way to the immense and impersonal megalopolis carved into distinctly different districts for business industry and residential neighborhoods which were in turn segregated by race ethnicity and social class.
rural life could not compete with the siren song of the city see figure 25 1.
industrial jobs above all drew people off farms in america as well as abroad and into factory centers.
but the urban lifestyle also held powerful attractions.
the predawn milking of cows had little appeal when compared with the late night glitter of city lights particularly alluring to young adults yearning for independence.
electricity indoor plumbing and telephones whose numbers leapt from the growth of cities lower broadway 1875 horses still abounded in new york and other cities when this lithograph was made but they would soon be displaced by street railways and automobiles.
some 50 000 in 1880 to over 1 million in 1900 all made life in the big city more enticing.
engineering marvels like the skyscraper and new yorks awesome brooklyn bridge a harplike suspension span dedicated in 1883 further added to the seductive glamour of the gleaming cities.
cavernous department stores such as macys in new york and marshall fields in chicago attracted urban middle class shoppers and provided urban workingclass jobs many of them for women.
the bustling emporiums also heralded a dawning era of consumerism and accentuated widening class divisions.
when carrie meeber novelist theodore dreisers ctional heroine in sister carrie 1900 escapes from rural boredom to chicago just before the turn of the century it is the spectacle of the citys dazzling department stores that awakens her fateful yearning for a richer more elegant way of life for entry into the privileged urban middle class whose existence she had scarcely imagined in the rustic countryside.
the move to the city introduced americans to new ways of living.
country dwellers produced little household waste.
domestic animals or scavenging pigs ate food scraps on the farm.
rural women mended and darned worn clothing rather than discard it.
household products were sold in bulk at the local store without wrapping.
mail order houses such as sears and montgomery ward which increasingly displaced the rural general store in the late nineteenth century at rst did not list trash barrels or garbage cans in their catalogues.
in the city however goods came in throwaway bottles boxes bags and cans.
apartment houses had no adjoining barnyards where residents might toss garbage to the hogs.
cheap ready to wear clothing and swiftly changing fashions pushed old suits and dresses out of the closet and onto the trash heap.
waste disposal in short was an issue new to the urban age.
and the mountains of waste that urbanites generated further testied to a cultural shift away from the virtues of thrift to the conveniences of consumerism.
chapter 25 america moves to the city 1865 1900 prohibiting alcohol and promoting reform alarming gains by demon rum spurred the temperance reformers to redoubled zeal.
especially obnoxious to them was the shutter doored corner saloon appropriately called the poor mans club the barroom helped keep both him and his family poor.
liquor consumption had increased during the nerve racking days of the civil war and immigrant groups accustomed to alcohol in the old country were hostile to restraints.
whiskey loving foreigners in boston would rudely hiss temperance lecturers.
many tipplers charged with some accuracy that temperance reform amounted to a middle class assault on working class lifestyles.
the national prohibition party orga nized in 1869 polled a sprinkling of votes in some of the ensuing presidential elections.
among the favorite songs of these sober souls were ill marry no man if he drinks vote down the vile trafc and the drunkards doom typical was this now all young men a warning take and shun the poisoned bowl twill lead you down to hells dark gate and ruin your own soul.
ida b wells 1862 1931 in 1892 wells spearheaded a protest against the heinous lynching of three respected black businessmen in memphis.
faced with threats on her life wells ed from the south persevering with her tenacious antilynching campaign from the north and from england see below or p 626.
nation to grant women equal suffrage rights further inspiring american reformers.
the reborn suffrage movement and other womens orga ni zations largely excluded black women from their ranks.
fearful that an integrated campaign would compromise its efforts to get the vote the national american woman suffrage association limited membership to whites.
black women however created their own associations.
journalist and teacher ida b wells inspired black women to mount a nationwide antilynching crusade.
she also helped launch the black womens club movement which culminated in the establishment of the national association of colored women in 1896 militant women entered the alcoholic arena notably when the womans christian temperance union wctu was orga nized in 1874 the white ribbon was its symbol of purity the saintly frances e willard also a champion of planned parenthood was its leading spirit.
less saintly was the muscular and mentally deranged kansas cyclone carrie a nation whose rst husband had died of alcoholism.
with her hatchet she boldly smashed saloon bottles and bars and her hatchetations brought considerable disrepute to the prohibition movement because of the violence of her one woman crusade.
but rum was now on the run.
the potent anti saloon league was formed in 1893 with its members singing the saloon must go and vote for cold water boys female supporters sang the lips that touch liquor must never touch mine statewide prohibition which had made surprising gains in maine and elsewhere before the civil war was sweeping new states into the dry column.
the great triumph but only a temporary one came in 1919 when the national prohibition amendment eighteenth was attached to the constitution.
the prohibition crusade doused for the cause minnesota 1878 these umbrella toting temperance crusaders stood their ground despite the water poured on them by the indignant wife of the billiard hall owner.
artistic triumphs carrie nation advertised as a lecturer nation took her antidrink crusade to several universities including harvard and yale which she denounced as hellholes predictably the students greeted her with wild burlesque.
all nations welcome but carrie became a standard saying in saloons throughout the land.
banners of other social crusaders were aloft.
the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals aspca was created in 1866 after its founder had witnessed brutality to horses in russia.
the american red cross was launched in 1881 with the dynamic and diminutive ve foot tall clara barton the angel of civil war battleelds at the helm.
john adams had anticipated that his generations preoccupation with nation building would allow art to ourish in the future but the results long proved unspectacular.
portrait painting continued to appeal as it had since the colonial era but many of americas nest painters made their living abroad.
james whistler 1834 1903 did much of his work including the celebrated portrait of his mother in eng land.
this eccentric and quarrelsome massachusetts yankee had earlier been dropped from west point after failing chemistry.
had silicon been a gas he later jested i would have been a major general another gifted portrait painter likewise self exiled in eng land was john singer sargent 1856 1925.
his attering but somewhat supercial likenesses of the british nobility were highly prized.
mary cassatt an american in exile in paris painted sensitive portrayals of women and children that earned her a place in the pantheon of the french impressionist painters whose work revolutionized the european art world after their 1874 debut.
other brush wielders no less talented brightened the artistic horizon.
self taught george inness 1825 chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 up to our own day american history has been in a large degree the history of the colonization of the great west.
the existence of an area of free land its continuous recession and the advance of american settlement westward explain american development.
the white man who possesses this whole vast country from sea to sea who roams over it at pleasure and lives where he likes cannot know the cramp we feel in this little spot with the undying remembrance of the fact which you know as well as we that every foot of what you proudly call america not very long ago belonged to the red man.
w hen the civil war crashed to a close the frontier line was still wavering westward.
a long fringe of settlement bulging outward here and there ran roughly north through central texas and on to the canadian border.
between this jagged line and the settled areas on the pacic slope there were virtually no white people.
the few exceptions were the islands of mormons in utah occasional trading posts and gold camps and several scattered spanish mexican settlements throughout the southwest.
sprawling in expanse the great west was a rough square that mea sured about a thousand miles on each this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website chapter in the saga of colonizing the vanishing frontier various american wests since columbuss day from the west indies to the chesapeake shore from the valleys of the hudson and connecticut rivers to the valleys of the tennessee and ohio rivers.
and yet the trans mississippi west formed a distinct chapter 28 progressivism and the republican roosevelt 1901 1912 room in a tenement flat 1910 tenement life on the lower east side of new york city was exposed by the camera of jacob riis who compiled a large photographic archive of turn of the century urban life.
many families counted themselves lucky to share a single room no matter how squalid.
reforms modeled on european examples importing policy ideas from berlin to baltimore.
feminists in multiplying numbers added social justice to suffrage on their list of needed reforms.
with urban pioneers like jane addams in chicago and lillian wald in new york blazing the way women entered the ght to improve the lot of families living and working in the festering cities.
raking muck with the muckrakers beginning about 1902 the exposing of evil became a ourishing industry among american publishers.
a group of aggressive ten and fteen cent popular magazines surged to the front notably mcclures cosmopolitan colliers and everybodys.
waging erce circulation wars they dug deep for the dirt that the public loved to hate.
enterprising editors nanced extensive research and encouraged pugnacious writing by their bright young reporters whom president roosevelt branded as muckrakers in 1906 annoyed by their excess of zeal he compared the mudslinging magazine dirt diggers to the gure in bunyans pilgrims progress who was so intent on raking manure that he could not see the celestial crown dangling overhead.
despite presidential scolding these muckrakers boomed circulation and some of their most scandalous exposures were published as best selling books.
the reformer writers ranged far wide and deep in their crusade to lay bare the muck of iniquity in american society.
in 1902 a brilliant new york reporter lincoln steffens launched a series of articles in mcclures titled the shame of the cities he fearlessly unmasked the corrupt alliance between big business and municipal government.
steffens was followed in the same magazine by ida m tarbell a pioneering journalist who published a devastating but factual expos of the standard oil company.
her father had been ruined by the oil interests.
in his muckraker speech 1906 theodore roosevelt 1858 1919 said now it is very necessary that we should not inch from seeing what is vile and debasing.
there is lth on the oor and it must be scraped up with the muck rake and there are times and places where this service is the most needed of all the services that can be performed.
but the man who never does anything else who never thinks or speaks or writes save of his feats with the muck rake speedily becomes not a help to society not an incitement to good but one of the most potent forces for evil.
progressives battle corruption and corporations in his muckraking classic the shame of the cities 1904 lincoln steffens 1866 1936 decried the great threat posed by new york citys tammany machine bribery is no ordinary felony but treason.
corruption which breaks out here and there and now and then is not an occasional offense but a common practice and.
the effect of it is literally to change the form of our government from one that is representative of the people to an oligarchy representative of special interests.
ida tarbell 1857 1944 in her ofce tarbell was the most eminent woman in the muckraking movement and one of the most respected business historians of her generation.
in 1904 she earned a national reputation for publishing a scathing history of the standard oil company the mother of trusts two years later she joined ray stannard baker william allen white and other muckrakers in purchasing the american magazine which became a journalistic podium in their campaign for honest government and an end to business abuses.
plucky muckrakers fearlessly tilted their pen lances at varied targets.
they assailed the malpractices of life insurance companies and tariff lobbies.
they roasted the beef trust the money trust the railroad barons and the corrupt amassing of american fortunes.
thomas w lawson an erratic speculator who had himself made 50 million on the stock market laid bare the practices of his accomplices in frenzied finance a series of articles that appeared in everybodys.
lawson by fouling his own nest made many enemies among his rich associates and he died a poor man.
david g phillips shocked an already startled nation by his series in cosmopolitan titled the treason of the senate 1906.
he boldly charged that seventy ve of the ninety senators did not represent the people at all but the railroads and trusts.
this withering indictment buttressed by facts impressed president roosevelt.
phillips continued his attacks through novels and was fatally shot in 1911 by a deranged young man whose family he had allegedly maligned.
some of the most effective re of the muckrakers was directed at social evils.
the ugly list included the immoral white slave trafc in women the rickety slums and the appalling number of industrial accidents.
the sorry subjugation of americas 9 million blacks of whom 90 percent still lived in the south and one third were illiterate was spotlighted in ray stannard bakers following the color line 1908.
the abuses of child labor were brought luridly to light by john spargos the bitter cry of the children 1906.
vendors of potent patent medicines often heavily spiked with alcohol likewise came in for bitter criticism.
these conscienceless vultures sold incredible quantities of adulterated or habit forming drugs while doping the press with lavish advertising.
muckraking attacks in colliers were ably reinforced by dr harvey w wiley chief chemist of the department of agriculture who with his famous poison squad performed experiments on himself.
full of sound and fury the muckrakers signied much about the nature of the progressive reform movement.
they were long on lamentation but stopped short of revolutionary remedies.
to right social wrongs they counted on publicity and an aroused public conscience not drastic political change.
they sought not to overthrow capitalism but to cleanse it.
the cure for the ills of american democracy they earnestly believed was more democracy.
thinking globally why is there no socialism in the united states t he industrial revolution that began in britain in the late eighteenth century had by 1900 utterly transformed life in the western world and beyond.
it also had spawned a powerful theory of history grounded in the writings of karl marx.
marxists believed that historys driving engine was class conict that in the industrial era that conict had been starkly reduced to the contest between capitalists and workers the bourgeoisie and the proletariat and that an inevitable socialist revolution would result in the triumph of the proletariat and the emergence of a classless society.
its organizing principle would be from each according to his ability to each according to his needs improbable as it might seem today many nineteenthcentury marxists expected the rst socialist revolution to occur in the united states.
marx himself saw america as the country where capitalism had developed more shamelessly than elsewhere thus setting the stage for the nal conict that would yield the socialist utopia.
violent labor upheavals like those at homestead see p 557 haymarket the prophet of the class struggle karl marx 1818 1883 see p 589 and pullman see p 658 seemed to conrm that analysis and a chorus of european marxists stepped up their prophecies.
marxs collaborator friedrich engels wrote in the aftermath of the haymarket eruption in may 1886 that in europe it had taken workers decades to evolve a common class consciousness but on the more favored soil of america where no medieval ruins bar the way.
the working class would do so within 10 months but it was not to be.
twenty years later the head of the german social democratic party lamented that we are waiting for you americans to do something the americans had done a little something but amid all the ferment of reform in the progressive era they remained a sore disappointment to european radicals.
eugene v debs organized the socialist party in 1901 and won 6 percent of the vote in the presidential election of 1912 but the socialist party remained a tiny marginal group.
it never posed a serious challenge to the major american parties and never remotely approached the stature of old world working class parties such as the french socialists the italian communists the german social democrats and the british labour party.
at one time or another most of these european organizations became ruling parties that implemented socialist ideas such as national ownership of core industries robust support for labor unions and lavish welfare programs developments that to this day have had only feeble if any counterparts in the united states.
the failure of marxs predictions about america occasioned much soul searching about the plausibility of his entire theory of history.
in 1904 a young german scholar named werner sombart traveled to the united states much as alexis de tocqueville had nearly seventy ve years earlier to examine americas puzzling reality rsthand see thinking globally alexis de tocqueville on democracy in america and europe pages 278 279.
two years later he published the notable book why is there no socialism in the united states.
if socialism follows as a necessary reaction to capitalism he asked why was there no socialist movement worthy of the name in the country with the most advanced capitalist development namely the united states sombart gave several answers 1 the strikingly egalitarian manners of all americans.
the bowing and scraping before the upper classes which produces such an unpleasant impression in europe is completely unknown he noted reecting the workers refusal or inability to consider themselves a class apart.
the iww seeks subscribers 1911 this poster aimed to attract subscribers to industrial worker the newspaper of the industrial workers of the world iww.
the iww was a small but vocal radical labor union that hoped to unify american workers in one big union irrespective of their particular jobs gender or race.
its motto was an injury to one is an injury to all at its peak in 1923 the union claimed 100 000 members commonly known as wobblies and could marshal the support of some 300 000 more mostly workers on the docks and in mines lumbering and textiles.
2 the safety valve of the western frontier which allowed workers to walk away from oppressive employers and strike out on their own.
sombart exaggerated the effects of the frontier see p 650 but he did call attention to the remarkable geographic mobility of american workers which together with their astonishing racial and ethnic diversity worked to inhibit their sense of class permanence and class solidarity.
3 the american workers remarkably high standard of living.
on roast beef and apple pie he concluded in a famous sentence all socialist utopias have gone to pot 4 an accident of historical timing.
sombart shared with tocqueville a deep insight into the american experience.
unlike europe where the struggles for political and economic rights went forward in tandem in america workers had largely achieved full political equality before the onset of americas own industrial revolution.
they had a stake in the existing political order from the outset and little incentive to overturn it.
as another german socialist put it for the purposes of building class consciousness the struggle for freedom is very much superior to the effortless possession of a freedom that others have won before that observation echoed tocquevilles celebrated dictum that because the united states never had a feudal phase it was born free instead of becoming so and was reaping the fruits of the democratic revolution without having had the revolution itself more than a century after sombarts inquiry and especially since the collapse of soviet communism marxism stands largely discredited and some western european societies are edging away from socialist ideas such as national ownership of industries.
as one historian has suggested one might well ask not why is there no socialism in the united states but why has there been no socialist transformation in any advanced capitalist society chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 american enterprise is not free the man with only a little capital is nding it harder and harder to get into the eld more and more impossible to compete with the big fellow.
because the laws of this country do not prevent the strong from crushing the weak.
o fce hungry democrats the outs since 1897 were jubilant over the disruptive republican brawl at the convention in chicago.
if they could come up with an outstanding reformist leader they had an excellent chance to win the white house.
such a leader appeared in dr woodrow wilson once a mild conservative but now a militant progressive.
beginning professional life as a brilliant academic lecturer on government he had risen in 1902 to the presidency of princeton university where he had achieved some sweeping educational reforms.
wilson entered politics in 1910 when new jersey bosses needing a respectable front candidate for the governorship offered him the nomination.
they expected to lead the academic novice by the nose but to their surprise wilson waged a passionate reform campaign in which he assailed the predatory trusts and promised to return state government to the people.
riding the crest of the progressive wave the schoolmaster in politics was swept into ofce.
once in the governors chair wilson drove through the legislature a sheaf of forward looking mea sures that made reactionary new jersey one of the more liberal states.
filled with righteous indignation wilson revealed irresistible reforming zeal burning eloquence superb powers of leadership and a refreshing habit of appealing over the heads of the scheming bosses to the sovereign people.
now a gure of national eminence wilson was being widely mentioned for the presidency.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website roosevelt versus wilson gop divided by bull moose equals democratic victory 1912 the bull moose campaign of 1912 when the democrats met at baltimore in 1912 wilson was nominated on the forty sixth ballot aided by william jennings bryans switch to his side.
the democrats gave wilson a strong progressive platform to run on dubbed the new freedom program it included calls for stronger antitrust legislation banking reform and tariff reductions.
surging events had meanwhile been thrusting roosevelt to the fore as a candidate for the presidency on a third party progressive republican ticket.
the ghting ex cowboy angered by his recent rebuff was eager to lead the charge.
a pro roosevelt progressive convention with about two thousand delegates from forty states assembled in chicago during august 1912 dramatically symbolizing the rising political status of women as well as progressive support for the cause of social justice settlement house pioneer jane addams placed roosevelts name in nomination for the presidency.
roosevelt was applauded tumultuously as he cried in a vehement speech we stand at armageddon and we battle for the lord the hosanna spirit of a religious revival meeting suffused the convention as the hoarse delegates sang onward christian soldiers and battle hymn of the republic william allen white the caustic kansas journalist later wrote roosevelt bit me and i went mad fired up progressives entered the campaign with righteousness and enthusiasm.
roosevelt boasted that he felt as strong as a bull moose and the bull moose took its place with the donkey and the elephant in the american political zoo.
as one poet whimsically put it i want to be a bull moose and with the bull moose stand with antlers on my forehead and a big stick in my hand.
roosevelt and taft were bound to slit each others political throats by dividing the republican vote they virtually guaranteed a democratic victory.
the two antagonists tore into each other as only former friends can.
death alone can take me out now cried the once jovial taft as he branded roosevelt a dangerous egotist and a demagogue roosevelt ghting mad assailed taft as a fathead with the brain of a guinea pig beyond the clashing personalities the overshadowing question of the 1912 campaign was which of two varieties of progressivism would prevail roosevelts new nationalism or wilsons new freedom.
both men favored a more active government role in economic and social affairs but they disagreed sharply over specic strategies.
roosevelt preached the theories spun out by the progressive thinker herbert croly in his book the promise of american life 1910.
croly and tr both favored continued consolidation of trusts and labor unions paralleled by the growth of powerful regulatory agencies in washington.
roosevelt and his bull moosers also campaigned for woman suffrage and a broad program of social welfare including minimum wage laws and socialistic social insurance.
clearly the bull moose progressives looked forward to the kind of activist welfare state that franklin roosevelts new deal would one day make a reality.
chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 chronology wilson defeats taft and roosevelt for presidency underwood tariff act sixteenth amendment income tax federal reserve act huerta takes power in mexico seventeenth amendment direct election of senators clayton anti trust act federal trade commission established u s seizes port of veracruz mexico world war i begins in europe sussex ultimatum and pledge u s exports to european belligerents skyrocket workingmens compensation act federal farm loan act warehouse act adamson act pancho villa raids new mexico brandeis appointed to supreme court jones act u s marines sent to dominican republic wilson defeats hughes for presidency united states buys virgin islands from denmark la follette seamans act lusitania torpedoed and sunk by german u boat u s marines sent to haiti germany declares submarine war area around british isles key terms new freedom 729 new nationalism 729 underwood tariff 732 federal reserve act 733 federal trade commission act 733 clayton anti trust act 733 holding companies 733 people to know workingmens compensation act 734 adamson act 734 jones act 734 tampico incident 737 central powers 738 allies 738 u boats 740 lusitania 740 herbert croly louis d brandeis victoriano huerta venustiano carranza francisco pancho villa john black jack pershing charles evans hughes who were the progressives.
d ebate about progressivism has revolved mainly around a question that is simple to ask but devilishly difcult to answer who were the progressives.
it was once taken for granted that progressive reformers were simply the heirs of the jeffersonian jacksonianpopulist reform crusades they were the oppressed and downtrodden common folk who nally erupted in wrath and demanded their due.
but in his inuential age of reform 1955 richard hofstadter astutely challenged that view.
progressive leaders he argued were not drawn from the ranks of societys poor and marginalized.
rather they were to learn more middle class people threatened from above by the emerging power of new corporate elites and from below by a restless working class.
it was not economic deprivation but status anxiety hofstadter insisted that prompted these people to become reformers.
their psychological motivation hofstadter concluded rendered many of their reform efforts quirky and ineffectual.
by contrast new left historians notably gabriel kolko argued that progressivism was dominated by established business leaders who successfully directed reform to their own conser vative ends.
in this view government regulation as embodied in new agencies like the federal reserve board and the federal tariff commission and in legislation like the meat inspection act simply accomplished what two generations of private efforts had failed to do dampen cutthroat competition stabilize markets and make america safe for monopoly capitalism.
still other scholars notably robert h wiebe and samuel p hays argued that the progressives were neither the psychologically or economically disadvantaged nor the old capitalist elite but were rather members of a rapidly emerging self condent social class possessed of the new techniques of scientic management technological ex per tise and orga ni zational know how.
this orga ni zational school of historians did not see progressivism as a struggle of the people against the interests as a confused and nostalgic campaign by status threatened reformers or as a conser vative coup dtat.
the progressive movement in this view was by and large an effort to rationalize and modernize many social institutions by introducing the wise and impartial hand of government regulation.
this view had much to recommend it.
yet despite its widespread acceptance among historians it could not adequately account for the titanic political struggles of the progressive era over the very reforms that the orga ni zational school regarded as simple adjustments to modernity.
it also brushed over the deep philosophical differences that divided progressives themselves such as between roosevelts new nationalism and wilsons new freedom.
in addition the orga ni zational approach did not account for the important role of women in advocating progressive reforms as demonstrated by robyn muncy linda gordon and theda skocpol.
building the american welfare state in the early twentieth century they have argued was fundamentally a gendered activity inspired by a female dominion of social workers and social feminists scholars such as daniel t rodgers have added that essential inspiration also came from across the atlantic.
in european countries vibrant labor movements sought a welfare state to benet the working class whereas in the united states the strength of female reformers promoted welfare programs aimed at protecting women and children.
all the same american programs frequently were modeled after policies adopted in london paris and berlin.
to learn more michael c adams the great adventure male desire and the coming of world war i 1990 john w chambers the tyranny of change america in the progressive era 1900 1917 rev.
ed 2000 john m cooper the warrior and the priest woodrow wilson and theodore roosevelt 1983 alexander l george and juliette l george woodrow wilson and colonel house 1956 henry may the end of american innocence a study of the first years of our time 1959 frank a ninkovich the wilsonian century u s foreign policy since 1900 1999 mary renda taking haiti military occupation and the culture of u s imperialism 1915 1940 2001 edward stettner shaping modern liberalism herbert croly and progressive thought 1993 philippa strum brandeis justice for the people 1985 eileen welsome the general and the jaguar pershings hunt for pancho villa 2006 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 their manpower barrels.
a huge american army would have to be raised trained and transported or the whole western front would collapse.
conscription was the only answer to the need for raising an immense army with all possible speed.
wilson disliked a draft as did many other americans with civil war memories but he eventually accepted and eloquently supported conscription as a disagreeable and temporary necessity.
the proposed draft bill immediately ran into a barrage of criticism in congress.
a congressman from missouri deploring compulsion cried out in protest that there was precious little difference between a conscript and a convict prophets of doom predicted that on draft registration day the streets would run red with blood.
at length congress six weeks after declaring war grudgingly got around to passing conscription.
the draft act required the registration of all males between the ages of eighteen and forty ve.
no draft dodger could purchase his exemption or hire a substitute as in the days of the civil war though the law exempted men in key industries such as shipbuilding.
ignoring grisly tales of the agonies of trench warfare many young american men saw an opportunity for adventure and seized it.
author john dos passos 1896 1970 recollected how he felt going off to war in 1917 we had spent our boyhood in the afterglow of the peaceful nineteenth century.
what was war like.
we wanted to see with our own eyes.
we ocked into the volunteer services.
i respected the conscientious objectors and occasionally felt i should take that course myself but hell i wanted to see the show.
the draft machinery on the whole worked effectively.
registration day proved to be a day of patriotic pilgrimages to ag draped registration centers and the sign up saw no shedding of blood as some had gloomily predicted.
despite precautions some 337 000 slackers escaped the draft and about 4 000 conscientious objectors were excused.
within a few frantic months the army grew to over 4 million men.
for the rst time women were admitted to the armed forces some 11 000 to the navy and 269 to the marines.
african americans also served in the armed forces though in strictly segregated units and usually under white ofcers.
reecting racial attitudes of the time military authorities hesitated to train black men for combat and the majority of black soldiers were assigned to construction battalions or put to work unloading ships.
recruits were supposed to receive six months of training in america and two more months overseas.
but so great was the urgency that many doughboys were swept swiftly into battle scarcely knowing how to handle a rie much less a bayonet.
fighting in france belatedly miracles in shipbuilding russias collapse underscored the need for haste.
the communistic bolsheviks after seizing power late in 1917 ultimately withdrew their beaten country from the capitalistic war early in 1918 this sudden defection released hundreds of thousands of battle tested germans from the eastern front facing russia for the western front in france where for the rst time in the stopping the german juggernaut war they were developing a dangerous superiority in manpower.
berlins calculations as to american tardiness were surprisingly accurate.
germany had counted on knocking out britain six months after the declaration of unlimited submarine warfare long before america could get into the struggle.
no really effective american ghting force reached france until about a year after congress declared war.
berlin had also reckoned on the inability of the americans to transport their army assuming that they were able to raise one.
here again the german predictions were not far from the mark as shipping shortages plagued the allies.
nevertheless france gradually began to bustle with american doughboys see map 30 1.
the rst trainees to reach the front were used as replacements in the allied armies and were generally deployed in quiet sectors with the british and french.
the newcomers soon made friends with the french girls or tried to and one of the most sung about women in history was the fabled mademoiselle from armentires one of the printable stanzas ran she was true to me she was true to you she was true to the whole damn army too.
battling venereal disease the american military waged a half hearted war on rampant venereal disease.
0 interactive map ver fla nd e s ly ypres ra n eth.
tr eld brussels sch.
do it of rs r.
dover st b elgi u m.
se r m eu so m m er.
somme offensive amiens cantigny may 28 1918 in e central powers neutral nations german spring offensive 1918 aisne marne offensive ge r m a n y ne r ais verdun feb 21 dec.
18 1916 belleau wood r june 6 25 1918 versailles allied powers se mo lux.
sedan paris m e r ar n chteau thierry may 31 june 4 1918 lo meuse argonne sept 26 nov 11 1918 second battle of the marne july 18 aug 6 1918 f r ance rr ai n e st mihiel sept 12 16 1918 a l s ac e 50n lle eng lis h cha n n el r lys offensive se map 30 1 major u s operations in france 1918 one doughboy recorded in his diary his baptism of re at st mihiel hiked through dark woods.
no lights allowed guided by holding on the pack of the man ahead.
stumbled through underbrush for about half mile into an open eld where we waited in soaking rain until about 10 00 p m we then started on our hike to the st mihiel front arriving on the crest of a hill at 1 00 a m i saw a sight which i shall never forget.
it was the zero hour and in one instant the entire front as far as the eye could reach in either direction was a sheet of ame while the heavy artillery made the earth quake 5e gr eat b r i ta i n n american offensive stabilized front 1914 1917 armistice line nov 11 1918 farthest german advance july 18 1918 deadlocked battle allied victory 100 km.
chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 not surprisingly american soldiers suffered from high rates of venereal disease which the army only contributed to by avoiding the subject.
american operations were not con ned solely to france small detachments fought in belgium italy and notably russia.
the united states hoping to keep stores of munitions from falling into german hands when bolshevik russia quit ghting contributed some 5 000 troops to an allied invasion of northern russia at archangel.
wilson likewise sent nearly 10 000 troops to siberia as part of an allied expedition which included more than 70 000 japa nese.
major american purposes were to prevent japan from getting a stranglehold on siberia to rescue some 45 000 marooned czechoslovak troops and to snatch military supplies from bolshevik control.
sharp ghting at archangel and in siberia involved casualties on both sides including several hundred americans.
the bolsheviks long resented these capitalistic interventions which they regarded as high handed efforts to suffocate their infant communist revolution in its cradle.
america helps hammer the hun the dreaded german drive on the western front exploded in the spring of 1918 spearheaded by about half a million troops the enemy rolled forward with terrifying momentum.
so dire was the peril that the allied nations for the rst time united under a supreme commander the quiet french marshal foch whose axiom was to make war is to attack until then the allies had been ghting imperfectly coordinated actions.
at last the ill trained yanks were coming and not a moment too soon.
late in may 1918 the german juggernaut smashing to within forty miles of paris threatened to knock out france.
newly arrived american troops numbering fewer than thirty thousand were thrown into the breach at chteau thierry right in the teeth of the german advance.
this was a historic moment the rst signicant engagement of american troops in a european war.
battle fatigued french soldiers watched incredulously as the roads lled with endless truckloads of american doughboys singing new world songs at the top of their voices a seemingly inexhaustible ood of fresh and gleaming youth.
with their arrival it was clear that a new american giant had arisen in the west to replace the dying russian titan in the east.
american weight in the scales was now being felt on both sides of the con ict see figure 30 1.
by july 1918 the awesome german drive had spent its force and keyed up american men participated in a foch counteroffensive in the second battle of the marne.
this engagement marked the beginning of a german withdrawal that was never effectively reversed.
in september 1918 nine american divisions about 243 000 men joined four french divisions to push the germans gassed by john singer sargent the noted artist captures the horror of trench warfare in world war i the enemy was often distant and unseen and death came impersonally from gas or artillery re.
american troops entering the line only in the wars nal days were only briey exposed to this kind of brutal ghting.
mademoiselle from armentires ome familiar songs such as julia ward howes stirring civil war era melody battle hymn of the republic were penned by known composers and have well established scores and lyrics.
but many ballads have no specic author.
songwriters may t new verses to known tunes but the songs essentially grow out of the soil of popular culture and take on a life of their own.
yankee doodle dandy for example originated during the seventeenthcentury eng lish civil war was adapted by the american revolutionaries more than a century later and was parodied by southerners during the american civil war s yankee doodle had a mind to whip the southern traitors because they didnt choose to live on codsh and potaters.
stagger lee or stagolee a blues ballad supposedly based on a murder in memphis in the 1930s has been played in countless renditions with its homicidal subject variously portrayed as a ruthless badman or a civil rights hero.
this process of accretion and adaptation can furnish valuable clues to historians about changing sentiments and sensibilities just as the ballads themselves give expression to feelings not always evident in the of cial record.
folklorist alan lomax spent a lifetime tracking down american ballads documenting layers of life and experience not usually excavated by traditional scholars.
in the case of the first world wars most notorious song mademoiselle from armentires or hinky dinky parley voo he compiled from various sources more than six hundred soldier authored stanzas some of which are reproduced here others he delicately described as not mailable.
what fresh and irreverent perspectives do they reveal about the soldierseye view of military life.
mademoiselle from armentires she hadnt been kissed in forty years.
she might have been young for all we knew when napoleon opped at waterloo.
youll never get your croix de guerre if you never wash your underwear.
the french they are a funny race they ght with their feet and save their face.
the cootie louse is the national bug of france.
the cooties found all over france no matter where you hang your pants.
oh the seventy seventh went over the top a sous lieutenant a jew and a wop.
the ofcers get all the steak and all we get is the belly ache.
the general got a croix de guerre the son of a gun was never there.
theres many and many a married man wants to go back to france again.
twas a hell of a war as we recall but still twas better than none at all.
source excerpt from john a lomax and alan lomax american ballads and folk songs pp.
560 courtesy of the alan lomax archive chapter 32 the politics of boom and bust 1920 1932 frustrated farmers sun bronzed farmers were caught squarely in a boomor bust cycle in the postwar decade.
while the ghting had raged they had raked in money hand over gnarled st by the spring of 1920 the price of wheat had shot up to an incredible 3 a bushel.
but peace brought an end to government guaranteed high prices and to massive purchases by other nations as foreign production reentered the stream of world commerce.
machines also threatened to plow the farmers under an avalanche of their own overabundant crops.
the gasoline engine tractor was working a revolution on american farms.
this steel mule was to cultivation and sowing what the mccormick reaper was to harvesting.
blue denimed farmers no longer had to plod after the horse drawn plow with high footed gait.
they could sit erect on their chugging mechanized chariots and turn under and harrow many acres in a single day.
they could grow bigger crops on larger areas using fewer horses and hired hands.
the wartime boom had encouraged them to bring vast new tracts under cultivation especially in the wheat belt of the upper midwest.
but such improved efciency and expanded agricultural acreage helped to pile up more pricedampening surpluses.
a withering depression swept through agricultural districts in the 1920s when one farm in four was sold for debt or taxes.
as a plaintive song of the period ran mechanizing agriculture just as the automobile replaced the horse on city streets so did the gas engine tractor replace horses and mules on the nations farms in the 1920s.
american farmers owned ten times more tractors in 1930 than they did in 1920 the smoke belching tractors bolstered productivity but also increased the farmers debt burden as the great depression made tragically clear.
no use talkin any mans beat with leven cent cotton and forty cent meat.
schemes abounded for bringing relief to the hardpressed farmers.
a bipartisan farm bloc from the agricultural states coalesced in congress in 1921 and succeeded in driv ing through some helpful laws.
noteworthy was the capper volstead act which exempted farmers marketing cooperatives from antitrust prosecution.
the farm blocs favorite proposal was the mcnary haugen bill pushed energetically from 1924 to 1928 it sought to keep agricultural prices high by authorizing the government to buy up surpluses and sell them abroad.
government losses were to be made up by a special tax on the farmers.
congress twice passed the bill but frugal coolidge twice vetoed it.
farm prices stayed down and farmers political temperatures stayed high reaching a fever pitch in the election of 1924 a three way race for the white house in 1924 self satised republicans chanting keep cool and keep coolidge nominated silent cal for the presidency at their convention in cleveland in the simmering summer of 1924 squabbling democrats had more difculty choosing a candidate when they met in new yorks sweltering madison square garden.
reecting farmers and reformers many of the cultural tensions of the decade the party was hopelessly split between wets and drys urbanites and farmers fundamentalists and modernists northern liberals and southern stand patters immigrants and old stock americans.
in one symptomatic spasm of discord the conventioneers failed by just one vote to pass a resolution condemning the ku klux klan.
deadlocked for an unprecedented 102 ballots the convention at last turned wearily sweatily and unenthusiastically to john w davis.
a wealthy corporation lawyer connected with the wall street banking house of j p morgan and company the polished nominee was no less conservative than cautious calvin coolidge.
the eld was now wide open for a liberal candidate.
the white pompadoured senator robert fighting bob la follette from wisconsin perennial aspirant to the presidency and now sixty nine years of age sprang forward to lead a new progressive party.
he gained the endorsement of the american federation of labor and enjoyed the support of the shrinking socialist party but his major constituency was made up of the pricepinched farmers.
la follettes new progressive party elding only a presidential ticket with no candidates for local ofce was a head without a body.
it proved to be only a shadow of the robust progressive coalition of prewar days.
its platform called for government ownership of railroads and relief for farmers lashed out at monopoly and antilabor injunctions and urged a constitutional amendment to limit the supreme courts power to invalidate laws passed by congress.
la follette turned in a respectable showing polling nearly 5 million votes.
but cautious cal and the oil smeared republicans slipped easily back into ofce overwhelming davis 15 718 211 to 8 385 283 the electoral count stood at 382 for coolidge 136 for davis and 13 for la follette all from his home state of wisconsin see map 32 1.
as the so called conscience of the callous 1920s la follette injected a badly needed map 32 1 presidential election of 1924 showing popular vote by county note the concentration of la follettes votes in the old populist strongholds of the midwest and the mountain states.
his ticket did especially well in the graininteractive map growing districts battered by the postwar slump in agricultural prices.
wash n h vt r 4 r 7 mont.
r 6 r 5 oregon minn r 5 mass.
r 12 idaho s dak.
p 13 r 3 r 13 r 8 r 4 ill r 29 colo r 6 kansas r 10 ariz r 3 r i r 5 iowa nebr.
r 13 mich pa utah calif r 45 r 15 nev r 3 r 18 n y okla n mex.
d 10 r 3 ind.
r 15 r 38 ohio md.
r 8 n c d 12 d 12 s c ark.
d 9 d 9 miss.
d 10 d 20 va d 12 r 13 tenn texas r 14 r 3 w va ky r 18 n j r 7 del.
r 24 r 8 mo.
conn ala d 12 ga d 14 la.
d 10 fla d 6 candidate party electoral vote popular vote coolidge republican 72 15 718 211 54 0 davis democrat 26 8 385 283 28 8 2 4 831 289 16 6 la follette progressive no returns unsettled etc.
chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 businesspeople chiselers publicly displayed the blue bird in their windows but secretly violated the codes.
complete collapse was imminent when in 1935 the supreme court shot down the dying eagle in the famed schechter sick chicken decision.
the learned justices unanimously held that congress could not delegate legislative powers to the executive.
they further declared that congressional control of interstate commerce could not properly apply to a local fowl business like that of the schechter brothers in brooklyn new york.
roosevelt was incensed by this horse and buggy interpretation of the constitution but actually the court helped him out of a bad jam.
grand coulee dam under construction on the columbia river 1939 located in central washington state the grand coulee dam was one of the most ambitious projects of the new deals public works administration.
it is the largest concrete structure in the united states and the central facility in the columbia basin project which generates electricity for the pacic northwest and provides irrigation for half a million acres of columbia valley farmland services that have transformed the life of the region.
the same act of congress that hatched the nra eagle also authorized the public works administration pwa likewise intended both for industrial recovery and for unemployment relief.
the agency was headed by the secretary of the interior acid tongued harold l ickes a free swinging former bull mooser.
long range recovery was the primary purpose of the new agency and in time over 4 billion was spent on some thirty four thousand projects which included public buildings highways and parkways.
one spectacular achievement was the grand coulee dam on the columbia river the largest structure erected by humans since the great wall of china.
in the depths of the depression the grand dam seemed the height of folly.
it made possible the irrigation of millions of acres of new farmland at a time when the government was desperately trying to reduce farm surpluses.
it created more electrical power than the entire tennessee valley authority in a region with little industry and virtually no market for additional power.
but with the outbreak of world war ii and then postwar prosperity the dam would come to seem a stroke of genius transforming the entire region with abundant water and power.
special stimulants aided the recovery of one segment of business the liquor industry.
the imminent repeal of the prohibition amendment afforded an opportunity to raise needed federal revenue and at the same time to provide a mea sure of employment.
prodded by roosevelt the hundred days congress in one of its earliest acts legalized light wine and beer with an alcoholic content presumably nonintoxicating not exceeding 3 2 percent by weight and levied a tax of 5 on every barrel so manufactured.
disgruntled drys unwilling to acknowledge the breakdown of law and order begotten by bootlegging damned roosevelt as a 3 2 percent american prohibition was ofcially repealed by the twenty rst amendment late in 1933 see the appendix and the saloon doors swung open.
paying farmers not to farm ever since the war boom days of 1918 farmers had suffered from low prices and overproduction especially in grain.
during the depression conditions became desperate as innumerable mortgages were foreclosed as corn was burned for fuel and as embattled farmers tried to prevent the shipment of crops to glutted markets.
in iowa several volatile counties were placed under martial law.
aid for agriculture a radical new approach to farm recovery was embraced when the emergency congress established the agricultural adjustment administration aaa.
through articial scarcity this agency was to establish parity prices for basic commodities.
parity was the price set for a product that gave it the same real value in purchasing power that it had enjoyed during the period from 1909 to 1914 the aaa would eliminate price depressing surpluses by paying growers to reduce their crop acreage.
the millions of dollars needed for these payments were to be raised by taxing processors of farm products such as our millers who in turn would shift the burden to consumers.
unhappily the aaa got off to a wobbly start.
it was begun after much of the cotton crop for 1933 had been planted and balky mules trained otherwise were forced to plow under countless young plants.
several million squealing pigs were purchased and slaughtered.
much of their meat was distributed to people on relief but some of it was used for fertilizer.
this sinful destruction of food at a time when thousands of citizens were hungry increased condemnation of the american economic system by many left leaning voices.
subsidized scarcity did have the effect of raising farm income but the whole confused enterprise met with acid criticism.
farmers food processors consumers and taxpayers were all to some degree unhappy.
paying the farmers not to farm actually increased unemployment at a time when other new deal agencies were striving to decrease it.
when the supreme court nally killed the aaa in 1936 by declaring its regulatory taxation provisions unconstitutional foes of the plow under program rejoiced loudly.
quickly recovering from this blow the new deal congress hastened to pass the soil conservation and domestic allotment act of 1936 the withdrawal of acreage from production was now achieved by paying farmers to plant soil conserving crops like soybeans or to let their land lie fallow.
with the emphasis thus on conservation the supreme court placed its stamp of approval on the revamped scheme.
the second agricultural adjustment act of 1938 passed two years later was a more comprehensive substitute although it continued conservation payments.
if growers observed acreage restrictions on specied commodities like cotton and wheat they would be eligible for parity payments.
other provisions of the new aaa were designed to give farmers not only a fairer price but a more substantial share of the national income.
both goals were partially achieved.
an okie family hits the road in the 1930s to escape the dust bowl dust bowls and black blizzards nature meanwhile had been providing some unplanned scarcity.
late in 1933 a prolonged drought struck the states of the trans mississippi great plains.
rainless weeks were followed by furious whining winds while the sun was darkened by millions of tons of powdery topsoil torn from homesteads in an area that stretched from eastern colorado to western missouri soon to be dubbed the dust bowl.
despondent citizens sat on front porches with protective masks on their faces watching their farms swirl by.
a sevenyear old boy in kansas suffocated.
overawed victims of the dust bowl disaster predicted the end of the world or the second coming of christ.
drought and wind triggered the dust storms but they were not the only culprits.
the human hand had also worked its mischief.
high grain prices during world war i had enticed farmers to bring countless acres of marginal land under cultivation.
worse dryfarming techniques and mechanization had revolutionized great plains agriculture.
the steam tractor and the disk plow tore up in nitely more sod than a team of oxen ever could leaving the powdery topsoil to be swept away at natures whim see map 33 1.
chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 the hydrogen bomb 1954 this test blast at bikini atoll in the marshall islands was so powerful that one japanese sherman was killed and all twenty two of his crewmates were seriously injured by radioactive ash that fell on their vessel some eighty miles away.
fishing boats a thousand miles from bikini later brought in radioactively contaminated catches.
if the cold war should ever blaze into a hot war there might be no world left for the communists to communize or the democracies to democratize a chilling thought that constrained both camps.
peace through mutual terror brought a shaky stability to the superpower standoff.
ferreting out alleged communists one of the most active cold war fronts was at home where a new anti red chase was in full cry.
many nervous citizens feared that communist spies paid with moscow gold were undermining the government and treacherously misdirecting foreign policy.
in 1947 truman launched a massive loyalty program.
the attorney general drew up a list of ninety supposedly disloyal orga ni zations none of which was given the opportunity to prove its innocence.
the loyalty review board investigated more than 3 million federal employees some 3 000 of whom either resigned or were dismissed none under formal indictment.
individual states likewise became intensely security conscious.
loyalty oaths in increasing numbers were demanded of employees especially teachers.
the gnawing question for many earnest americans was could the nation continue to enjoy traditional freedoms especially freedom of speech freedom of thought and the right of political dissent in a cold war climate.
in 1949 eleven communists were brought before a new york jury for violating the smith act of 1940 the rst peacetime antisedition law since 1798 convicted of advocating the overthrow of the american government by force the defendants were sent to prison.
the supreme court upheld their convictions in dennis v united states 1951.
the house of representatives in 1938 had established the house un american activities committee huac to investigate subversion in 1948 committee member richard m nixon an ambitious red catcher led the chase after alger hiss a prominent ex new dealer and a distinguished member of the eastern establishment accused of being a communist agent in the 1930s hiss demanded the right to defend himself.
he dramatically met his chief accuser before huac in august 1948 hiss denied every thing but was caught in embarrassing falsehoods convicted of perjury in 1950 and sentenced to ve years in prison.
was america really riddled with soviet spies.
soviet agents did in ltrate certain government agencies though without severely damaging consequences and espionage may have helped the soviets to develop an the anti communist crusade at home hunt.
in 1950 truman vetoed the mccarran internal secu rity bill which among other provisions authorized the president to arrest and detain suspicious people during an internal security emergency critics protested that the bill smacked of police state concentration camp tactics.
but the congressional guardians of the republics liberties enacted the bill over trumans veto.
the stunning success of the soviet scientists in developing an atomic bomb was attributed by many to the cleverness of communist spies in stealing american secrets.
notorious among those who had allegedly leaked atomic data to moscow were two american citizens julius and ethel rosenberg.
they were convicted in 1951 of espionage and went to the electric chair in 1953 the only people in american history ever executed in peacetime for espionage.
their sensational trial and electrocution combined with sympathy for their two orphaned children began to sour some sober citizens on the excesses of the red hunters.
democratic divisions in 1948 richard nixon red hunter congressman nixon examines the microlm that gured as important evidence in alger hisss conviction for perjury in 1950 atomic bomb somewhat sooner than they would have otherwise.
trumans loyalty program thus had a basis in reality.
but for many ordinary americans the hunt for communists was not just about fending off the military threat of the soviet union.
unsettling dangers lurked closer to home.
while men like nixon and senator joseph mccarthy led the search for communists in washington conser vative politicians at the state and local levels discovered that all manner of real or perceived social changes including declining religious sentiment increased sexual freedom and agitation for civil rights could be tarred with a red brush.
anticommunist crusaders ransacked school libraries for subversive textbooks and drove debtors drinkers and homosexuals all alleged to be security risks from their jobs.
some americans including president truman realized that the red hunt was turning into a witch attacking high prices and high tax harry truman the republicans had won control of congress in the congressional elections of 1946 their prospects had seldom looked rosier as they gathered in philadelphia to choose their 1948 presidential candidate.
they noisily renominated warmed over new york governor thomas e dewey still as debonair as if he had stepped out of a bandbox.
also gathering in philadelphia democratic politicos looked without enthusiasm on their hand medown president and sang im just mild about harry but their dump truman movement collapsed when war hero dwight d eisenhower refused to be drafted.
the peppery president unwanted but undaunted was then chosen in the face of vehement opposition by southern delegates who had been alienated by his strong stand in favor of civil rights for blacks especially his decision in 1948 to desegregate the military.
trumans nomination split the party wide open.
embittered southern democrats from thirteen states like their re eating forebears of 1860 next met in their own convention in birmingham alabama with confederate ags brashly in evidence.
amid scenes of heated deance these dixiecrats nominated governor j strom thurmond of south carolina on a states rights party ticket.
chapter 36 the cold war begins 1945 1952 korea saved us secretary of state acheson later commented.
truman now ordered a massive military buildup well beyond what was necessary for korea.
soon the united states had 3 5 million men under arms and was spending 50 billion per year on the defense budget some 13 percent of the gnp.
nsc 68 was a key document of the cold war period not only because it marked a major step in the militarization of american foreign policy but also because it vividly reected the sense of almost limitless possibility that pervaded postwar american society.
nsc 68 rested on the assumption that the enormous american economy could bear without strain the huge costs of a gigantic rearmament program.
said one nsc 68 planner there was practically nothing the country could not do if it wanted to do it truman took full advantage of a temporary soviet absence from the united nations security council on june 25 1950 to obtain a unanimous condemnation of north korea as an aggressor.
why the soviets were absent remains controversial.
scholars once believed that the soviets were just as surprised as the americans by the attack.
it now appears that stalin had given his reluctant approval to north koreas strike plan but believed that the ghting would be brief and that the united states would take little interest in it.
the security council also called upon all u n members including the united states to render every assistance to restore peace.
two days later without consulting congress truman ordered american air and naval units to support south korea.
before the week was out he also ordered general douglas macarthurs japan based occupation troops into action alongside the beleaguered south koreans.
so began the ill fated korean war.
ofcially the united states was simply participating in a united nations police action but in fact the united states made up the overwhelming bulk of the u n contingents and general macarthur appointed u n commander of the entire operation took his orders from washington not from the security council.
korea to its former borders but the pursuing south koreans had already crossed the thirty eighth parallel and there seemed little point in permitting the north koreans to regroup and come again.
the u n general assembly tacitly authorized a crossing by macarthur whom president truman ordered northward provided that there was no intervention in force by the chinese or soviets see map 36 4.
ussr june 25 1950 manchuria china china l ya.
ur north korea ussr sept 14 1950 manchuria lu ya 40n r north korea pyongyang 40n pyongyang 38n 38n seoul seoul south korea 35n 35n pusan 125e 130e 130e north korean attack ussr manchuria manchuria china r lu ya 40n pyongyang north korea seoul pusan 125e 130e 38n south korea 35n pusan 125e 40n pyongyang 38n south korea 35n r north korea seoul inchon ussr july 27 1953 china lu ya pusan 125e north korean attack nov 25 1950 south korea 130e chinese counterattack armistice line macarthur attack n the military seesaw in korea rather than ght his way out of the southern pusan perimeter macarthur launched a daring amphibious landing behind the enemys lines at inchon.
this bold gamble on september 15 1950 succeeded brilliantly within two weeks the north koreans had scrambled back behind the sanctuary of the thirty eighth parallel.
trumans avowed intention was to restore south territory held by south korean forces territory held by north korean forces front 100 200 km.
map 36 4 the shifting front in korea interactive map the korean war the americans thus raised the stakes in korea and in so doing they quickened the fears of another potential player in this dangerous game.
the chinese communists had publicly warned that they would not sit idly by and watch hostile troops approach the strategic yalu river boundary between korea and china.
but macarthur pooh poohed all predictions of an effective intervention by the chinese and reportedly boasted that he would have the boys home by christmas macarthur erred badly.
in november 1950 tens of thousands of chinese volunteers fell upon his rashly overextended lines and hurled the u n forces reeling back down the peninsula.
the ghting now sank into a frostbitten stalemate on the icy terrain near the thirty eighth parallel.
an imperious macarthur humiliated by this rout pressed for drastic retaliation.
he favored a blockade of the chinese coast and bombardment of chinese bases in manchuria.
he even suggested that the united states use nuclear weapons on the advancing chinese and their supply lines.
but washington policymakers with anxious eyes on moscow refused to enlarge the already costly con ict.
the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff declared that a wider clash in asia would be the wrong war at the wrong place at the wrong time and with the wrong enemy europe not asia was the administrations rst concern and the ussr not china loomed as the more sinister foe.
two sted general macarthur felt that he was being asked to ght with one hand tied behind his back.
he sneered at the concept of a limited war and insisted that there is no substitute for victory truman bravely resisted calls for nuclear escalation a rare example of a military commander refusing to use the most powerful weapons at his disposal.
when macarthur began to criticize the presidents policies publicly truman had no choice but to remove the insubordinate macarthur from command on april 11 1951 truman takes the heat macarthur a legend in his own mind returned to an uproarious welcome whereas truman was condemned as a pig an imbecile a judas and an appeaser of communist russia and communist china in july 1951 truce discussions began in a rude eld tent near the ring line but were almost immediately snagged on the issue of prisoner exchange.
talks dragged on unproductively for nearly two years while men continued to die.
chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 the face of segregation these women in the segregated south of the 1950s were compelled to enter the movie theater through the colored entrance once inside they were restricted to a separate seating section usually in the rear of the theater.
veterans claiming the rights for which they had fought overseas were murdered in the summer of 1946 a mississippi mob lynched black fourteen year old emmett till in 1955 for allegedly leering at a white woman.
it is small wonder that a black clergyman declared that every where i go in the south the negro is forced to choose between his hide and his soul segregation tarnished americas international image much as mccarthyism did.
after the war african american entertainers like paul robeson and josephine baker toured widely in europe and latin america informing audiences about the horrors of jim crow and raising doubts about americas reputation as the beacon of freedom against soviet communism.
in response the state department conscated robesons passport but it had to nd other ways to silence baker who had assumed french citizenship.
intellectuals poured on criticism as well.
swedish scholar gunnar myrdal published his landmark book an american dilemma exposing the scandalous contradiction between the american creed allegiance to the values of progress liberty equality and humanitarianism and the nations shameful treatment of black citizens.
international pressure combined with grassroots and legal activism to propel some racial progress in the north after world war ii.
in a growing number of northern cities and states african americans battled for and won equal access to public accommodations like restaurants hotels theaters and beaches.
jackie robinson cracked baseballs color barrier when the brooklyn dodgers signed him in 1947 the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp pushed the supreme court in 1950 to rule in sweatt v painter that separate professional schools for blacks failed to meet the test of equality.
the national conscience was slowly awakening from its centurieslong slumber but black suffering still continued especially in the south.
increasingly however african americans refused to suffer in silence see makers of america the great african american migration pp.
on a chilly day in december 1955 rosa parks a college educated black seamstress made history in montgomery alabama.
she boarded a bus took a seat in the whites only section and refused to give it up.
her arrest for joseph e lowery b.
1923 a methodist minister and civil rights activist in mobile alabama reected on the powerful message of the 1955 montgomery bus boycott for blacks you see what the bus thing did was simply more than withholding patronage from the bus it was restoring a sense of dignity to the patrons as best expressed by an oft quoted black woman in montgomery who said since ive been walking my feet are tired but my souls rested.
p rior to the bus boycotts the determination of our freedom rested with the courts.
with the bus boycott we determined it.
the court could say what it liked we werent gon ride in the back of the bus.
the civil rights struggle violating the citys jim crow statutes sparked a yearlong black boycott of city buses and served notice throughout the south that blacks would no longer submit meekly to the absurdities and indignities of segregation.
the montgomery bus boycott also catapulted to prominence a young pastor at montgomerys dexter avenue baptist church the reverend martin luther king jr barely twenty seven years old king seemed an unlikely champion of the downtrodden and disfranchised.
raised in a prosperous black family in atlanta and educated partly in the north he had for most of his life been sheltered from the grossest cruelties of segregation.
but his oratorical skill his passionate devotion to biblical and constitutional conceptions of justice and his devotion to the nonviolent principles of indias mohandas gandhi were destined to thrust him to the forefront of the black revolution that would soon pulse across the south and the rest of the nation.
seeds of the civil rights revolution when president harry truman heard about the lynching of black war veterans in 1946 he exclaimed my god.
i had no idea it was as terrible as that the horried truman responded by commissioning a report titled to secure these rights following the reports recommendations truman in 1948 ended segregation in federal civil ser vice and ordered equality of treatment and opportunity in the armed forces.
yet congress stubbornly resisted passing civil rights legislation and trumans successor dwight eisenhower showed no real interest in racial issues.
it was the supreme court that assumed political leadership in the civil rights struggle.
chief justice earl warren former governor of cal ifornia shocked traditionalists with his active judicial intervention in previously taboo social issues.
publicly snubbed and privately scorned by president eisenhower warren courageously led the court to address urgent issues that congress and the president preferred to avoid as impeach earl warren signs blossomed along the nations highways.
the unanimous decision of the warren court in brown v board of education of topeka kansas in may 1954 was epochal.
in a forceful opinion the learned justices ruled that segregation in the public schools was inherently unequal and thus unconstitutional.
the uncompromising sweep of the decision startled conser vatives like an exploding time bomb for it reversed the courts earlier declaration of 1896 in plessy v ferguson see p 547 that separate but equal facilities were allowable under the constitution.
that doctrine was now dead.
desegregation the justices insisted must go ahead with all deliberate speed the border states generally made reasonable efforts to comply with this ruling but in the deep south diehards orga nized massive resistance against the courts annulment of the sacred principle of separate but equal more than a hundred southern congressional representatives and senators signed the declaration of constitutional principles in 1956 pledging their unyielding resistance to desegregation.
several states diverted public funds to hastily created private schools for there the integration order was more difcult to apply.
throughout the south white citizens councils sometimes with re and hemp thwarted attempts to make integration a reality.
ten years after the courts momentous ruling fewer than 2 percent of the eligible blacks in the deep south were sitting in classrooms with whites.
president eisenhower remained reluctant to promote integration.
he shied away from employing his vast popularity and the prestige of his ofce to educate white americans about the need for racial justice.
his personal attitudes may have helped to restrain him.
he had grown up in an all white town spent his career in a segregated army and advised against integration of the armed forces in 1948 he complained that the supreme courts decision in brown v board of education had upset the customs and convictions of at least two generations of americans and he steadfastly refused to issue a public statement endorsing the courts conclusions.
i do not believe he explained that prejudices even palpably unjustiable prejudices will succumb to compulsion but in september 1957 ike was forced to act.
orval faubus the governor of arkansas mobilized the national guard to prevent nine black students from enrolling in little rocks central high school.
confronted with a direct challenge to federal authority eisenhower sent troops to escort the children to their classes.
in the same year congress passed the rst civil rights act since reconstruction days.
eisenhower characteristically reassured a southern senator that the legislation represented the mildest civil rights bill possible it set up a permanent civil rights commission makers of america the the great great african africanamerican american migration migration t he great social upheavals of world war ii continued to transform america well after the guns had fallen silent in 1945 among the groups most affected by the war were african americans.
predominantly a rural southern people before 1940 african americans were propelled by the war into the cities of the north and west and by 1970 a majority lived outside the states of the old confederacy.
the results of that massive demographic shift were momentous for african americans and for all of american society.
so many black southerners took to the roads during world war ii that local ofcials lost track of their numbers.
black workers on the move crowded into boardinghouses camped out in cars and clustered in the juke joints of roadside america en route to their new lives.
southern cotton elds and tobacco plantations had historically yielded slender sustenance to african american farmers most of whom struggled to make ends meet as tenants or sharecroppers.
the great depression dealt black southerners yet another blow for when new deal farm programs paid growers to leave their land fallow many landlords simply pocketed the the migration of the negro by jacob lawrence 1940 1941 artist jacob lawrence depicted the migration of southern blacks to the north during and after world war ii in a series of paintings.
the rst panel of the series bears the description during the world war there was a great migration north by southern negroes money and evicted their tenants white as well as black from their now idle elds.
as the depression deepened dispossessed former tenants and sharecroppers toiled as seasonal farmworkers or languished without jobs without shelter and without hope.
the spanking new munitions plants and bustling shipyards of wartime america at rst offered little solace to african americans particularly in the south.
in 1940 and 1941 the labor hungry war machine soaked up unemployed white workers but commonly denied jobs to blacks.
when the army constructed a training camp near petersburg virginia it imported white carpenters from all parts of the united states rather than employ the hundreds of skilled black carpenters who lived nearby.
fed up with such injustices many african americans headed for shipyards factories foundries and elds on the pacic coast or north of the mason dixon line where their willing hands found more work awaiting them.
angered by the racism that was depriving their people of a fair share of jobs black leaders cajoled president roosevelt into issuing an executive order in june 1941 declaring that there shall be no discrim the home front though often confronted by prejudice and discrimination many african american migrants from the rural south found their rst industrial jobs in wartime defense plants during world war ii.
ination in the employment of workers in defense industries or government because of race creed color or national origin roosevelts action was a tenuous hesitant step.
yet in its way executive order 8802 amounted to a second emancipation proclamation as the federal government for the rst time since reconstruction had committed itself to ensuring justice for african americans.
the entire nation was now forced to face the evil of racism as bloody wartime riots in detroit new york philadelphia and other cities tragically demonstrated.
but for the rst time large numbers of blacks secured a foothold in the industrial economy and they were not about to give it up.
by wars end the great wartime exodus had scattered hundreds of thousands of african americans to new regions and new ways of life a second black diaspora comparable in its scale and consequence to the original black dispersal out of africa.
in the postwar decades blacks continued to pour out of the south in search of economic opportunity and political freedom.
in western and northern cities blacks now com detroit race riot 1943 from a streetcar.
a black passenger is dragged peted for housing and jobs and they also voted many of them for the rst time in their lives.
as early as 1945 naacp leader walter white concluded that the war immeasurably magnied the negros awareness of the disparity between the american profession and practice of democracy after the war he predicted african americans would be convinced that whatever betterment of their lot is achieved must come largely from their own efforts the wartime migration thus set the stage for the success of the civil rights movement that began to stir in the late 1940s and the 1950s.
with their new political base outside the old south and with new support from the democratic party african americans eventually forced an end to the hated segregationist practices that had kept them from enjoying full rights as citizens.
chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 horse for deepening american control over european affairs.
de gaulle deemed the americans unreliable in a crisis so he tried to preserve french freedom of action by developing his own small atomic force.
despite the perils of nuclear proliferation or soviet domination de gaulle demanded an independent europe free of yankee inuence.
foreign flare ups and flexible response special problems for u s foreign policy emerged from the worldwide decolonization of european overseas possessions after world war ii.
sparsely populated laos freed of its french colonial overlords in 1954 was festering dangerously by the time kennedy came into ofce.
the eisenhower administration had drenched this jungle kingdom with dollars but failed to cleanse the country of an aggressive communist element.
a red laos many observers feared would be a river on which the inuence of communist china would ood into all of southeast asia.
as the laotian civil war raged kennedys military advisers seriously considered sending in american troops.
but the president found that he had insufcient forces to put out the re in asia and still honor his commitments in europe.
kennedy thus sought a diplomatic escape hatch in the fourteen power geneva conference which imposed a shaky peace on laos in 1962 these brushre wars intensied the pressure for a shift away from secretary dulless dubious doctrine of massive retaliation kennedy felt hamstrung by the knowledge that in a crisis he had the devils choice between humiliation and nuclear incineration.
with defense secretary mcnamara he pushed the strategy of exible response that is developing an array of military options that could be precisely matched to the gravity of the crisis at hand.
to this end kennedy increased spending on conventional military forces and bolstered the special forces green berets.
they were an elite antiguerrilla outt trained to survive on snake meat and to kill with scientic nesse.
stepping into the vietnam quagmire the doctrine of exible response seemed sane enough but it contained lethal logic.
it potentially lowered the level at which diplomacy would give way to shooting.
it also provided a mechanism for a progressive and possibly endless stepping up of the use of force.
vietnam soon presented grisly proof of these pitfalls.
the corrupt right wing government of ngo dinh diem in saigon despite a deluge of american dollars had ruled shakily since the partition of vietnam in 1954 see p 960.
anti diem agitators noisily threatened to topple the pro american government from power.
in a fateful decision late in 1961 kennedy ordered a sharp increase in the number of military advisers u s troops in south vietnam.
american forces allegedly entered vietnam to foster political stability to help protect diem from the communists long enough to allow him to enact basic social reforms favored by the americans.
but the kennedy administration eventually despaired of the reactionary diem and encouraged a successful coup against him in november 1963 ironically the united states thus contributed to a long process of political disintegration that its original policy had meant to prevent.
kennedy still told the south vietnamese that it was their war but he had made dangerously deep political commitments.
by the time of his death he had ordered more than fteen thousand american men into the far off asian slaughter pen.
a graceful pullout was becoming increasingly difcult see map 38 1.
modernization theory provided the theoretical underpinnings for an activist u s foreign policy in the underdeveloped world.
its proponents believed that the traditional societies of asia africa and latin map 38 1 vietnam and southeast asia 1954 1975 le ly hayslip b.
1949 was born in a peasant village in south vietnam just south of da nang.
in her memoir when heaven and earth changed places she describes the trauma endured by ordinary vietnamese as a result of americas ght against the viet cong in 1963 the year the viet cong came to my village american warplanes bombed man quang.
it was at noon just when the children were getting out of school.
my aunt thu and her pregnant daughter in law were making lunch for her husband and four grandchildren when the air raid signal blared.
they all jumped under the wooden table and sheltered the pregnant woman with their bodies even the little kids.
a bomb fell in aunt thus front yard.
hot shrapnel tore through everyone except the pregnant woman.
aunt thu and one of her grandchildren were killed.
the passing fragment left only a weeping hole where her generous heart had been interactive map 100 km.
c ho chi minh trail re d bla c boat people refugees after 1975 i n a r k dienbienphu r french surrender may 7 1954 harbor mined hanoi m y a n m a r haiphong burma h 100 mi.
enemy supply routes major battle of the tet offensive january 1968 major u s base during the war u s bombing begins 1964 communist pathet lao victory 1975 north v i et n a m p lai n of jars g u l f o f to n k i n 20n alleged attacks on american naval vessels august 1964 gulf of tonkin incident r ca r m ek ong l a vinh o keo nua pass s vientiane u s seventh fleet operations during the war mu gia pass udon thani nakhon phanom demilitarized zone spone khe sanh lang vei khon kaen t h a i l a quang tri hue n demarcation line 1954 a shau valley da nang 17n south china sea d chu lai kham duc ubon ratchathani ta khli r ratchasima mekong kontum pleiku an khe c e ntral h i g h lan ds kampuchea u s bombing begins 1969 u s nha trang i n v a s i o n 19 70 gulf of thailand mayaguez incident vi etna mese in va phnom penh dalat 100e sion 1 c a mau pe n i n su l a 105e cam ranh bay so ut h v i et n a m 110e bien hoa long binh saigon tan son nhut cholon my tho vung tau vinh long ben tre can tho chau duc ca mau tuy hoa ban me thuot bu dop communist khmer rouge victory 1975 qui nhon duc co c a m b o d i a sattahip 15n dak to don muang bangkok my lai quang ngai n 10n mekong delta vietcong north vietnamese victory and u s withdrawal chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 to help the good neighbors close the gap between the callous rich and the wretched poor and thus quiet communist agitation.
but results were disappointing there was little alliance and even less progress.
american handouts had little positive impact on latin americas immense social problems.
president kennedy also struck below the border with the mailed st.
he had inherited from the eisenhower administration a cia backed scheme to topple fidel castro from power by invading cuba with anticommunist exiles.
on april 17 1961 some twelve hundred exiles landed at cubas bay of pigs.
when the ill starred bay of pigs invasion bogged down kennedy stood fast in his decision to keep hands off and the bullet riddled band of anti castroites surrendered.
president kennedy assumed full responsibility for the failure remarking that victory has a hundred fathers and defeat is an orphan the bay of pigs blunder along with continuing american covert efforts to assassinate castro and overthrow his government naturally pushed the cuban leader even further into the soviet embrace.
wily chair backbone the united states supports south vietnam.
america could develop into modern industrial and democratic nations by following the wests own path.
noted economic historian walt whitman rostow one of the most inuential modernization theorists charted the route from traditional society to the age of high mass consumption in his book the stages of economic growth 1960.
though it would later come under attack for its eurocentric bias modernization theory offered a powerful intellectual framework for policymakers ensnared in the cold war.
rostow himself served as an inuential adviser to the kennedy and johnson administrations.
cuban confrontations although the united states regarded latin america as its backyard its southern neighbors feared and resented the powerful colossus of the north.
in 1961 kennedy extended the hand of friendship with the alliance for progress alianza para el progreso hailed as a marshall plan for latin america.
a primary goal was failed bay of pigs invasion 1961 cuban soldiers demonstrate a beach gun they used against a brigade of ex cubans who furtively invaded cuba as agents of the united states.
the debacle was one of several unsuccessful american attempts to overthrow cuban leader fidel castro.
the cuban missile crisis man khrushchev lost little time in taking full advantage of his cuban comrades position just ninety miles off floridas coast.
in october 1962 the aerial photographs of american spy planes revealed that the soviets were secretly and speedily installing nuclear tipped missiles in cuba.
the soviets evidently intended to use these devastating weapons to shield castro and to blackmail the united states into backing down in berlin and other trouble spots.
kennedy and khrushchev now began a nerveracking game of nuclear chicken the president atly rejected air force proposals for a surgical bombing strike against the missile launching sites.
instead on october 22 1962 he ordered a naval quarantine of cuba and demanded immediate removal of the threatening weaponry.
he also served notice on khrushchev that any attack on the united states from cuba would be regarded as coming from the soviet union and would trigger nuclear retaliation against the russian heartland.
for an anxious week americans waited while soviet ships approached the patrol line established by the u s navy off the island of cuba.
seizing or sinking a soviet vessel on the high seas would unquestionably be regarded by the kremlin as an act of war.
the world teetered breathlessly on the brink of global atomization.
only in 1991 did the full dimensions of this nuclear peril become known when the russians revealed that their ground forces in cuba already had operational nuclear weapons at their disposal and were authorized to launch them if attacked.
in this tense eyeball to eyeball confrontation khrushchev nally inched.
on october 28 he agreed to a partially face saving compromise by which he would pull the missiles out of cuba.
the united states in return agreed to end the quarantine and not invade the island.
the american government also quietly signaled that it would remove from turkey some of its own missiles targeted at the soviet union.
fallout from the cuban missile crisis was considerable.
a disgraced khrushchev was ultimately hounded out of the kremlin and became an unperson hard liners in moscow vowing never again to be humiliated in a nuclear face off launched an enormous program of military expansion.
the soviet buildup reached a crescendo in the next decade stimulating in turn a vast american effort to catch up with the russians the democrats did better than expected in the midterm elections of november 1962 allegedly because the republicans were cubanized kennedy apparently sobered by the appalling risks he had just run pushed harder for a nuclear test ban treaty with the soviet union.
after prolonged negotiations in moscow a pact prohibiting trial nuclear explosions in the at mosphere was signed in late 1963 another barometer indicating a thaw in the cold war was the installation august 1963 of a moscowwashington hot line permitting immediate teletype communication in case of a crisis.
most signicant was kennedys speech at american university in washington d c in june 1963 the president urged americans to abandon a view of the soviet union as a devil ridden land lled with fanatics and instead to deal with the world as it is not as it might have been had the history of the last eighteen years been different kennedy thus tried to lay the foundation for a realistic policy of peaceful coexistence with the soviet union.
here were the modest origins of the policy that later came to be known as dtente french for relaxation of tension.
the struggle for civil rights kennedy had campaigned with a strong appeal to black voters but he proceeded gingerly to redeem his promises.
although he had pledged to eliminate racial discrimination in housing with a stroke of the pen it took him nearly two years to nd the right pen.
civil rights groups meanwhile sent thousands of pens to the white house in an ink for jack protest against the presidents slowness.
political concerns stayed the presidents hand on civil rights.
elected by a wafer thin margin and with shaky control over congress kennedy needed the support of southern legislators to pass his economic and social legislation especially his medical and educational bills.
he believed perhaps justiably that those mea sures would eventually benet black americans at least as much as specic legislation on civil rights.
bold moves for racial justice would have to wait.
but events soon scrambled these careful calculations.
after the wave of sit ins that surged across the south in 1960 groups of freedom riders fanned out to end segregation in facilities serving interstate bus passengers.
a white mob torched a freedom ride bus near anniston alabama in may 1961 and attor ney general robert kennedys personal representative was beaten unconscious in another anti freedom ride riot in montgomery.
when southern ofcials proved unwilling or unable to stem the violence washington chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 sd 4 ne 5 nm 4 ca wi in ok 8 tx oh md mt or id ri nv ca ks ok nm tx il in mo la oh ky ms al wv va nc tn ar me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 14 ri pa nj ct 4 17 8 mi ak fl ak ia ne co wi d c sc ga ut mn sd de va 12 al nd wy az nc 13 tn 11 ms wa nj wv ky 9 la me pa mo ar nh ma 14 ct il ks 7 az 5 ut wy nv 4 3 co 6 or 6 ny mi ia 9 id mt 4 4 nd 4 wa 9 mn 10 vt ga sc de md dc fl hi hi candidate party electoral vote popular vote johnson democrat 90 3 43 129 566 61 1 9 7 27 178 188 38 5 goldwater republican map 38 2 presidential election of 1964 in the map on the left the size of each state is distorted according to its weight in the electoral college.
in new orleans toward the end of the campaign a gutsy johnson displayed his commitment to civil rights when he told a story about an old senator who once said of his deep south constituents i would like to go back down there and make them just one more democratic speech.
the poor old state they havent heard a democratic speech in 30 years.
all they hear at election time is negro negro negro johnsons open voicing of sentiments like this contributed heavily to his losses in the traditionally democratic solid south the great society congress johnsons huge victory temporarily smashed the conservative congressional coalition of southern democrats and northern republicans.
a wide open legislative road stretched before the great society programs as the president skillfully ringmastered his two to one democratic majorities.
congress poured out a ood of legislation comparable only to the output of the new dealers in the hundred days congress of 1933 johnson condent that a growing economy gave him ample scal and political room for maneuver delivered at last on long deferred democratic promises of social reform.
escalating the war on poverty congress doubled the appropriation of the ofce of economic opportunity to 2 billion and granted more than 1 billion to redevelop the gutted hills and hollows of appalachia.
johnson also prodded congress into creating two new cabinet ofces the department of transportation and the department of housing and urban development interactive map hud to which he named the rst black cabinet secretary in the nations history respected economist robert c weaver.
other noteworthy laws established the national endowments for the arts and the humanities designed to lift the level of american cultural life.
even more impressive were the big four legislative achievements that crowned lbjs great society program aid to education medical care for the elderly and indigent immigration reform and a new voting rights bill.
johnson neatly avoided the thorny question of separation of church and state by channeling educational aid to students not schools thus allowing funds to ow to hard pressed parochial institutions.
catholic john f kennedy had not dared to touch this prickly issue.
with a keen eye for the dramatic lbj signed the education bill in the humble one room texas schoolhouse he had attended as a boy.
medicare for the elderly accompanied by medicaid for the poor became a reality in 1965 like the new deals social security program medicare and medicaid created entitlements that is they conferred the great society giving thanks for medicare an elderly woman showed her gratitude to president lyndon b johnson for his signing of the medicare bill in april 1965 providing basic medical care for the aged.
in tribute to former president trumans unsuccessful effort to pass a national medical insurance program twenty years earlier johnson ew to trumans missouri home to sign the bill that he claimed would deliver care for the sick and serenity for the fearful no one acknowledged that trumans earlier plan had been much more comprehensive or that johnson then a young texas congressman had opposed it.
rights on certain categories of americans virtually in perpetuity without the need for repeated congressional approval.
these programs were part of a spreading rights revolution that materially improved the lives of millions of americans but also eventually undermined the federal governments nancial health.
immigration reform was the third of johnsons big four feats.
the immigration and nationality act of 1965 abolished at last the national origins quota system that had been in place since 1921 see p 773.
the act also doubled to 290 000 the number of immigrants allowed to enter annually while for the rst time setting limits on immigrants from the western hemisphere 120 000.
the new law further provided for the admission of close relatives of united states citizens outside those numerical limits.
to the surprise of many of the acts architects more than 100 000 persons per year took advantage of its family unication provisions in the decades after 1965 and the immigrant stream swelled beyond expectations.
even more surprising to the acts sponsors the sources of immigration soon shifted heavily from europe to latin america and asia dramatically changing the racial and ethnic composition of the american population.
great society programs came in for rancorous political attack in later years.
conservatives charged that the billions spent for social engineering had simply been ushed down the waste pipe.
yet the poverty rate declined measurably in the ensuing decade see figure 38 1.
medicare made especially dramatic reductions in the incidence of poverty among americas millions percent number in poverty poverty rate figure 38 1 poverty in the united states 1960 2006 in 2000 the poverty rate fell to 11 3 percent its lowest level since 1979 in the new century it increased by a percentage point.
these gures refer to the number of people who live in families whose total income is lower than a set poverty threshold which is tied to the consumer price index so it varies with ination.
the poverty rate means the percentage of all americans living below that threshold.
source u s bureau of the census.
other antipoverty programs among them project head start sharply improved the educational perfor mance of underprivileged youth.
infant mortality rates also fell in minority communities as general health conditions improved.
lyndon johnson was not chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 half a million troops into southeast asia and the annual bill for the war was exceeding 30 billion.
yet the end was nowhere in sight.
vietnam vexations america could not defeat the enemy in vietnam but it seemed to be defeating itself.
world opinion grew increasingly hostile the blasting of an underdeveloped country by a mighty superpower struck many critics as obscene.
several nations expelled american peace corps volunteers.
the ever censorious charles de gaulle withdrew france from nato in 1966 and ordered all american troops out of the country reportedly prompting johnson to ask if that included the thousands buried in normandy.
overcommitment in southeast asia also tied americas hands elsewhere.
attacked by soviet backed egypt jordan and syria a beleaguered israel stunned the world with a military triumph in june 1967 when the smoke cleared after the six day war israel expanded to control new territories in the sinai peninsula the golan heights the gaza strip and the west bank of the jordan river including jerusalem see map 40 2 on p 1038.
the israeli victory brought some 1 million resentful palestinian arabs under direct israeli control while another 350 000 palestinian refugees ed to neighboring jordan.
the israelis eventually withdrew from the sinai after signing a peace treaty with egypt but they refused to relinquish the other areas without a treaty and began moving jewish settlers into the heavily arab district of the west bank.
the six day war markedly intensied the problems of the already volatile middle east leading to an intractable standoff between the israelis and palestinians now led by yasir arafat 1929 2004 head of the palestine liberation organization plo.
for decades a return to the pre 1967 boundaries would be a key negotiating aim for palestinians.
the middle east became an ever more dangerously packed powder keg that the war plagued united states proved powerless to defuse.
domestic discontent festered as the vietnamese entanglement dragged on.
antiwar demonstrations had begun on a small scale with campus teach ins in 1965 and gradually these protests mounted to tidalwave proportions.
as the long arm of the military draft dragged more and more young men off to the southeast asian slaughter pen resistance stiffened.
thousands of draft registrants ed to canada others vietnam vets protest the war 1971 public opinion gradually but inexorably turned against the war.
in 1965 polls showed that only 15 percent of americans favored withdrawal from vietnam.
but by 1969 69 percent of those interviewed indicated that they considered the war a mistake and by 1970 a majority supported withdrawal of u s troops.
in this demonstration on april 23 1971 eight hundred veterans threw away their purple hearts bronze stars silver stars and other military honors in front of the u s capitol in protest against a war they no longer could support.
publicly burned their draft cards.
hundreds of thousands of marchers lled the streets of new york san francisco and other cities chanting hell no we wont go and hey hey lbj how many kids did you kill today many americans felt pangs of conscience at the spectacle of their countrymen burning peasant huts and blistering civilians with ghastly napalm.
johnson and vietnam opposition in congress to the vietnam involvement centered in the inuential senate committee on foreign relations headed by senator william fulbright of arkansas.
a constant thorn in the side of the president he staged a series of widely viewed televised hearings in 1966 and 1967 during which prominent personages aired their views largely antiwar.
gradually the public came to feel that it had been deceived about the causes and winnability of the war.
a yawning credibility gap opened between the government and the people.
new ocks of antiwar doves were hatching daily.
even within the administration doubts were deepening about the wisdom of the war in vietnam.
when defense secretary mcnamara expressed increasing discomture at the course of events he was quietly eased out of the cabinet.
years later mcnamara wrote that we were wrong terribly wrong about vietnam.
by early 1968 the brutal and futile struggle had become the longest and most unpopular foreign war in the nations history.
the government had failed utterly to explain to the people what was supposed to be at stake in vietnam.
many critics wondered if any objective could be worth the vast price in blood and treasure that america was paying.
casualties killed and wounded already exceeded 100 000 more bombs had been dropped on vietnam than on all enemy territory in world war ii.
the vietnam quagmire this soldier carrying a rocket launcher across a stream in the ironically named demilitarized zone dmz that separated north and south vietnam was killed in action just days after this photo was taken.
the war was also ripping apart the fabric of american society and even threatening to shred the constitution.
in 1967 president johnson ordered the cia in clear violation of its charter as a foreign intelligence agency to spy on domestic antiwar activists.
he also encouraged the fbi to turn its counterintelligence program code named cointelpro against the peace movement.
cointelpro subverted leading doves with false accusations that they were communist sympathizers.
these clandestine tactics made the fbi look like a totalitarian states secret police rather than a guardian of american democracy.
as the war dragged on evidence mounted that america had been entrapped in an asian civil war ghting against highly motivated rebels who were striving to overthrow an oppressive regime.
yet johnson clung to his basic strategy of ratcheting up the pressure bit by bit.
he stubbornly assured doubting americans that he could see the light at the end of the tunnel but to growing numbers of americans it seemed that johnson was bent on saving vietnam by destroying it.
vietnam topples johnson hawkish illusions that the struggle was about to be won were shattered by a blistering communist offensive launched in late january 1968 during tet the vietnamese new year.
at a time when the viet cong were supposedly licking their wounds they suddenly and simultaneously mounted savage attacks on twentyseven key south vietnamese cities including the capital saigon.
although eventually beaten off with heavy losses they demonstrated anew that victory could not be gained by johnsons strategy of gradual escalation.
the tet offensive ended in a military defeat but a political victory for the viet cong.
with an increasingly insistent voice american public opinion demanded a speedy end to the war.
opposition grew so vehement that president johnson could feel the very foundations of government shaking under his feet.
he was also suffering through hells of personal agony over american casualties.
he wept as he signed letters of condolence and slipped off at night to pray with monks at a small catholic church in washington.
american military leaders responded to the tet attacks with a request for 200 000 more troops.
the size of the request staggered many policymakers.
former secretary of state dean acheson reportedly advised the president that the joint chiefs of staff dont know what theyre talking about chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 wa mt or id nv ca nd wy ut az mn sd ne co wi ia ks ok nm il mi in mo la oh wv ky tn ar tx me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 14 ri pa nj ct 4 17 8 ms al ga va nc r 12 ai 1 sc de md dc fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote popular vote nixon republican 56 1 31 785 480 humphrey democrat 35 5 31 275 166 42 7 8 4 9 906 473 13 5 wallace american independent 43 4 map 38 3 presidential election of 1968 with electoral vote by state george wallace won in ve states and he denied a clear majority to either of the two major party candidates in twenty ve other states.
a shift of some fty thousand votes might well have thrown the election into the house of representatives giving wallace the strategic bargaining position he sought.
interactive map as for wallace he won an impressive 9 906 473 popular votes and 46 electoral votes all from ve states of the deep south four of which the republican goldwater had carried in 1964 wallace remained a formidable force for he had amassed the largest third party popular vote in american history to that point and was the last third party candidate to win any electoral votes.
in 1992 ross perot enjoyed a greater popularvote margin but won no states see p.
wallace had also resoundingly demonstrated the continuing power of populist politics which appealed to voters fears and resentments rather than to the better angels of their nature.
his candidacy foreshadowed a coarsening of american political life that would take deep root in the ensuing decades.
the obituary of lyndon johnson talented but tragedy struck lyndon johnson returned to his texas ranch in january 1969 and died there four years later.
his party was defeated and his me too hubert humphrey was repudiated.
yet johnsons legislative leadership for a time had been remarkable.
no president since lincoln had worked harder or done more for civil rights.
none had shown more compassion for the poor blacks and the ill educated.
but by 1966 johnson was already sinking into the vietnam quicksands.
great society programs began to wither on the vine as soaring war costs sucked tax dollars into the military machine.
his effort to provide both guns and butter prevented him from delivering either in sufcient quantity.
the war on poverty met resistance that was as stubborn as the viet cong and eventually went down to defeat.
great want persisted alongside great wealth.
johnson had crucied himself on the cross of vietnam.
the southeast asian quagmire engulfed his noblest intentions.
committed to some degree by his two predecessors he had chosen to defend the american foothold and enlarge the con ict rather than be run out.
he was evidently persuaded by his brightest advisers both civilian and military that massive aerial bombing and limited troop commitments would make a cheap victory possible.
his decision not to escalate the ghting further offended the hawks and his refusal to back off altogether antagonized the doves like the calvinists of colonial days luckless lyndon johnson was damned if he did and damned if he did not.
the cultural upheaval of the 1960s the struggles of the 1960s against racism poverty and the war in vietnam had momentous cultural consequences.
the decade came to be seen as a watershed dividing two distinct eras in terms of values morals and behavior.
everywhere in 1960s america a newly negative attitude toward all kinds of authority took hold.
disillusioned by the discovery that american society was not free of racism sexism imperialism and oppression many young people lost their traditional moral rudders.
neither families nor churches nor schools seemed to be able to de ne values and shape behavior with the certainty of shared purpose that many people believed had once existed.
the nations mainline protestant denominations which had dominated american religious life for centuries lost their grip in the 1960s as weekly churchgoing declined from 48 per the counterculture of the 1960s cent in the late 1950s to 41 percent in the early 1970s.
the liberal protestant churches suffered the most.
they increasingly ceded religious authority to conservative evangelicals while surrendering cultural authority to secular professionals and academic social scientists.
a new cultural divide began to take shape as educated americans became increasingly secular and the less educated became more religious.
religious upheaval even churned the tradition bound roman catholic church among the worlds oldest and most conser vative institutions.
clerics abandoned their roman collars and latin lingo folk songs replaced gregorian chants and meatless fridays became ancient history.
no matter what the topic conventional wisdom and inherited ideas came under re.
trust no one over thirty was a popular sneer of rebellious youth.
skepticism about authority had deep historical roots in american culture and it had even bloomed in the supposedly complacent and conformist 1950s.
beat poets like allen ginsberg and iconoclastic novelists like jack kerouac had voiced dark disillusion with the materialistic pursuits and establishment arrogance of the eisenhower era.
in movies like rebel without a cause 1955 the attractive young actor james dean expressed the restless frustration of many young people.
the disaffection of the young reached crisis proportions in the tumultuous 1960s.
one of the rst organized protests against established authority broke out at the university of cal i fornia at berkeley in 1964 in the aptly named free speech movement.
students objected to an administrative ban on the use of campus space for political debate.
during months of protest they accused the cold war megaversity of promoting corporate interests rather than humane values.
but in only a few years the clean cut berkeley activists and their sober minded sit ins would seem downright quaint.
fired by outrage against the war in vietnam some sons and daughters of the middle class became radical political rebels.
others turned to mind bending drugs tuned in to acid rock and dropped out of straight society.
still others did their own thing in communes or alternative institutions.
patriotism became a dirty word.
beowered women in trousers and long haired men with earrings heralded the rise of a self conscious counterculture stridently opposed to traditional american ways.
social upheaval in the 1960s was far from an american only phenomenon.
as people born in the wake of world war ii came of age across the world they questioned established authority every where.
waves of the free speech movement berkeley california 1964 the free speech movement on the campus of the university of california at berkeley marked the rst of the large scale student mobilizations that rocked campuses across the country throughout the rest of the 1960s.
here a student schooled in passive resistance is dragged by police to a waiting bus.
protests and calls for individual rights and political freedom spread like wild re.
the year 1968 was so stormy that it became synonymous with un rest in many languages.
in may of that year leftist french students organized city crippling strikes against their countrys antiquated university system.
joined by millions of workers they nearly toppled the government.
the global spirit of protest against the vietnam war racial injustice and the strictures of bourgeois society spread from berkeley cal i fornia to columbia university in chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 the first unelected president gerald rudolph ford the rst man to be made president solely by a vote of congress entered the besmirched white house in august 1974 with serious handicaps.
he was widely and unfairly suspected of being little more than a dim witted former college football player.
president johnson had sneered that jerry was so lacking in brainpower that he could not walk and chew gum at the same time.
worse ford had been selected not elected vice president following spiro agnews resignation in disgrace.
the sour odor of illegitimacy hung about this president without precedent.
then out of a clear sky ford granted a complete pardon to nixon for any crimes he may have committed as president discovered or undiscovered.
democrats were outraged and lingering suspicions about the circumstances of the pardon cast a dark shadow over fords prospects of being elected president in his own right in 1976 ford at rst sought to enhance the so called dtente with the soviet union that nixon had crafted.
in july 1975 president ford joined leaders from thirtyfour other nations in helsinki finland to sign several sets of historic accords.
one group of agreements ofcially wrote an end to world war ii by nally legitimizing the soviet dictated boundaries of poland and other eastern european countries.
in return the soviets signed a third basket of agreements guaranteeing more liberal exchanges of people and information between east and west and protecting certain basic passing the buck a satirical view of where responsibility for the vietnam debacle should be laid.
human rights the helsinki accords kindled small dissident movements in eastern europe and even in the ussr itself but the soviets soon poured ice water on these sputtering ames of freedom.
western europeans especially the west germans cheered the helsinki conference as a milestone of dtente.
but in the united states critics increasingly charged that dtente was proving to be a one way street.
american grain and technology owed across the atlantic to the ussr and little of comparable importance owed back.
moscow also continued its human rights violations including restrictions on jewish emigration which prompted congress in 1974 to add punitive restrictions to a u s soviet trade bill.
despite these difculties ford at rst clung stubbornly to dtente.
but the american publics fury over moscows double dealing so steadily mounted that by the end of his term the president was refusing even to pronounce the word dtente in public.
the thaw in the cold war was threatening to prove chillingly brief.
defeat in vietnam early in 1975 the north vietnamese gave full throttle to their long expected drive southward.
president ford urged congress to vote still more weapons for vietnam but his plea was in vain and without the crutch of massive american aid the south vietnamese quickly and ingloriously collapsed.
the dam burst so rapidly that the remaining americans had to be frantically evacuated by helicopter the last of them on april 29 1975 also rescued were feminist victories about 140 000 south vietnamese most of them so dangerously identied with the americans that they feared a bloodbath by the victorious communists.
ford compassionately admitted these people to the united states where they added further seasoning to the melting pot.
eventually some 500 000 arrived see makers of america the vietnamese pp.
americas longest most frustrating war thus ended not with a bang but a whimper.
in a technical sense the americans had not lost the war their client nation had.
the united states had fought the north vietnamese to a standstill and had then withdrawn its troops in 1973 leaving the south vietnamese to ght their own war with generous shipments of costly american aircraft tanks and other munitions.
the estimated cost to america was 118 billion in current outlays together with some 56 000 dead and 300 000 wounded.
the people of the united states had in fact provided just about every thing except the will to win and that could not be injected by outsiders.
technicalities aside america had lost more than a war.
it had lost face in the eyes of foreigners lost its own self esteem lost condence in its military prowess and lost much of the economic muscle that had made possible its global leadership since world war ii.
americans reluctantly came to realize that their power as well as their pride had been deeply wounded in vietnam and that recovery would be slow and painful.
feminist victories and defeats as the army limped home from vietnam there was little rejoicing on the college campuses where dem onstrators had once braved tear gas and billy clubs to denounce the war.
the antiwar movement like many of the other protest movements that convulsed the country in the 1960s had long since splintered and stalled.
one major exception to this pattern stood out american feminists although they had their differences showed vitality and momentum.
they won legislative and judicial victories and provoked an intense rethinking of gender roles.
on the roots of this movement see makers of america the feminists pp.
thousands of women marched in the womens stride for equality on the ftieth anniversary of woman suffrage in 1970 in 1972 congress passed title ix of the education amendments prohibiting sex discrimination in any federally assisted educational program or activity.
perhaps this acts biggest impact was to create opportunities for girls and womens athletics at schools and colleges giving birth to a new title ix generation that would reach maturity in the 1980s and 1990s and help professionalize womens sports as well.
the equal rights amendment era to the constitution won congressional approval in 1972 it declared equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of sex twenty eight of the necessary thirty eight states quickly ratied the amendment rst proposed by suffragists in 1923 hopes rose that the era might soon become the law of the land.
even the supreme court seemed to be on the movements side.
in reed v reed 1971 and frontiero v richardson 1973 the court challenged sex discrimination in legislation and employment.
and in the landmark case of roe v wade 1973 the court struck down the abortion wars pro choice and prolife demonstrators brandish their beliefs.
by the end of the twentieth century the debate over abortion had become the most morally charged and divisive issue in american society since the struggle over slavery in the nineteenth century.
makers of america theafricanthe great vietnamese american migration a t rst glance the towns of westminster and fountain valley cal i fornia seem to resemble other cal i fornia communities nearby.
tract homes line residential streets shopping centers ank the busy thoroughfares.
but these are no ordinary american suburbs.
instead they make up little saigons vibrant outposts of vietnamese culture in the contemporary united states.
shops offer exotic asian merchandise restaurants serve such delicacies as lemongrass chicken.
these neighborhoods living reminders of americas anguish in vietnam are a rarely acknowledged consequence of that sorrowful con ict.
before south vietnam fell in 1975 few vietnamese ventured across the pacic.
indeed throughout most of american history until the mid twentieth century the bulk of u s immigrants had come from europe with the notable exception of the chinese and to a lesser extent the japa nese see pp.
550 551 and pp.
this trend began to change in the 1960s as people from south america and asia began arriving in greater numbers.
the war weary vietnamese were at the forefront of this new immigration so much so that in 1966 the u s immigration authorities designated vietnamese as a separate category of newcomers.
most early immigrants were the wives and children of u s servicemen.
as the communists closed in on saigon in the mid1970s many vietnamese particularly those who had worked closely with american or south vietnamese authorities feared for their lives.
gathering together as many of their extended family members as they could thousands of vietnamese prepared to ee the country.
in a few hectic days in 1975 some 140 000 vietnamese escaped before the approaching communist gun re a few dramatically clinging to the bottoms of departing u s helicopters.
from saigon they were conveyed to military bases in guam and the philippines.
another 60 000 less fortunate vietnamese escaped at the same time over land and sea to hong kong and thailand where they waited ner vously for permission to move on.
to accommodate the refugees the u s government set up camps across the united states.
arrivals were crowded into army barracks affording little room and less privacy.
these were boot camps not for military ser vice but for assimilation into american society.
a rigorous program trained the vietnamese in eng lish forbade children from speaking their native language in the classroom and even immersed them in american slang.
many resented this attempt to mold them to strip them of their culture.
their discontent boiled over when authorities prepared to release the refugees from camps and board them with families around the nation.
the resettlement ofcials had decided to nd a sponsor for each vietnamese family an american family that would provide food shelter and assistance for the refugees until they could fend for themselves.
but the vietnamese people cherish their traditional extended families grandparents uncles aunts and cousins living communally with parents and children.
few american sponsors would accommodate a large extended family fewer vietnamese families would willingly separate.
the last days of saigon violence often attended the frantic american evacuation from vietnam in 1975 preserving the past a vietnamese american boy learns classical calligraphy from his grandfather.
the refugees were dispersed to iowa illinois pennsylvania new york washington and cal i fornia.
but the settlement sites many of them tucked away in rural districts offered scant economic opportunities.
the immigrants who had held mainly skilled or whitecollar positions in vietnam bristled as they were herded into menial labor.
as soon as they could they relocated hastening to established vietnamese enclaves around san francisco los angeles and dallas.
soon a second throng of vietnamese immigrants pushed into these little saigons.
fleeing from the ravages of poverty and from the oppressive communist government these stragglers had crammed themselves and their few possessions into little boats hoping to reach hong kong or get picked up by foreign ships.
eventually many of these boat people reached the united states.
usually less educated than the rst arrivals and receiving far less resettlement aid from the u s government they were however more willing to start at the bottom.
today these two groups total more than half a million people.
differing in experience and expectations the vietnamese share a new home in a strange land.
their uprooting is an immense unreckoned consequence of americas longest war.
boat people vietnamese refugees ee to freedom.
chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 billions of dollars 9 000 8 500 8 000 7 500 7 000 6 500 6 000 5 500 5 000 g w bush elected 2001 september 11th attack 4 000 clinton elected 1 000 reagan elected 1 500 vietnam war 2 000 depression 2 500 korean war breaks world war ii breaks 3 000 japan surrenders 3 500 invasion of iraq 4 500 figure 40 1 the national debt 1930 2006 world war ii provided the rst major boost to the national debt.
but it was the policies of the reagan and george h w bush administrations 1981 1993 that explosively expanded the debt to the 4 trillion level.
by the 1990s 14 percent of federal revenues went to interest payments on the debt.
the budget surpluses created by the booming economy of the second clinton administration 1997 2001 raised the prospect that the debt might be paid off.
but the combination of the george w bush tax cuts and increased military spending sent the debt soaring again after 2001.
sources historical statistics of the united states and statistical abstract of the united states relevant years ofce of management and budget mid session review budget of the u s government fiscal year 2008 but if the decits represented an economic failure they also constituted strangely enough a kind of political triumph.
among the paramount goals of reagans political life was his ambition to slow the growth of government and especially to block or even repeal the social programs launched in the era of lyndon johnsons great society.
by appearing to make new social spending both practically and politically impossible for the foreseeable future the decits served exactly that purpose.
they achieved in short reagans highest political objective the containment of the welfare state.
ronald reagan thus ensured the long term perpetuation of his dearest political values to a degree that few presidents have managed to achieve.
for better or worse the consequences of reaganomics would be large and durable.
yet another legacy of the 1980s was a sharp reversal of a long term trend toward a more equitable distribution of income and an increasing squeeze on the middle class.
in the early 1990s median household income in 1993 dollars actually declined from about 33 500 in 1989 to about 31 000 in 1993 see figure 40 2.
whether that disturbing trend should be attributed to reagans policies or to more deeply running economic currents remained controversial.
religion and politics 51 7 49 5 47 6 46 7 46 2 46 6 48 7 49 8 50 4 21 0 22 1 22 2 highest 5 44 1 18 5 16 5 4 2 3 8 1980 1990 3 7 3 6 3 4 lowest 20 percent 1980 1990 middle 60 percent the religious right religion pervaded american politics in the 1980s.
especially conspicuous was a coalition of conser vative evangelical christians known as the religious right.
in 1979 the reverend jerry falwell an evangelical minister from lynchburg virginia founded a political orga ni zation called the moral majority.
falwell preached with great success against sexual permissiveness abortion feminism and the spread of gay rights.
in its rst two years the moral majority registered between 2 million and 3 million voters.
using radio direct mail marketing and cable tv televangelists reached huge audiences in the 1980s collected millions of dollars and became aggressive political advocates of conser vative causes.
members of the religious right were sometimes called movement conser vatives a term that recalls the left wing protest movements of the 1960s.
in many ways the religious right of the 1980s was a reection of or answer to sixties radicalism.
feminists in the 1960s declared that the personal was political the religious right did the same.
what had in the past been personal matters gender roles homosexuality and prayer became the organizing ground for a powerful political movement.
like advocates of multiculturalism and af rmative action the religious right practiced a form of identity politics but rather than de ning themselves as latino voters or gay voters they declared themselves christian or pro life voters.
1980 1990 highest 20 percent figure 40 2 share of income received by families by quintile 1980 2005 since 1980 the incomes of the lowest 20 percent and the middle 60 percent have been shrinking while the incomes of the highest 20 percent and particularly the top 5 percent have climbed steadily.
source statistical abstract of the united states 2008.
the new right also mimicked the new left in some of its tactics.
if the left had consciousness raising sessions the right had prayer meetings.
adherents articulated their positions in a language of rights and entitlements as in the right to life or anti abortion movement.
they even mirrored the tactics of civil the moral majority 1981 television evangelist and religious leader the reverend jerry falwell mobilized his national moral majority organization in support of ronald reagans presidential campaign in 1980 and a conservative social agenda.
chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 bush on the home front george h w bush partly redeemed his pledge to work for a kinder gentler america when he signed the americans with disabilities act ada in 1990 a landmark law prohibiting discrimination against the 43 million u s citizens with physical or mental disabilities.
the president also signed a major water projects bill in 1992 that fundamentally reformed the distribution of subsidized federal water in the west.
the bill put the interests of the environment ahead of agriculture especially in cal i fornias heavily irrigated central valley and made much more water available to the wests thirsty cities.
the new president continued to aggravate the explosive social issues that had so divided americans throughout the 1980s especially the nettlesome questions of af rmative action and abortion.
in 1990 bushs department of education challenged the legality of college scholarships targeted for racial minorities.
bush repeatedly threatened to veto civil rights legislation that would make it easier for employees to prove discrimination in hiring and promotion practices.
he grudgingly accepted a watered down civil rights bill in 1991.
most provocatively in 1991 bush nominated for the supreme court the conser vative african american jurist clarence thomas a stern critic of af rmative action.
thomass nomination was loudly opposed by read my nose when president bush reneged on his 1988 campaign promise of no new taxes he inicted mortal political damage on his reelection campaign in 1992 liberal groups including orga nized labor the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp and the national organization for women now.
reecting irreconcilable divisions over af rmative action and abortion the senate judiciary committee concluded its hearings on the nomination with a divided 7 7 vote and forwarded the matter to the full senate without a recommendation.
then just days before the senate was scheduled to vote in early october 1991 a press leak revealed that anita hill a law professor at the university of oklahoma had accused thomas of sexual harassment.
the senate judiciary committee was forced to reopen its hearings.
for days a prurient american public sat glued to their television sets as hill graphically detailed her charges of sexual improprieties and thomas angrily responded.
in the end by a 52 48 vote the senate con rmed thomas as the second african american ever to sit on the supreme bench thurgood marshall was the rst.
while many americans hailed hill as a heroine for focusing the nations at tention on issues of sexual harassment thomas maintained that hills widely publicized unproved allegations amounted to a high tech lynching for uppity blacks who in any way deign to think for themselves to do for themselves the furor over thomass con rmation suggested that the social issues that had helped produce three republican presidential victories in the 1980s were losing some of their electoral appeal.
many women en economic troubles raged by the all male judiciary committees behavior in the thomas hearings grew increasingly critical of the presidents uncompromising stand on abortion.
a gender gap opened between the two political parties as pro choice women grew increasingly cool toward the strong anti abortion stand of the republicans.
still more damaging to president bushs political health was the economy which sputtered and stalled almost from the outset of his administration.
by 1992 the unemployment rate exceeded 7 percent.
it approached 10 percent in the key state of cal i fornia rav aged by defense cutbacks.
the federal budget decit continued to mushroom cancerously topping 250 billion in each of bushs years as president.
in a desperate attempt to stop the hemorrhage of red ink bush agreed in 1990 to a budget increase that included 133 billion in new taxes.
bushs 1990 tax and budget package added up to a political catastrophe.
in his 1988 presidential campaign bush had belligerently declared read my lips no new taxes now he had agrantly broken that campaign promise.
chronology reagan defeats carter for presidency iran releases american hostages reaganomics spending and tax cuts passed solidarity movement in poland oconnor appointed to supreme court rst woman justice fourth reagan gorbachev summit meeting in moscow bush defeats dukakis for presidency chinese government suppresses prodemocracy demonstrators in tiananmen square webster v reproductive health services eastern european countries oust communist governments berlin wall torn down 1981 united states aids anti leftist forces in central america recession hits u s economy israel invades lebanon reagan announces sdi plan star wars u s marines killed in beirut lebanon u s invasion of grenada iraq invades kuwait east and west germany unite americans with disabilities act ada persian gulf war thomas appointed to supreme court gorbachev survives coup attempt resigns as soviet president soviet union dissolves republics form commonwealth of independent states twenty seventh amendment prohibiting congressional pay raises from taking effect until an election seats a new session of congress ratied planned parenthood v casey reagan defeats mondale for presidency soviet union boycotts summer olympics in los angeles gorbachev comes to power in soviet union announces glasnost and perestroika first reagan gorbachev summit meeting in geneva reagan administration backs aquino in philippines iran contra affair revealed second reagan gorbachev summit meeting in reykjavik iceland senate rejects supreme court nomination of robert bork u s naval escorts begin in persian gulf stock market plunges 508 points third reagan gorbachev summit meeting in washington d c inf treaty signed chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 key terms proposition 13 1034 boll weevils 1035 supply side economics 1035 reaganomics 1035 strategic defense initiative sdi 1036 sandinistas 1037 contras 1037 glasnost 1039 perestroika 1039 intermediate range nuclear forces inf treaty 1039 people to know iran contra affair 1041 moral majority 1043 black monday 1045 commonwealth of independent states cis 1047 operation desert storm 1050 americans with disabilities act ada 1052 ronald reagan margaret thatcher mikhail gorbachev saddam hussein jerry falwell sandra day oconnor george h w bush boris yeltsin nelson mandela manuel noriega norman stormin norman schwarzkopf clarence thomas where did modern conservatism come from.
r onald reagans election surprised many historians.
reecting a liberal political outlook that is common among academic scholars they were long accustomed to understanding american history as an inexorable almost evolutionary unfolding of liberal principles including the quests for economic equality social justice and active government.
that point of view animated the enormously popular writings of the so called progressive historians such as charles and mary beard earlier in the century see varying viewpoints the populists radicals or reactionaries on p 744.
for the beards conser vatives were the rich privileged elites bent on preserving their wealth and power and determined to keep government impotent but doomed in the end to give way to the forces of liberal democracy.
even the new left revisionists of the 1960s while critical of the celebratory tone of their progressive forebears were convinced that the deepest currents of american history owed leftward.
but whether they were liberal or revisionist most scholars writing in the rst three post world war ii decades dismissed conservatism as an obsolete political creed.
the revisionists were much more interested in decrying liberalisms deciencies than in analyzing conservatisms strengths.
liberals and revision ists alike abandoned the beards image of powerful conser vative elites and offered instead a contemptuous portrait of conser vatives as fringe wackos paranoid mccarthyites or racist demagogues who in the words of the liberal critic lionel trilling trafcked only in irritable mental gestures which seem to resemble ideas such an outlook is conspicuous in books such as daniel bells the radical right 1963 and richard hofstadters the paranoid style in american politics 1965.
yet what owed out of the turbulent decade of the 1960s was not a strengthened liberalism but a revived conservatism.
ronald reagans huge political success compelled a thorough reexamination of the tradition of american conservatism and the sources of its modern resurgence.
historians such as leo ribuffo and alan brinkley have argued that characters once dismissed as irrational crackpots or colorful irrelevancies including religious fundamentalists and depression era gures like huey long and father charles coughlin articulated values deeply rooted and widely shared in american culture.
those conser vative spokespersons whatever their peculiarities offered a vision of free individuals minimal government and autonomous local communities that harked back to many to learn more of the themes of civic republicanism in the era of young nationhood.
but modern conservatism however deep its roots is also a product of the recent historical past.
as scholars like thomas sugrue and thomas edsall have shown the economic stagnation that set in af ter 1970 made many americans insecure about their futures and receptive to new political doctrines.
at the same time as the commentator kevin phillips has stressed social issues with little or no apparent economic content became increasingly prom inent as movements for sexual liberation legal abortion and womens rights sharply challenged traditional beliefs.
perhaps most important the success of the civil rights movement thrust the perpet ually agonizing question of race relations to the very center of american political life.
finally the failure of government policies in vietnam runaway ination in the 1970s and the disillusioning watergate episode cast doubt on the legitimacy the efcacy and even the morality of big government many modern conser vatives including the pun dit george will stress the deep historical roots of american conservatism.
in their view as will once put it it took sixteen years to count the ballots from the 1964 goldwater versus johnson election and goldwater won after all.
but that argument is surely overstated.
goldwater ran against the legacy of the new deal and was overwhelmingly defeated.
reagan ran against the consequences of the great society and won decisively.
many conser vatives in short apparently acknowledge the legitimacy of the new deal and the stake that many middle class americans feel they have in its programs of social security home mortgage subsidies farm price supports and similar policies.
but they reject the philosophy of the great society with its more focused attack on urban poverty and its vigorous support of af rmative action.
modern conservatism springs less from a repudiation of government per se and more from a disapproval of the particular priorities and strategies of the great society.
the different historical fates of the new deal and the great society suggest the key to the rise of modern conservatism.
to learn more robert collins transforming america politics and culture during the reagan years 2007 barbara ehrenreich the worst years of our lives irreverent notes from a decade of greed 1990 irving kristol reections of a neoconservative 1983 walter lafeber inevitable revolutions 2nd ed 1993 william martin with god on our side the rise of the religious right in america 1996 richard l pacelle jr the transformation of the supreme courts agenda from the new deal to the reagan administration 1991 kevin phillips the politics of rich and poor wealth and the american electorate in the reagan aftermath 1990 paul c roberts the supply side revolution 1984 john w sloan the reagan effect economics and presidential leadership 1999 david a stockman the triumph of politics why the reagan revolution failed 1986 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 national security had undergirded the values of openness and individual freedom that de ned the distinctive character of american society.
now american security and american liberty alike were dangerously imperiled.
bush takes the offensive against iraq on only its second day in ofce the bush administration warned that it would not tolerate iraqs continued deance of united nations weapons inspections mandated after iraqs defeat in the 1991 persian gulf war.
iraqi dictator saddam hussein had played hideand seek with the inspectors for years.
in 1998 he had expelled both the u n monitoring verication and inspection commission unmovic and the international atomic energy agency iaea inducing president clinton with congressional approval to declare that saddams removal regime change was an ofcial goal of u s policy.
but no sustained military action against iraq had followed.
now in the context of the new terrorist threat the bush administration focused on iraq with a vengeance.
in january 2002 just weeks after the september 11 attacks bush claimed that iraq along with iran and north korea constituted an axis of evil that gravely menaced american security.
iran and north korea were both known to be pursuing nuclear weapons programs and iran had long supported terrorist operations in the middle east.
but iraqi tyrant saddam hussein defeated but not destroyed by bushs father in 1991 became the principal object of the new presidents wrath.
the elder bush had carefully assembled a broad international coalition to ght the 1991 persian gulf war.
he had also spoken so often of prudence that late night television comedians had mocked him for it.
in contrast his son was brashly determined to break with long standing american traditions and wage a preemptive war against iraq and to go it alone if necessary.
the younger bush thus cast off his appeal for america to be a humble nation and stood revealed as a plunger a daring risk taker willing to embrace bold dramatic policies foreign as well as scal.
in that spirit bush began laying plans for a war against iraq while somewhat halfheartedly pursuing diplomatic initiatives to avoid war.
itching for a ght and egged on by hawkish vice president cheney and other neoconser vative advis ers bush accused the iraqi regime of all manner of wrongdoing oppressing its own people frustrating the weapons inspectors developing nuclear chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction referred to as wmd and supporting terrorist orga ni zations like al qaeda.
perhaps most controversially he also suggested that a liberated democratized iraq might provide a beacon of hope to the islamic world and thereby begin to improve the political equation in the volatile middle east.
to skeptical observers including americas usually reliable european allies the very multiplicity of bushs reasons for war cast doubt on his case and his ambition to create a democracy in long suffering iraq seemed hopelessly utopian.
secretary of state colin powell urged caution warning about the long term consequences for the united states of invading and occupying an unstable religiously and culturally divided nation of 25 million people.
you break it you own it he told the president.
in his 2002 state of the union address president george w bush b.
1946 declared iraq continues to aunt its hostility toward america and to support terror.
the iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax and nerve gas and nuclear weapons for over a decade.
this is a regime that has already used poison gas to murder thousands of its own citizens leaving the bodies of mothers huddled over their dead children.
this is a regime that agreed to international inspections then kicked out the inspectors.
this is a regime that has something to hide from the civilized world.
states like these and their terrorist allies constitute an axis of evil arming to threaten the peace of the world.
by seeking weapons of mass destruction these regimes pose a grave and growing danger.
they could provide these arms to terrorists giving them the means to match their hatred.
they could attack our allies or attempt to blackmail the united states.
in any of these cases the price of indifference would be catastrophic.
the war in iraq 40e 45e turkey shia arab shia arab sunni arab sunni arab sunni arab sunni kurd mosul sunni kurd kirkuk 35n tikrit syria iran samarra haditha baquba ramadi fallujah baghdad igr is r.
t map 41 5 iraq in transition carved out of the old ottoman empire after world war i iraq has long been a combustible compound of rivalrous ethnic and religious groups.
saddam husseins dictatorial regime imposed a brutal peace on the country for twenty four years following his ascent to power in 1979 but after the american invasion in 2003 old feuds resumed exacerbated by stinging resentment against the occupying forces.
iraq kut karbala jordan n najaf eup saudi arabia hrates nasiriya r basra path of u s coalition forces march april 2003 sunni triangle oil field site of major clash with iraqi insurgents 30n 100 km.
kuwait 100 mi.
persian gulf interactive map heavy majorities in both houses of congress nevertheless passed a resolution in october 2002 authorizing the president to employ armed force to defend against iraqi threats to americas national security and to enforce united nations resolutions regarding iraq.
a month later the u n security council voted unanimously to give iraq a nal opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations there followed a months long cat and mouse game.
u n weapons inspectors returned to iraq.
saddam once again harassed and blocked them.
no weapons of mass destruction were found.
the inspectors asked for more time.
the united nations declined to authorize the use of force to compel compliance.
in this tense and confusing at mosphere bush with britain his only major ally launched the longanticipated invasion of iraq on march 19 2003 saddam husseins vaunted military machine collapsed almost immediately.
in less than a month baghdad had fallen and saddam had been driven from power and hounded into hiding.
he was found and arrested ethnic and religious groups by percent of total population c 25 000 000 other 3 sunni kurd 17 sunni arab 20 shia arab 60 some nine months later and executed in 2006.
from the deck of a u s aircraft carrier off the cal i fornia coast speaking beneath a banner declaring mission accomplished bush triumphantly announced on may 1 2003 that major combat operations in iraq have ended see map 41 5.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 the democrats win back control of congress 2006 house majority whip james clyburn of south carolina left speaker of the house nancy pelosi of california center and majority leader steny hoyer of maryland right raise their hands in victory after being selected to lead the democratic party in the house of representatives.
their party also won a majority in the senate in the 2006 midterm elections the rst time since 1994 that the democrats controlled both houses.
which devastated new orleans and much of the gulf coast in late august 2005 ooding 80 percent of the historic city and causing over 1 300 deaths and 150 billion in damages.
midterm elections of 2006 as charges of dictatorial power grabbing cronyism and incompetence mounted during bushs second term democrats campaigned hard against the president and his party in the midterm elections of 2006 republicans fell victim to the same anti incumbency sentiment they had ridden to power twelve years earlier as democrats charged that a culture of corruption had taken hold in washington.
a series of highpro le arrests and resignations over lobbying graft illegal campaign nancing and sexual misconduct among republican legislators added fuel to the democrats re.
democrats narrowly regained control of both houses of congress for the rst time since the gingrich revolution of 1994 see p 1059.
new speaker of the house nancy pelosi the rst woman to hold that post promised a new era of reform openness and a check on the bush administration.
the biggest factor in the democratic sweep was the perceived mishandling of the war in iraq.
public approval of the presidents management of the war had declined steadily since early 2005 as the american death toll continued to rise.
prewar claims about wmd and iraqs connections to al qaeda and 9 11 had all proved false.
by late 2005 a majority of americans believed that the war had been a mistake.
even more felt that the bush administration particularly the defense department under secretary donald rumsfeld had badly mismanaged events on the ground.
rumsfeld resigned after the republicans thumping in the 2006 midterm elections.
but the quagmire continued.
the bush administration attempted to bridge it in early 2007 by sending a surge of twenty thousand new troops to iraq to battle insurgents.
though the surge appeared to bring a modest measure of stability to iraq as the 2008 election cycle got under way public opinion solidied against the war.
the major question was how the united states could extract itself while at the same time avoid leaving in its wake a genocidal civil war.
election of 2008 the election of 2008 was historic from the beginning.
george w bush had twice selected dick cheney as his running mate for his experience and lack of political ambition after leaving the vice presidency.
in his late sixties and with a history of heart problems cheney never had any intention of running for president himself.
with neither the sitting president nor vice president running the 2008 election was truly open for the rst time in 80 years.
the surge in iraq european disapproval of the iraq war 2007 the presidential election of 2008 with president bushs popularity ratings dropping to historic lows a large eld of democratic candidates dove into the primary campaign of 2008 smelling republican blood in the electoral waters.
the democratic race soon tightened into a ercely fought contest between the 46 year old rst term illinois senator barack obama and the pre campaign favorite former first lady and new york senator hillary rodham clinton.
the ensuing battle destined to catapult either a black man or a woman into the general election as a major party nominee for the rst time split the party but drew millions of new voters into the democratic primaries.
obama narrowly prevailed surviving clintons attacks on his inexperience.
son of a black kenyan father and a white mother from kansas obama appealed to both the crusading spirit of the civil rights era of old and the newer ethos of tolerance that came more easily to the young in twentieth rst century america.
he also capitalized on an army of smartly managed volunteers a record of early opposition to the war in iraq and an astonishing gift for eloquence that he used to advocate a post partisan politics appealing to voters weary of the divisive partisanship of the bush years.
to strengthen his national security credentials he picked foreign policy savvy delaware senator joseph biden as his running mate.
in keeping with the countrys anti bush mood republicans nominated longtime arizona senator john mccain aged 72 a self styled maverick with a record of supporting bipartisan legislation on such issues as normalizing relations with north vietnam campaign nance and immigration reform.
he had launched his political career as a vietnam war hero who had endured years of torture as a pow.
to rally the conservative and christian evangelical wing of his party quite and then there were two february 2008 eight candidates competed for the democratic nomination in primaries and caucuses beginning in january 2008 by the time of this debate at the university of texas at austin in february only illinois senator barack obama and new york senator hillary clinton remained in the race.
chapter 42 the american people face a new century changing colors a second grade bilingual class recites the pledge of allegiance in both spanish and english in austin texas.
by the end of the twentyrst century americans who will be able to trace their ancestry directly to europe might well be a minority in the united states.
yet the fact was that foreign born people accounted for only about 12 1 percent of the american population in 2005 a far smaller proportion than the historical high point of nearly 15 percent recorded in the census of 1910 but evidence nonetheless that american society continued to welcome and need newcomers.
somewhat inconsistently critics charged both that immigrants robbed citizens of jobs and that they dumped themselves on the welfare rolls at the taxpayers expense.
but studies showed that immigrants took jobs scorned by americans and that they paid more dollars in federal taxes withholding and social security taxes as well as excise taxes than they claimed for welfare payments.
the story was different at the state level where expenditures for immigrant education and health care often exceeded the net tax contribution of the immigrants themselves.
yet the infusion of young immigrants and their offspring was just what the country needed when faced with the challenges of an aging population.
a more urgent worry was that unscrupulous employers might take cruel advantage of alien workers who often had scant knowledge of their legal rights.
debates over immigration were complicated by the problem of illegal immigrants.
the intensity mounted in 2006 when xenophobic pundits and politicians fanned the old ames of anxiety that millions of undocumented workers were usurping american tax dollars and privileges.
immigrant sympathizers argued that unlawful aliens had to be legalized so that they could receive the same protections as other workers.
amid this chaos president george w bush and a bi partisan group of legislators proposed a law to establish a guest worker program for undocumented workers and create a path to citizenship albeit after paying a ne.
anti immigrant forces condemned the plan as amnesty business interests protested that it put too great a burden on employers to verify the right to work.
and immigrant rights advocates claimed that it would create second class citizens in the end the compromise bill pleased no one and fell into the dustbin.
but the debates legacy was large.
the anti immigrant venom spewed by many republican politicians undercut hopes that the gop might continue to attract latino voters as it had in the 2004 presidential election when many of them embraced the partys conser vative positions on social values.
beyond the melting pot thanks both to continued immigration and to their own high birthrate latinos were becoming an increasingly important minority.
the united states by 2006 was home to about 44 million of them.
they included some 26 million chicanos or mexican americans mostly in the southwest as well as 3 million puerto ricans chiey in the northeast and more than 1 million cubans in florida where it was jokingly a multicultural society the oldest americans members of the cheyenne river sioux tribe celebrate the opening of the smithsonian institutions national museum of the american indian in washington d c 2004 said that miami had become the most anglo city in latin america.
flexing their political muscles latinos elected mayors of miami denver san antonio and los angeles.
after years of struggle the united farm workers organizing committee ufwoc headed by the softspoken and charismatic csar chvez succeeded in improving working conditions for the mostly chicano stoop laborers who followed the cycle of planting and harvesting across the american west.
latino inuence seemed likely to grow as suggested by the increasing presence of spanish language ballots and television broadcasts.
latinos newly condent and orga nized became the nations largest ethnic minority outnumbering even african americans in 2003 indeed by the early twenty rst century the chicano population of americas largest state cal i fornia led the anglo population making the state a patchwork of minorities with no single ethnic majority.
in 2003 most newborns in cal i fornia were latino a powerful harbinger of the states demographic future.
asian americans also made great strides.
by the 1980s they were americas fastest growing minority and their numbers reached nearly 12 million by 2002 once feared and hated as the yellow peril and consigned to the most menial and degrading jobs citi zens of asian ancestry were now counted among the most prosperous americans.
indians the original americans numbered some 2 4 million in the 2000 census.
half of them had left their reservations to live in cities.
meanwhile unemployment and alcoholism had blighted reservation life.
many tribes took advantage of their special legal status as independent nations to open bingo halls and gambling casinos for the general public on reservation lands but the cycle of discrimination and poverty proved hard to break.
cities and suburbs americas alabaster cities of song and story grew more sooty and less safe in the closing decades of the twentieth century.
crime was the great scourge of urban life.
the rate of violent crimes committed in cities reached an all time high in the drug infested 1980s and then leveled off in the early 1990s.
the number of violent crimes even began to decline substantially in many areas after 1995 nevertheless murders robberies and rapes remained shockingly common not only in cities but also in suburbs and rural areas.
america imprisoned a larger fraction of its citizens than makers of america theafricanthe great latinos american migration t oday mexican food is handed through fast food drive up windows in all fty states spanishlanguage broadcasts ll the airwaves and the latino community has its own telephone book the spanish yellow pages.
latinos send representatives to congress and mayors to city hall record hit songs paint murals and teach history.
latinos among the fastest growing segments of the u s population include puerto ricans frequent voyagers between their native island and northeastern cities cubans many of them refugees from the communist dictatorship of fidel castro concentrated in miami and southern florida and central americans eeing the ravages of civil war in nicaragua and el salvador.
but the most populous group of latinos derives from mexico see figure 42 6.
the rst signicant numbers of mexicans began heading for el norte the north around 1910 when the upheavals of the mexican revolution stirred and shufed the mexican population into more or less constant ux.
their northward passage was briey interrupted during the great depression when thousands of mexican nationals were deported.
but immigration resumed during demonstrating for immigrant rights los angeles 2007 latinos march in downtown los angeles in support of legalizing undocumented parents who have children born in the united states.
u s law gives the right of citizenship to anyone born on american soil jus soli but not necessarily to the parents of that child.
world war ii and since then a steady ow of legal immigrants has passed through border checkpoints joined by countless millions of their undocumented countrymen and countrywomen stealing across the frontier on moonless nights.
for the most part these mexicans came to work in the elds following the ripening crops northward to canada through the summer and autumn months.
in winter many headed back to mexico but some gathered instead in the cities of the southwest el paso los angeles houston and san bernardino.
there they found regular work even if lack of skills and racial discrimination often con ned them to manual labor.
city jobs might pay less than farm labor but the work was steady and offered the prospect of a stable home.
houses may have been shabby in the barrios but these mexican neighborhoods provided a sense of togetherness a place to raise a family and the chance to join a mutual aid society.
such societies or mutualistas sponsored baseball leagues helped the sick and disabled and defended their members against discrimination.
puerto rican 9 6 3 4 million cuban 3 5 1 2 million central or south american and other latino 28 4 10 1 million mexican 58 5 20 6 million figure 42 6 sources of latino population in the united states 2000 source statistical abstract of the united states 2003.
mexican american farmworkers pitting apricots in fruit groves near los angeles 1924 mexican immigrants lived so close to the border that their native country acted like a powerful magnet drawing them back time and time again.
mexicans frequently returned to see relatives or visit the homes of their youth and relatively few became u s citizens.
indeed in many mexican american communities it was a badge of dishonor to apply for u s citizenship.
the mexican government likewise inuenced by the proximity of the two countries intervened in the daily lives of its nationals in america sometimes dis couraging them from becoming citizens of their adopted country.
as anglo reformers attempted to americanize the immigrants in the 1910s and 1920s the mexican consulate in los angeles launched a mex icanization program.
the consulate sponsored pa rades on cinco de mayo fifth of may celebrating mexicos defeat of a french army at the battle of puebla in 1862 and opened special spanish language schools for children.
since world war ii the american born generation has carried on the ght for political representation economic opportunity and cultural preservation.
fresh arrivals from mexico and from the other latin american nations daily swell latino communities across america.
the census of 2000 revealed that latinos are now the largest minority group in the united states surpassing african americans.
as the united states moves through the twenty rst century it is taking on a pronounced spanish accent and increasingly latinos are making themselves a force to be reckoned with in american politics.
young latina activists in east boston 2004 latinos have become increasingly inuential voters courted by democratic and republican candidates alike.
chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at.

chapter 3 new bern ni lo o r.
er charles town th english scotch irish u savannah o georgia n r.
ar ah am alt c sa ee nt sa wilmington es.
south carolina va nn ah at l a n t i c ocean ar r fe r ee ed pe pe ca norfolk ro anoke r north carolina s german dutch african 200 mi 400 km non native groups in colonial america 1760 even though the entire atlantic seaboard of what is now the united states had become a series of british colonies by 1760 the non native population consisted of people from many places.
as this map reveals english settlers dominated most of the regions of north america.
but note the large areas of german settlement in the western chesapeake and pennsylvania the swath of dutch settlement in new york and new jersey the scotch irish regions in the western regions of the south and the large areas in which enslaved africans were becoming the majority of the population.
what aspects of the history of these colonies help explain their ethnic composition.
society and culture in provincial america 65 changing sources of european immigration the most distinctive and enduring feature of the american population was that it brought together peoples of many different races ethnic groups and nationalities.
north america was home to a highly diverse population.
the british colonies were the home to native americans english immigrants forcibly imported africans and a wide range of other european groups.
among the earliest european immigrants were about 300 000 french calvinists known as huguenots.
the edict of nantes of 1598 had assured them freedom of religion in france.
but in 1685 the edict was revoked driving many huguenot refugees huguenots to north america.
germany had similar laws banning protestantism driving many germans to america where they settled in pennsylvania.
they came to be known as the pennsylvania dutch a corruption of the german term for their nationality deutsch.
frequent wars in europe drove many other immigrants to the american colonies.
the most numerous of the newcomers were the so called scotch irish scotch presbyterians who had settled in northern ireland in the province of ulster in the early s eventeenth scotch irish century.
most of the scotch irish in america pushed out to the western edges of european settlement and occupied land without much regard for who actually claimed to own it.
there were also immigrants from scotland itself and from southern ireland.
the irish migrated steadily over a long period.
some abandoned their roman catholic religion and much of their ethnic identity after they arrived in america.
the colonial economies farming hunting and fishing dominated almost all areas of european and african settlement in north america throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
even so the economies of the different regions varied markedly.
the southern economy a strong european demand for tobacco enabled some planters in the chesapeake maryland and virginia to become enormously wealthy and at times allowed the region as a whole to prosper.
but throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth boom and bust tobacco economy centuries production of tobacco frequently exceeded demand and as a result the price of the crop sometimes suffered severe declines.
the result was a boom and bust cycle in the chesapeake economy with the first major bust occurring in 1640 south carolina and georgia relied on rice production since the low lying coastline with its many tidal rivers made it possible to create rice paddies that could be flooded and drained.
rice cultivation was so difficult and unhealthy that white laborers generally refused to perform it.
hence planters in south carolina and georgia were much more dependent on slaves than were their northern counterparts.
african workers were adept at rice cultivation in part because some of them had come from rice producing regions of west africa and in part because they were generally more accustomed to the hot humid climate than were europeans.
they also had a greater natural immunity to malaria.
but the work was arduous and debilitating for them nevertheless.
because of their dependence on large scale cash crops the southern colonies developed less of a commercial or industrial economy than the colonies of the north.
the trading in tobacco and rice was handled largely by merchants based in london and later in the northern colonies.
66 chapter 4 the boston massacre 1770 by paul revere this sensationalized engraving of the conflict between british troops and boston laborers is one of many important propaganda documents by revere and others for the patriot cause in the 1770s.
among the victims of the massacre listed by revere was crispus attucks probably the first black man to die in the struggle for american independence.
the library of congress in america did public virtue survive.
in 1772 he proposed the creation of a committee of correspondence in boston to publicize the grievances against england.
other colonies followed massachusettss lead and a loose intercolonial network of political organizations was soon established that kept the spirit of dissent alive through the 1770s.
committee of correspondence the philosophy of revolt although a superficial calm settled on the colonies after the boston massacre the crises of the 1760s had helped arouse enduring ideological challenges to english authority and had produced powerful instruments for publicizing colonial grievances.
gradually a political outlook gained a following in america that would ultimately serve to justify revolt.
the ideas that would support the revolution emerged from many sources.
some were drawn from religious particularly puritan sources or from the political experiences of the colonies.
others came from abroad.
most important perhaps were the radical ideas the empire in transition 99 of the political opposition in great britain.
some were scots who considered the english state tyrannical.
others were embittered country whigs who felt excluded from power and considered the existing system corrupt and oppressive.
drawing from some of the great philosophical minds of earlier generations most notably john locke these english dissidents framed a powerful argument against their government.
central to this emerging ideology was a new concept of what government should be.
because humans were inherently corrupt and selfish government was necessary to protect individuals from the evil in one another.
but because any government was run by corruptible leaders the people needed safeguards against its possible abuses of power.
most people in both england and america considered the english constitution the best system ever devised to meet these necessities.
by distributing power among the three elements of society the monarchy the aristocracy and the common people the english political system had ensured that no individual or group could exercise unchecked authority.
yet by the mid seventeenth century dissidents in both england and america had become convinced that the constitution was in danger.
a single center of power the king and his ministers was becoming so powerful that it could not be effectively checked.
such arguments found little sympathy in most of england.
the english constitution was not a written document or a fixed set of unchangeable rules.
it was a general sense of the way things are done and most people in england were willing to accept changes in it.
americans by contrast drew from their experience with colonial charters in which the shape and powers of government were permanently inscribed on paper.
they resisted the idea of a flexible changing set of basic principles.
one basic principle americans believed was the right of people to be taxed only with their own consent a belief that gradually took shape in no taxation without representation the popular slogan no taxation without representation whatever the nature of a tax it could not be levied without the consent of the colonists themselves.
this clamor about representation made little sense to the english.
according to english constitutional theory members of parliament did not represent individuals or particular geographical areas.
instead each member represented the interests of the whole nation and indeed the whole empire.
the many boroughs of england that had no representative in parliament the whole of ireland and the colonies thousands of miles away all were thus represented in the parliament at london even though they elected no representatives of their own.
this was the theory of virtual representation.
but americans drawing from their experiences with their town meetings and their colonial assemblies believed in actual representation.
every community was entitled to its own representative elected by the people of that community.
since the colonists had none of their own representatives in parliament it followed that they were not represented there.
americans believed that the colonial assemblies played the same role within the colonies as parliament did within england.
the empire the americans argued was a sort of federation of commonwealths each with its own legislative body all tied together by loyalty to the king.
such ideas illustrated a fundamental difference of opinion between england and america over the question of where ultimate power lay.
by arguing that parliament had the right to legislate for the empire as a whole but that only the provincial assemblies could legislate for the individual colonies americans were in effect arguing for a division of sovereignty debated sovereignty.
parliament would be sovereign in some matters the assemblies in others.
to the british such an argument was absurd.
in any system of government there must be a single ultimate authority.
and since the empire was in their view a single undivided unit there could be only one authority within it the english government of king and parliament.
patterns of popular culture taverns in revolutionary massachusetts in colonial massachusetts as in many other american colonies in the 1760s and 1770s taverns or public houses as they were often known were crucial to the development of popular resistance to british rule.
the puritan culture of new england created some resistance to taverns and reformers tried to regulate or close them to reduce the problems caused by public drunkenness lewd behavior and anarchy but as the commercial life of the colonies expanded and more people began living in towns and cities taverns became a central institution in american social life and eventually in its political life as well.
taverns were appealing of course because they provided alcoholic drinks in a culture where the craving for alcohol and the extent of drunkenness was very high.
but taverns had other attractions as well.
they were one of the few places where people could meet and talk openly in public indeed many colonists considered the life of the tavern as the only vaguely democratic experience available to them.
the tavern was a mostly male institution just as politics was considered a mostly male concern.
and so the fusion of male camaraderie and political discourse emerged naturally out of the tavern culture.
as the revolutionary crisis deepened taverns and pubs became the central meeting places for airing the ideas that fueled resistance to british policies.
educated and uneducated men alike joined in 100 a nimated discussions of events.
those who could not read and there were many could learn about the contents of revolutionary pamphlets from listening to tavern conversations.
they could join in the discussion of the new republican ideas emerging in america by participating in tavern celebrations of for example the anniversaries of resistance to the stamp act.
those anniversaries inspired elaborate toasts in public houses throughout the colonies.
in an age before wide distribution of newspapers taverns and tavernkeepers were important sources of information about the political and social turmoil of the time.
taverns were also the settings for political events.
in 1770 for example a report circulated through the taverns of danvers massachusetts about a local man who was continuing to sell tea despite the colonial boycott.
the sons of liberty brought the seller to the bell tavern and persuaded him to sign a confession and apology before a crowd of defiant men in the public room.
almost all politicians who wanted any real contact with the public found it necessary to visit taverns in colonial massachusetts.
samuel adams spent considerable time in the public houses of boston where he sought to encourage resistance to british rule while taking care to drink moderately so as not to erode his stature as a leader.
his cousin john adams although somewhat more skeptical of taverns and more sensitive to the vices they encouraged also r ecognized their political value.
in taverns he once said bastards and legislatores are frequently begotten understand analyze evaluate 1 why were taverns so important in edu cating colonists about the relationship with britain.
2 what gathering places today serve the same purposes as taverns did in colonial america.
taverns and politics the green dragon tavern is where protesters planned the boston tea party.
granger nyc all rights reserved.
sites of resistance colonists kept the growing spirit of resistance alive in many ways but most of all through writing and talking.
dissenting leaflets pamphlets and books circulated widely through the colonies.
in towns and cities men gathered in churches schools town squares and above all taverns to discuss politics.
taverns were also places where resistance pamphlets and leaflets could be distributed and where meetings for the planning of protests and demonstrations could be held.
massachusetts had the most elaborately developed tavern culture which was perhaps one reason why the spirit of resistance grew more quickly there than anywhere else.
see patterns of popular culture taverns in revolutionary massachusetts the apparent calm in america in the 1770s hid a growing sense of resentment about the continued enforcement of the navigation acts.
popular anger was visible in occasional acts of rebellion.
at one point colonists seized a british revenue ship on gaspe incident the lower delaware river.
in 1772 angry residents of rhode island boarded the british schooner gaspe set it afire and sank it.
the tea excitement the revolutionary fervor of the 1760s intensified as a result of a new act of parliament one that involved the business of selling tea.
in 1773 britains east india company on the verge of bankruptcy was sitting on large stocks of tea that it could not sell in england.
in an effort to save it the government passed the tea act of 1773 which gave the tea act the company the right to export its merchandise directly to the colonies without paying any of the regular taxes that were imposed on colonial merchants who had traditionally served as the intermediaries in such transactions.
with these privileges the company could undersell american merchants and monopolize the colonial tea trade.
the act angered influential colonial merchants and more important revived american passions about the issue of taxation without representation.
the law provided no new tax on tea.
but the original townshend duty on the commodity survived and the east india company was now exempt from paying it.
lord north had assumed that most colonists would welcome the new law because it would reduce the price of tea to consumers by removing the intermediaries.
but resistance leaders in america argued that the law in effect represented an unconstitutional tax on american merchants.
the colonists responded by boycotting tea.
101 102 chapter 5 it was simple common sense paine wrote for americans to break completely with a political system that could inflict such brutality on its own people.
common sense sold more than 100 000 copies in only a few months and helped build support for the idea of independence in the early months of 1776.
for more on the origins of the rebellion see debating the past the american revolution the declaration of independence in the meantime the continental congress in philadelphia was moving toward a complete break with england.
at the beginning of the summer it appointed a committee to draft a formal declaration of independence and on july 2 1776 it adopted a resolution that these independence declared united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states that they are absolved from all allegiance to the british crown and that all political connexion between them and the state of great britain is and ought to be totally dissolved two days later on july 4 congress approved the declaration of independence itself which provided formal justifications for this resolution.
the declaration launched a period of energetic political innovation as one colony after another reconstituted itself as a state by 1781 most states had produced written constitutions for themselves.
at the national level however the process was more uncertain.
in articles of confederation november 1777 finally congress adopted a plan for union the articles of confederation.
the document confirmed the existing weak decentralized system.
thomas jefferson a thirty three year old virginian wrote most of the declaration with thomas jefferson help from benjamin franklin and john adams.
the declaration expressed concepts that had been circulating throughout the colonies over the previous few months in the form of at least ninety other local declarations of independence declarations drafted up and down the coast by town meetings artisan and militia organizations county officials grand juries sons of liberty and colonial assemblies.
jefferson borrowed heavily from these texts.
the final document had two parts.
in the first the declaration restated the familiar contract theory of john locke that governments were formed to protect what jefferson called life liberty and the pursuit of happiness in the second part it listed the alleged crimes of the king who with the backing of parliament had violated his contract with the colonists and thus had forfeited all claim to their loyalty.
mobilizing for war financing the war was difficult.
congress had no authority to levy taxes on its own and when it requisitioned money from the state governments none contributed more than a small part of its expected share.
congress had little success borrowing from the public since few americans could afford to buy bonds.
instead congress issued paper money.
printing presses turned out enormous amounts of continental currency and the states printed currencies of their own.
the result predictably was soaring inflation and congress soon found that the continental currency was virtually worthless.
ultimately congress financed the war mostly by borrowing from other nations.
after a first surge of patriotism in 1775 volunteer soldiers became scarce.
states had to pay bounties or use a draft to recruit the needed men.
at first the militiamen remained under the control of their respective states.
but congress recognized the need for a centralized military command and it created a continental army with a single commander in the american revolution 111 jean baptist de verger a french officer serving in america during the revolution kept an illustrated journal of his experiences.
here he portrays four american soldiers carrying different kinds of arms a black infantryman with a light rifle a musketman a rifleman and an artilleryman.
brown university library providence rhode island usa bridgeman images revolutionary soldiers chief george washington.
washington an early advocate of independence with considerable military experience was admired respected and trusted by nearly all patriots.
he took command of the new army in june 1775 with the aid of foreign military experts such as the marquis de lafayette from france and the baron von steuben from prussia he built a force that prevailed against the mightiest power in the world.
even more important perhaps washingtons steadiness courage and dedication to his cause washington takes command provided the army and the people with a symbol of stability around which they could rally.
the war for independence as the war for independence began the british seemed to have overwhelming advantages the greatest navy and the best equipped army in the world the resources of an empire a coherent structure of command.
yet the united states had advantages too.
americans were fighting on their own ground.
they were more committed to the conflict than were the british.
and beginning in 1777 they received substantial aid from abroad.
but the american victory was also a result of a series of early blunders and miscalculations by the british.
it was finally a result of the transformation of the war through three distinct phases into a new kind of conflict that the british military for all its strength was unable to win.
the first phase new england for the first year of the conflict from the spring of 1775 to the spring of 1776 many english authorities thought that british forces were not fighting a real war but simply quelling pockets of rebellion in the contentious area around boston.
after the redcoats 112 chapter of the revolution around the chesapeake bay and the james river.
what errors led the british to their surrender at yorktown.
america in the world the age of revolutions the american revolution was a result of tensions and conflicts between imperial britain and its north american colonies.
but it was also both a part and a cause of what historians have come to call an age of revolutions which spread through much of the western world in the last decades of the eighteenth century and the first decades of the nineteenth.
the modern idea of revolution the overturning of old systems and regimes and the creation of new ones was to a large degree a product of the ideas of the enlightenment.
among those ideas was the notion of popular sovereignty articulated by among others the english philosopher john locke.
locke argued that political authority did not derive from the divine right of kings or the inherited authority of aristocracies but from the consent of the governed.
a related enlightenment idea was the concept of individual freedom which challenged the traditional belief that governments had the right to prescribe the way people act speak and even think.
champions of individual freedom in the eighteenth century among them the french philosopher voltaire advocated religious toleration and freedom of thought and expression.
the enlightenment also helped spread the idea of political and legal equality for all people the end of special privileges for aristocrats and elites and the right of all citizens to participate in the formation of policies and laws.
jean jacques rousseau a swissfrench theorist helped define these new ideas of equality.
together enlightenment ideas formed the basis for challenges to existing social orders in many parts of the western world and eventually beyond it.
the american revolution was the first and in many ways most influential of the enlightenment derived uprisings against 116 e stablished orders.
it served as an inspiration to people in other lands who opposed unpopular regimes.
in 1789 a little over a decade after the beginning of the american revolution dissenters rebelled in france at first through a revolt by the national legislature against the king and then through a series of increasingly radical challenges to established authority.
the monarchy was abolished and the king and queen publicly executed in 1793 the authority of the catholic church was challenged and greatly weakened and at the peak of revolutionary chaos during the jacobin period 1793 1794 over 40 000 suspected enemies of the revolution were executed and hundreds of thousands of others imprisoned.
the radical phase of the revolution came to an end in 1799 when napoleon bonaparte a young general seized power and began to build a new french empire.
but frances ancien regime of king and aristocracy never wholly revived.
together the french and american revolutions helped inspire uprisings in many other parts of the atlantic world.
in 1791 a major slave revolt began in haiti and soon attracted over 100 000 rebels.
the army of enslaved people defeated both the white settlers of the island and the french colonial armies sent to quell their rebellion.
under the leadership of toussaint louverture they began to agitate for independence which they obtained on january 1 1804 a few months after toussaints death.
the ideas of these revolutions spread next into spanish and portuguese colonies in the americas particularly among the so called creoles people of european ancestry born in the americas.
in the late eighteenth century they began to resist the continuing authority of colonial officials from spain and portugal and to demand a greater say in governing their own lands.
when napoleons french armies this painting portrays the storming of the great parisian fortress and prison the bastille on july 14 1789 the bastille was a despised symbol of royal tyranny to many of the french because of the arbitrarily arrested and imprisoned people who were sent there.
the july assault was designed to release the prisoners but in fact the revolutionaries found only seven people in the vast fortress.
even so the capture of the bastille which marked one of the first moments in which ordinary frenchmen joined the revolution became one of the great moments in modern french history.
the anniversary of the event bastille day remains the french national holiday.
musee de la ville de paris musee carnavalet paris france bridgeman images storming the bastille invaded spain and portugal in 1807 they weakened the ability of the european regimes to sustain authority over their american colonies.
in the years that followed revolutions swept through much of latin america.
mexico became an independent nation in 1821 and provinces of central america that had once been part of mexico guatemala el salvador honduras nicaragua and costa rica established their independence three years later.
simn bolvar modeling his efforts on those of george washington movement that helped inspire revolutionary campaigns in venezuela ecuador and peru all of which won their independence in the 1820s.
at about the same time greek patriots drawing from the examples of other revolutionary nations launched a movement to win their independence from the ottoman empire which finally succeeded in 1830 the age of revolutions left many new independent nations in its wake.
it did not however succeed in establishing the ideals of popular sovereignty individual freedom and political equality in all the nations it affected.
slavery survived in the united states and in many areas of latin america.
new forms of aristocracy and even monarchy emerged in france mexico brazil and elsewhere.
women many of whom had hoped the revolutionary age would win them new rights made few legal or political gains in this era.
but the ideals that the revolutionary era introduced to the western world continued to shape the histories of nations throughout the nineteenth century and beyond.
understand analyze evaluate 1 how did the american revolution influ ence the french revolution and how were other nations affected by it.
2 what was the significance of the revolution in haiti and how much attention did it get in other nations.
117 118 chapter 8 hudson river to new york city.
fulton and livingston then gave aaron ogden the business of carrying passengers across the river between new york and new jersey.
but thomas gibbons who had a license granted by congress began competing with ogden for the ferry traffic.
ogden brought suit against him and won in the new york courts.
gibbons appealed to the supreme court.
the most important question facing the justices was whether congresss power to give gibbons a license superseded the state of new yorks power to grant ogden a monopoly.
marshall claimed that the power of congress to regulate interstate commerce which he said included navigation was complete in itself and might be exercised to its utmost extent ogdens state granted monopoly therefore was void.
the highly nationalist decisions of the marshall court established the primacy of the federal primacy established federal government over the states in regulating the economy and opened the way for an increased federal role in promoting economic growth.
they protected corporations and other private economic institutions from local government interference.
the court and the tribes the nationalist inclinations of the marshall court were visible as well in a series of decisions concerning the legal status of indian tribes.
but these decisions did not simply affirm the supremacy of the united states they also carved out a distinctive position for native americans within the constitutional structure.
the first of the crucial indian decisions was johnson v mcintosh 1823.
leaders of the illinois and pinakeshaw tribes had sold parcels of their land to a group of white settlers including johnson but had later signed a treaty with the federal government ceding territory that included those same parcels to the united states.
the government proceeded to grant homestead rights to new white settlers among them mcintosh on the land claimed by johnson.
the court was asked to decide which claim had precedence.
marshalls ruling not surprisingly favored the united states.
but in explaining it he offered a preliminary definition of the place of indians within the nation.
the tribes had a basic right to their tribal lands he said that preceded all other american law.
individual american citizens could not buy or take land from the tribes only the federal government the supreme authority could do that.
even more important was the courts 1832 decision in worcester v georgia in which the worcester v georgia court invalidated a georgia law that attempted to regulate access by u s citizens to cherokee country.
only the federal government could do that marshall claimed.
the tribes he explained were sovereign entities in much the same way georgia was a sovereign entity distinct political communities having territorial boundaries within which their authority is exclusive in defending the power of the federal government he was also affirming indeed expanding the rights of the tribes to remain free from the authority of state governments.
the marshall decisions therefore did what the constitution itself had not they defined a place for indian tribes within the american political system.
the tribes had basic property rights.
they were sovereign entities not subject to the authority of state governments.
but the federal government like a guardian governing its ward had ultimate authority over tribal affairs.
the latin american revolution and the monroe doctrine just as the supreme court was asserting american nationalism in shaping the countrys economic life so the monroe administration was asserting nationalism in formulating foreign policy.
american diplomacy had been principally concerned with europe.
but in the 1820s dealing with europe forced the united states to develop a policy toward latin america.
varieties of american nationalism 197 sequoyah who also used the name george guess was a mixed blood cherokee who translated his tribes language into writing through an elaborate syllabary equivalent to an alphabet of his own invention pictured here.
he opposed indian assimilation into white society and saw the preservation of the cherokee language as a way to protect the culture of his tribe.
he moved to arkansas in the 1820s and became a chief of the western cherokee tribes.
hulton archive getty images cherokee leader sequoyah americans looking southward in the years following the war of 1812 beheld a gigantic spectacle the spanish empire in its death throes and a whole continent in revolt.
already the united states had developed a profitable trade with latin america.
many believed the success of the anti spanish revolutions would further strengthen americas position in the region.
in 1815 the united states proclaimed neutrality in the wars between spain and its rebellious colonies.
but the united states sold ships and supplies to the revolutionaries a clear indication that it was trying to help the revolutions.
finally in 1822 president monroe established diplomatic relations with five new nations la plata later argentina chile peru colombia and mexico making the united states the first country to recognize them.
in 1823 monroe went further and announced a policy that would ultimately be known beginning some thirty years later as the monroe doctrine even the monroe doctrine though it was primarily the work of john quincy adams.
the american continents monroe declared are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any european powers the united states would consider any foreign challenge to the sovereignty of existing american nations as an unfriendly act.
at the same time he proclaimed our policy in regard to europe.
is not to interfere in the internal concerns of any of its powers 198 chapter 10 some artisans made successful transitions into small scale industry.
but others found themselves unable to compete with the new factory made goods.
in the face of this competition skilled workers in cities such as philadelphia baltimore boston and new york formed societies for mutual aid.
during the 1820s and 1830s these craft societies began to combine on a citywide basis and set up central organizations known as trade unions.
in 1834 delegates from six cities founded the national trades union and in 1836 printers and cordwainers makers of high quality shoes and boots set up their own national craft unions.
hostile laws and hostile courts handicapped the unions as did the panic of 1837 and the depression that followed.
but some artisans managed to retain control over their productive lives.
fighting for control industrial workers made continuous efforts to improve their lots.
they tried with little success to persuade state legislatures to pass laws setting a maximum workday and regulating child labor.
their greatest legal victory came in massachusetts in 1842 when the commonwealth v hunt state supreme court in commonwealth v hunt declared that unions were lawful organizations and that the strike was a lawful weapon.
other state courts gradually accepted the principles of the massachusetts decision but employers continued to resist.
virtually all the early craft unions excluded women.
as a result women began establishing their own new protective unions in the 1850s.
like the male craft unions the female unions had little power in dealing with employers.
they did however serve an important role as mutual aid societies for women workers.
many factors combined to inhibit the growth of better working standards.
among the most important obstacles was the flood into the country of immigrant laborers who were usually willing to work for lower wages than native workers.
because they were so numerous manufacturers had little difficulty replacing disgruntled or striking workers with eager immigrants.
ethnic divisions often led workers to channel their resentments into internal bickering among one another rather than into their shared grievances.
another obstacle was the sheer strength of the industrial capitalists who possessed not only economic but also political and social power.
patterns of society the industrial revolution was making the united states both dramatically wealthier and increasingly unequal.
it was transforming social relationships at almost every level.
the rich and the poor the commercial and industrial growth of the united states greatly elevated the average income of the american people.
but this increasing wealth was being distributed highly unequally.
substantial groups of the population slaves indians landless farmers and many of the unskilled workers on the fringes of the manufacturing system shared hardly at all in the economic growth.
but even among the rest of the population disparities of income were growing.
merchants and industrialists were accumulating enormous fortunes and in the cities a distinctive culture of wealth began to emerge.
income gap grows americas economic revolution 241 daily carriage rides allowed the wealthy to take in fresh air while showing off their finery to their neighbors.
private collection bridgeman images central park in large cities people of great wealth gathered together in neighborhoods of astonishing opulence.
they founded clubs and developed elaborate social rituals.
they looked increasingly for ways to display their wealth in great mansions showy carriages lavish household goods and the elegant social establishments they patronized.
new york developed a particularly elaborate high society.
the construction of central park which began in the 1850s was in part a result of pressure from the members of high society who wanted an elegant setting for their daily carriage rides.
a significant population of genuinely destitute people also emerged in the growing urban centers.
these people were almost entirely without resources often the urban poor homeless and dependent on charity or crime or both for survival.
substantial numbers of people actually starved to death or died of exposure.
some of these paupers as contemporaries called them were recent immigrants.
some were widows and orphans stripped of the family structures that allowed most working class americans to survive.
some were people suffering from alcoholism or mental illness unable to work.
others were victims of native prejudice barred from all but the most menial employment because of race or ethnicity.
the irish were particular victims of such prejudice.
the worst victims in the north were free blacks.
most major urban areas had significant black populations.
some of these african americans harsh life for free blacks were descendants of families who had lived in the north for generations.
others were former slaves who had escaped or been released by their masters.
in material terms at least life was not always much better for them in the north than it had been in slavery.
most had access to very menial jobs at best.
in most parts of the north blacks could not vote attend public schools or use any of the public services available to white residents.
even so most african americans preferred life in the north however arduous to life in the south.
242 chapter 12 america unlike in europe wild nature still existed and that america therefore was a nation of greater promise than the overdeveloped lands of the old world.
in later years some of the hudson river painters traveled farther west.
their enormous canvases of great natural wonders the yosemite valley yellowstone the rocky mountains touched a passionate chord among the public.
some of the most famous of their paintings particularly the works of albert bierstadt and thomas moran traveled around the country attracting enormous crowds.
an american literature the effort to create a distinctively american literature made considerable progress in the 1820s through the work of the first great american novelist james fenimore cooper.
what most distinguished his work was its evocation of the american west.
cooper had a lifelong fascination with the human relationship to nature and with the challenges and dangers of americas expansion westward.
his most important novels among them the last of the mohicans 1826 and the deerslayer 1841 examined the experience of rugged white frontiersmen with indians pioneers violence and the law.
cooper evoked the ideal of the independent individual with a natural inner goodness an ideal that many americans feared was in jeopardy.
another later group of american writers displayed more clearly the influence of walt whitman romanticism.
walt whitmans book of poems leaves of grass 1855 celebrated democracy the liberation of the individual spirit and the pleasures of the flesh.
in helping free verse from traditional restrictive conventions he also expressed a yearning for emotional and physical release and personal fulfillment a yearning perhaps rooted in part in his own experience as a homosexual living in a society profoundly intolerant of unconventional sexuality.
less exuberant was herman melville perhaps the greatest american writer of his era.
herman melville moby dick published in 1851 is melvilles most important although not in his lifetime his most popular novel.
it tells the story of ahab the powerful driven captain of a whaling vessel and his obsessive search for moby dick the great white whale that had once maimed him.
it is a story of courage and of the strength of human will.
but it is also a tragedy of pride and revenge.
in some ways it is an uncomfortable metaphor for the harsh individualistic achievement driven culture of ninetee nthcentury america.
literature in the antebellum south the south experienced a literary flowering of its own in the mid nineteenth century and it produced writers and artists who were like their northern counterparts concerned with defining the nature of america.
but white southerners tended to produce very different images of what society was and should be.
the southern writer edgar allan poe produced stories and poems that were primarily edgar allan poe sad and macabre.
his first book tamerlane and other poems 1827 received little recognition.
but later works including his most famous poem the raven 1845 established him as a major if controversial literary figure.
poe evoked images of individuals rising above the narrow confines of intellect and exploring the deeper and often painful and horrifying world of the spirit and emotions.
other southern novelists of the 1830s among them nathaniel beverley tucker william alexander caruthers and john pendleton kennedy produced historical romances and antebellum culture and reform 275 eulogies for the plantation system of the upper south.
the most distinguished of the regions men of letters was william gilmore simms.
for a time his work expressed a broad nationalism that transcended his regional background but by the 1840s he too became a strong defender of southern institutions especially slavery against the encroachments of the north.
there was he believed a unique quality to southern life that fell to intellectuals to defend.
one group of southern writers however produced works that were more broadly american.
these writers from the fringes of plantation society augustus b longstreet joseph g baldwin johnson j hooper and others depicted the world of the backwoods south and focused on ordinary people and poor whites.
instead of romanticizing their subjects they were deliberately and sometimes painfully realistic seasoning their sketches with a robust vulgar humor that was new to american literature.
these southern realists established a tradition of american regional humor that was ultimately to find its most powerful voice in mark twain.
the transcendentalists one of the outstanding expressions of the romantic impulse in america came from a group of new england writers and philosophers known as the transcendentalists.
borrowing heavily from german and english writers and philosophers the transcendentalists promoted a theory of the individual that rested on a distinction between what they called reason and understanding reason as they defined it had little to do with rationality.
it was rather the individuals innate capacity to grasp beauty and truth by giving full expression to the instincts and emotions.
understanding by contrast was the use of margaret fuller as a leading transcendentalist fuller argued for the important relationship between the discovery of the self and the questioning of the prevailing gender roles of her era.
in her famous feminist work women in the nineteenth century fuller wrote many women are considering within themselves what they need and what they have not she encouraged her readers especially women to set aside conventional thinking about the role of women in society.
corbis 276 chapter 14 understood the war to be a struggle for emancipation.
otherwise beyond the timeless motivations of comradeship honor and adventure shared by soldiers in many wars union troops generally fought to sustain the best government on earth 1 like his union counterpart the average confederate soldier rarely had proper military training and tended to serve with comrades from the same area.
when on the march fully provisioned southern soldiers carried an ammunition cartridge box on their belts a rolledup blanket a haversack a tin cup frying pan and cloth covered canteen.
many confederate soldiers supplied their own shotguns hunting rifles or ancient flintlock muskets and cavalrymen often provided their own horses.
regiments wore different uniforms and even after the confederacy adopted gray the government was never able to clothe every soldier.
meals were meager with soldiers on both sides subsisting on dried vegetables salt pork and beef coffee and tough crackers known as hardtack.
southerners saw themselves as the protectors of sacred american values.
they defended the right of states to secede if they found the federal government oppressive just as the colonies had claimed the right to declare independence from an oppressive britain in the revolutionary war.
and they interpreted their defense of slavery as a defense of individual property rights in general.
indeed slavery was at the heart of the rights confederates sought to protect and of the life and economy they fought to preserve.
confederate vice president alexander stephens called slavery the cornerstone of the confederacy.
outraged at the thought of living under an antislavery president secessionists relished independence.
thank god wrote one mississippian the summer after secession.
we have a country at last.
to live for to pray for to fight for and if necessary to die for 2 beyond these abstract motivations however many rebels fought to protect their homes and families from the invading yankees.
the mobilization of the north in the north the war produced considerable discord frustration and suffering.
but it also produced prosperity and economic growth.
with the south now gone from congress the republican party enjoyed almost unchallenged supremacy.
during the war it enacted an aggressively nationalistic program to promote economic development.
economic nationalism two 1862 acts assisted the rapid development of the west.
the homestead act permitted any citizen or prospective citizen to purchase 160 acres of public land for a small fee after homestead and morrill acts living on it for five years.
the morrill act transferred substantial public acreage to the state governments which could now sell the land and use the proceeds to finance public education.
this act led to the creation of many new state colleges and universities the so called land grant institutions.
congress also passed a series of tariff bills that by the end of the war had raised duties to the highest level in the nations history a great boon to domestic industries eager for protection from foreign competition but a hardship for many farmers and other consumers.
without the seceding states to block their legislation congress bent to the political will of the northern and western factions.
1 james mcpherson battle cry of freedom the civil war era new york oxford up 1988 p 309.
2 mcpherson battle cry of freedom p 310 the civil war 327 congress also moved to spur completion of a transcontinental railroad.
it created two new federally chartered corporations the union pacific railroad company which was to build westward from omaha and the central pacific which was to build eastward from california.
the two projects were to meet in the middle and complete the link which they did in 1869 at promontory point utah.
the national bank acts of 1863 1864 created a new national banking system.
existing or newly formed banks could join the system if they had enough capital national bank acts and were willing to invest one third of it in government securities.
in return they could issue united states treasury notes as currency.
this eliminated much although not all of the chaos and uncertainty surrounding the nations currency.
more difficult was financing the war itself.
the government tried to do so in three ways levying taxes issuing paper currency and borrowing.
congress levied new taxes on almost all goods and services and in 1861 levied an income tax for the first time.
but taxation raised only a small proportion needed to fight the war and strong popular resistance prevented the government from raising the rates.
at least equally controversial was the printing of paper currency or greenbacks the new currency was backed not by gold or silver but as today simply by the good faith and credit of the government.
the value of the greenbacks fluctuated according to the fortunes of the northern armies.
early in 1864 with the war effort bogged down a greenback dollar was worth only 39 percent of a gold dollar.
but at the close of the war with confidence high it was worth 67 percent of a gold dollar.
by far the largest source of financing for the war was loans.
the treasury persuaded ordinary citizens to buy over 400 million worth of bonds.
yet public bond purchases constituted only a small part of the governments borrowing which in the end totaled 2 6 billion most of it from banks and large financial interests.
raising the union armies at the beginning of 1861 the regular army of the united states consisted of only 16 000 troops many of them stationed in the west.
so the union like the confederacy had to raise its army mostly from scratch.
lincoln called for an increase of 23 000 in the regular army but the bulk of the fighting he knew would have to be done by volunteers in state militias.
when congress convened in july 1861 it authorized enlisting 500 000 volunteers for three year as opposed to the customary three month terms.
this voluntary system of recruitment produced adequate forces only briefly during the first flush of enthusiasm for the war.
by march 1863 congress was forced to the draft pass a national draft law.
virtually all young adult males were eligible to be drafted although a man could escape service by hiring someone to go in his place or by paying the government a fee of 300.
to many who were accustomed to a remote and inactive national government conscription was strange and threatening.
opposition to the draft law was widespread particularly among laborers immigrants and democrats opposed to the war known as peace democrats or copperheads by their opponents.
occasionally opposition to the draft erupted into violence such as when demonstrators rioted in new york city for four days in july 1863 after the first names were selected for conscription.
new york city draft riots more than 100 people died.
irish workers were at the center of violence.
they were angry because black strikebreakers had been used against them in a recent longshoremens strike.
they blamed african americans generally for the war which they thought 328 chapter 14 battle of the wilderness may 5 7.
without stopping to rest or reorganize grant resumed his march toward richmond and met lee again in the bloody battle of spotsylvania court house may 8 21 in which 12 000 union troops and a large but unknown number of confederates fell.
grant kept moving but victory continued to elude him.
lee kept his army between grant and the confederate capital and on june 1 3 repulsed the union forces again just northeast of richmond at cold harbor.
grant now moved his army east of richmond and headed south toward the railroad center at petersburg.
if he could seize petersburg he could cut off the capitals communications with the rest of the confederacy.
but petersburg had strong defenses and once lee came to the citys relief the assault became a prolonged siege.
in georgia meanwhile sherman was facing less ferocious resistance.
with 90 000 men he confronted confederate forces of 60 000 under johnston.
as sherman advanced johnston tried to delay him by maneuvering.
the two armies fought only one real battle kennesaw mountain northwest of atlanta on june 27 where johnston scored an impressive victory.
even so he was unable to stop the union advance toward atlanta prompting davis to replace atlanta taken him with general john b hood.
sherman took the city on september 2 and burned it.
hood now tried unsuccessfully to draw sherman out of atlanta by moving back up through tennessee and threatening an invasion of the north.
sherman sent union troops grants northern campaign c rland r be um virginia johnston surrenders april 18 1865 raleigh nashville december 15 16 1864 rosec gg n nsto joh ra sherman n s chickamauga september 19 20 1863 mississippi north carolina john sto fayetteville march 11 1865 chattanooga november 23 25 1863 bra thomas tennessee knoxville franklin november 30 1864 columbia destroyed by fire february 17 1865 n wilmington february 22 1865 n ma r she bentonville march 19 21 1865 atlanta south carolina fort fisher september 2 1864 sa january 15 1865 ntee r sa she rm an na s m at l a n t ic alabama ar oc e a n ch charleston t o february 18 1865 the macon 65 il 18 s r p e a a rch wilson ma 100 mi savannah occupied georgia montgomery december 21 1864.
r 200 km hoo har.
pi r ssi ssi p mi kentucky r nessee ten cairo dee ill d n va h am a alab mbigbee r to r cha ahoochee r tt troop movements union victories confederate.
mobile mobile bay august 5 1864 pensacola florida r fa r ag gulf of mexico ut jacksonville extent of union control while grant was wearing lee down in virginia general william tecumseh sherman was moving east across georgia.
after a series of battles in tennessee and northwest georgia sherman captured atlanta and then marched unimpeded to savannah on the georgia coast deliberately devastating the towns and plantations through which his troops marched.
note that after capturing savannah by christmas 1864 sherman began moving north through the carolinas.
a few days after lee surrendered to grant at appomattox confederate forces farther south surrendered to sherman.
what did sherman believe his devastating march to the sea would accomplish.
shermans march to the sea 1864 1865 the civil war 349 to reinforce nashville.
in the battle of nashville on december 15 16 1864 northern forces practically destroyed what was left of hoods army.
meanwhile sherman had left atlanta to begin his soon to be famous march to the sea living off the land destroying supplies it could not use shermans march to the sea his army cut a sixty mile wide swath of desolation across georgia.
sherman sought not only to deprive the confederate army of war materials and railroad communications.
he was also determined to break the will of the southern people by burning towns and plantations along his route.
by december 20 he had reached savannah which surrendered two days later.
early in 1865 sherman continued his destructive march moving northward through south carolina.
he was virtually unopposed until he was well inside north carolina where a small force under johnston could do no more than cause a brief delay.
in april 1865 grants army of the potomac still engaged in the prolonged siege at petersburg finally captured a vital railroad junction southwest of the town.
without rail access to the south and plagued by heavy casualties and massive desertions lee informed the confederate government that he could no longer defend richmond.
within hours jefferson davis his cabinet and as much of the white population as could find transportation fled.
that night mobs roamed the city setting devastating fires.
and the next morning northern forces entered the confederate capital.
with them was abraham lincoln who walked through the streets of the burned out city surrounded by black men and women cheering him as the messiah and father abraham in one particularly stirring moment the president turned to a former slave kneeling on the street before him and said dont kneel to me.
you must kneel to god only and thank him for the liberty you will enjoy hereafter with the remnant of his army now about 25 000 men lee began moving west in the forlorn hope of finding a way around the union forces so that he could move south and link up with johnston in north carolina.
but the union army pursued him and blocked his escape route.
lee finally recognized that further bloodshed was futile.
he arranged to meet grant at a private home in the small town of appomattox court house virginia appomattox court house where on april 9 he surrendered what was left of his forces.
nine days later near durham north carolina johnston surrendered to sherman.
the long war was now effectively over.
jefferson davis was finally captured in georgia.
a few southern diehards continued to fight but even their resistance collapsed before long.
general george meades shout its all over described in simple terms one of the most momentous events in the nations history.
the war ensured the permanence of the union but many other issues remained far from settled.
what would happen to the freedmen the term used for slaves who were now liberated.
could the south and the north reconcile.
would the massive industrial growth in the north during the civil war spread to the south or would the south remain an agrarian region with much less wealth than in the north.
the end of the war was the beginning of more than a generation of struggle to determine the legacy of the civil war.
conclusion the american civil war began with high hopes and high ideals on both sides.
in the north and the south alike thousands of men enthusiastically enlisted in local regiments and went off to war.
four years later over 600 000 of them were dead and many more maimed and traumatized for life.
a fight for principles and ideals a fight few people had thought would last more than a few months had become one of the longest wars and by far the bloodiest war in american history before or since.
350 chapter 16 this portrait of chun duck chin and his seven year old son chun jan yut was taken in a studio in san francisco in the 1870s.
both father and son appear to have dressed up for the occasion in traditional chinese garb and the studio which likely took many such portraits of chinese families provided a formal chinese backdrop.
the son is holding what appears to be a chicken perhaps to impress relatives in china with the familys prosperity.
national archives and records administration a chinese family in san francisco a few chinese traveled to the american west even before the gold rush but after 1848 the flow increased dramatically.
by 1880 more than 200 000 chinese had settled in the united states.
almost all came as free laborers.
for a time white americans welcomed the chinese as a conscientious hardworking people.
very quickly however white opinion turned hostile in part because the chinese were so industrious and successful that some white americans began considering them rivals.
in the early 1850s large numbers of chinese immigrants joined the hunt for gold.
many of them were well organized hardworking prospectors and for a time some enjoyed considerable success.
but opportunities for the chinese to prosper in the mines were fleeting.
in 1852 the california legislature began trying to exclude the chinese from gold mining by enacting a foreign miners tax.
gradually the effect of the discriminatory laws the hostility of white miners and the declining profitability of the surface mines drove most chinese out of prospecting.
the conquest of the far west 385 as mining declined as a source of wealth and jobs for the chinese railroad employment grew.
beginning in 1865 over 12 000 chinese found work building the transcontinental railroad forming 90 percent of the labor force of the central pacific.
railroad workers the company preferred them to white laborers because they worked hard made few demands and accepted relatively low wages.
work on the central pacific was arduous and often dangerous.
in the winter many chinese tunneled into snowbanks at night to create warm sleeping areas for themselves even though such tunnels frequently collapsed suffocating those inside.
in the spring of 1866 5 000 chinese railroad workers rebelled against the terrible conditions and went on strike to demand higher wages and a shorter workday.
the company isolated them surrounded them with strikebreakers and starved them into submission.
in 1869 the transcontinental railroad was completed and thousands of chinese lost their jobs.
some moved into agricultural work usually in menial positions.
increasingly however the chinese flocked to cities.
by far the largest single chinese community was in san francisco.
much of community life there and in other chinatowns throughout the west revolved around organizations somewhat like chinatowns benevolent societies that filled many of the roles that political machines often served in immigrant communities in eastern cities.
often led by prominent merchants in san francisco the leading merchants known as the six companies often worked together to advance their interests in the city and state these organizations became in effect employment brokers unions arbitrators of disputes defenders against outside persecution and dispensers of social services.
they also organized elaborate festivals and celebrations that were a conspicuous and important part of life in chinatowns.
other chinese organizations were secret societies known as tongs some of the tongs were violent criminal organizations involved in the opium trade and prostitution.
few people outside the chinese communities were aware of their existence except when rival tongs engaged in violent conflict or tong wars.
in san francisco and other western cities the chinese usually occupied the lower rungs of the employment ladder.
many worked as common laborers servants and unskilled factory hands.
some established their own small businesses especially laundries.
there were few commercial laundries in china but they could be started in america with very little capital and required only limited command of english.
by the 1890s chinese constituted over two thirds of all the laundry workers in california.
during the earliest chinese migrations to california virtually all the relatively small number of women who made the journey did so because they had been sold into prostitution.
as late as 1880 nearly half the chinese women in california were chinese families prostitutes.
gradually however the number of chinese women increased and chinese men in america became more likely to seek companionship in families.
anti chinese sentiments as chinese communities grew larger and more visible anti chinese sentiment among white residents intensified.
anti chinese activities some of them bloody reflected the resentment of many white workers toward chinese laborers for accepting lower wages.
as the political value of attacking the chinese grew in california the democratic party took up the call.
so did the workingmens party of california founded in 1878 by denis kearney an irish immigrant which gained significant power in the state largely because 386 chapter 16 years these outside owners reaped tremendous profits from 1860 to 1880 the nevada lodes yielded bullion worth 306 million.
after that the mines quickly played out.
the next important mineral discoveries came in 1874 when gold was found in the black hills of southwestern dakota territory.
prospectors swarmed into the remote area.
like the others the boom flared for a time until surface resources faded and corporations took over above all the enormous homestake mining company and came to dominate the fields.
the dakotas like other boom areas of the mineral empire ultimately developed a largely agricultural economy.
the gold and silver discoveries generated the most popular excitement.
but less glamorous natural resources proved more important to western development.
the great anaconda copper mine launched by william clark in 1881 marked the beginning of an industry that would remain important to montana for many decades.
in other areas mining operations had significant success with lead tin quartz and zinc.
men greatly outnumbered women in the mining towns and younger men in particular gender disparity had difficulty finding female companions of comparable age.
those women who did gravitate to the new communities often came with their husbands.
single women or women whose husbands were earning no money did work for wages at times as cooks laundresses and tavernkeepers.
and in the sexually imbalanced mining communities there was always a ready market for prostitutes.
the thousands of people who flocked to the mining towns in search of quick wealth and failed to find it often remained as wage laborers in corporate mines after the boom period working in almost uniformly terrible conditions.
in the 1870s one worker in every thirty was disabled in the mines and one in every eighty was killed.
that rate fell later in the nineteenth century but mining remained one of the most dangerous and arduous working environments in the united states.
the cattle kingdom a second important element of the changing economy of the far west was cattle ranching.
the open range the vast grasslands of the public domain provided a huge area on the great plains where cattle raisers could graze their herds.
the western cattle industry was born slowly and through the pioneering work of mexican roots mexicans texans white settlers and free and enslaved blacks.
long before citizens of the united states entered the southwest mexican ranchers had developed the techniques and equipment that the cattlemen and cowboys of the great plains later employed branding roundups roping and the gear of the herders their lariats saddles leather chaps and spurs.
americans in texas with the largest herds of cattle in the country adopted these methods and carried them to the northernmost ranges of the cattle kingdom.
from texas too came the small muscular horses broncos and mustangs that enabled cowboys to control the herds.
at the end of the civil war an estimated 5 million cattle roamed the texas ranges.
eastern markets offered good prices for steers.
the challenge facing the cattle industry lay in getting the animals from the range to the railroad centers.
early in 1866 some texas cattle ranchers began driving their combined herds up to 260 000 steers north to sedalia missouri on the missouri pacific railroad.
the caravan suffered heavy losses.
but the drive proved that cattle could be driven to distant markets and pastured along the trail.
this earliest of the long drives established the first tentative link between the isolated cattle breeders of west texas and the booming urban markets of the east.
the conquest of the far west 389 canada montana la minnesota s u p e ri o r mich wisconsin st paul deadwood south dakota ke l a k e mi c h i g a n north dakota wyoming u n i o n pa c i f i c r.
omaha illinois denver colorado abilene st louis dodge city g o o d n i g h t l o v i n g tr a i l ky oklahoma terr.
tr a i l tenn new mexico territory miss.
rin c h i s h o l m tr a i l gs arkansas la.
new orleans se san antonio mexico 300 mi da lia texas w e s t e r n tr a i l unorg.
sp santa fe missouri sedalia topeka kansas pueblo and baxter leadville chicago iowa nebraska cheyenne ogallala 500 km railroads g u l f of m exico cattle trails cattle ranching and cattle drives are among the most romanticized features of the nineteenth century west.
but they were also hardheaded businesses made possible by the growing eastern market for beef and the availability of reasonably inexpensive transportation thanks to the dense network of trails and railroads to take cattle to the urban markets.
why was the open range necessary for the great cattle drives and what eventually ended the cattle trails.
the cattle kingdom ca.
1866 1887 market facilities soon grew up at abilene kansas on the kansas pacific railroad and for years the town reigned as the railhead of the cattle kingdom.
but by the mid 1870s agricultural development in western kansas had eaten away at the open range land.
cattlemen had to develop other trails and other market outlets.
as the railroads reached farther west other locations began to rival abilene as major centers of stock herding dodge city and wichita in kansas ogallala and sidney in nebraska cheyenne and laramie in wyoming and miles city and glendive in montana.
there had always been an element of risk and speculation in the open range cattle business.
rustlers and indians frequently seized large numbers of animals.
but as the settlement of the plains increased new forms of competition arose.
sheep breeders from 390 chapter 18 the creation of public space there were a few early american cities that were planned from the beginning philadelphia and washington most prominently.
by the mid nineteenth century reformers planners architects and others began to call for more ordered visions of many other cities.
among the most important urban innovations of the mid nineteenth century were great city parks which reflected the desire of urban leaders to provide an antidote to the congestion of the city landscape.
parks they argued would allow city residents a healthy restorative escape from the strains of urban life by reacquainting them with the natural world.
this notion of the park as refuge was most effectively promoted by the landscape designers frederick law olmsted and calvert vaux who together in the late 1850s central park designed new yorks central park.
they deliberately created a public space that would look as little like the city as possible.
instead of the ordered formal spaces common in some european cities they created a space that seemed entirely natural.
central park was from the start one of the most popular and admired public spaces in the world.
at the same time that cities were creating great parks they were also creating great public buildings libraries art galleries natural history museums theaters and concert and opera halls.
new yorks metropolitan museum of art was the largest and best known of many great museums taking shape in the late nineteenth century but giant museums grew up quickly in boston philadelphia chicago and other places.
in one city after another new and lavish public libraries appeared as if to confirm the citys role as a center of learning and knowledge.
wealthy residents were the principal force behind the creation of the great art museums concert halls opera houses and at times even parks.
as their own material and social aspirations grew they wanted the public life of the city to provide them with amenities to match their expectations.
becoming an important patron of a major cultural institution was an especially effective route to social distinction.
as both the size and aspirations of great cities increased urban leaders launched monumental projects to remake them.
some cities began to clear away older neighborhoods and streets and create grand monumental avenues lined with new and more impressive buildings.
a particularly important event in inspiring such efforts was the 1893 columbian exposition in chicago a worlds fair constructed to honor the 400th anniversary of columbuss first voyage to america.
at the center of the wildly popular exposition was a cluster of neoclassical buildings the great white city arranged symmetrically around a formal lagoon.
city beautiful movement it became the inspiration for the city beautiful movement led by the architect of the great white city daniel burnham.
the movement strove to impose a similar order and symmetry on the disordered life of cities around the country.
only rarely however were planners able to overcome the obstacles of private landowners and complicated urban politics to realize more than a small portion of their dreams.
the effort to remake the city did not focus only on redesigning existing landscapes.
it occasionally led to the creation of entirely new ones.
in one of the largest public works projects ever undertaken in america to that point the city of boston gradually filled in a large area of marshy tidal land in the late 1880s to create the neighborhood known as back back bay bay boston was not alone.
chicago reclaimed large areas from lake michigan and at one point raised the street level for the entire city to help avoid the problems the marshy land created.
in new york and other cities the response to limited space was not so much to create new land as to annex adjacent territory.
a great wave of annexations expanded the boundaries of many american cities in the 1890s and beyond most notably new york citys 1898 annexation of brooklyn which was itself a large and important city.
the age of the city 435 this woman shown here with some of her children was typical of many workingclass mothers who found income producing activities they could pursue in the home in this case laundry.
bettmann corbis a tenement laundry the search for housing one of the greatest urban problems was to provide housing for the thousands of new residents pouring into the cities every day.
for the prosperous housing was seldom a worry.
the availability of cheap labor reduced the cost of building and permitted anyone with even a moderate income to afford a house.
some of the richest urban residents lived in palatial mansions located in exclusive neighborhoods in the heart of the city fifth avenue in new york back bay and beacon hill in boston society hill in philadelphia lake shore drive in chicago nob hill in san francisco and many others.
many of the moderately well to do city dwellers took advantage of less expensive land on the edges of cities and settled in new suburbs linked to the downtowns by new suburbs trains or streetcars.
chicago in the 1870s for example connected nearly 100 residential suburbs to the downtown by railroad.
real estate developers worked to create suburban communities that would appeal to many city dwellers nostalgia for the countryside promoting them with lawns trees and houses designed to look manorial.
most urban residents however could not afford either to own a house in the city or to move to the suburbs.
instead they stayed in the city centers and rented.
landlords tried to squeeze as many rent paying residents as possible into the smallest available space.
in manhattan for example the average population density in 1894 was 143 people per acre a rate far higher than that of any other american or european city then or since.
in the cities of the south charleston new orleans richmond poor african americans lived in crumbling former slave quarters.
in boston immigrants moved into cheap three story wooden 436 chapter 17 was a sign of a dangerous instability even perhaps a revolution.
labor radicalism some of it real more of it imagined by the frightened middle class heightened the general sense of crisis among the public.
coxeys army the silver question the financial panic weakened the governments monetary system.
president cleveland believed that the instability of the currency was the primary cause of the depression.
the money question therefore became one of the burning issues of the era.
the debate centered on what would form the basis of the dollar what would lie behind it and give it value.
today the value of the dollar rests on little more than public confidence in the government.
but in the nineteenth century many people believed that currency was worthless if there was not something concrete behind it precious metal specie which holders of paper money could collect if they presented their currency to a bank or to the treasury.
during most of its existence as a nation the united states had recognized two metals gold and silver as a basis for the dollar a system known as bimetallism in the 1870s however that had changed.
the official ratio of the value of silver to the value of gold for purposes of creating currency the mint ratio was 16 to 1 sixteen ounces of silver equaled one ounce of gold.
but the actual commercial value of silver the market ratio was much higher than that.
owners of silver could get more by selling it for manufacture into jewelry and other objects than they could by taking it to the mint for conversion into coins.
so they stopped taking it to the mint and the mint stopped coining silver.
in 1873 congress passed a law that seemed simply to recognize the existing situation by officially discontinuing silver coinage.
few objected at the time.
but later in the 1870s the market value of silver fell well below the official mint ratio of 16 to 1 silver was suddenly available for coinage again and it soon became clear that congress had foreclosed a potential method of expanding the currency.
before long many americans concluded that a conspiracy of big bankers had been responsible for the demonetization of silver and referred to the law as the crime of 73 two groups of americans were especially determined to undo the crime of 73.
one consisted of the silver mine owners now understandably eager to have the government take their surplus silver and pay them much more than the market price.
the other group consisted of discontented farmers who wanted an increase in the quantity of money an inflation of the currency as a means of raising the prices of farm products and easing payment of the farmers debts.
the inflationists demanded that the government return at once to the free and free silver advocates unlimited coinage of silver at the old ratio of 16 to 1 congress responded weakly to these demands with the sherman silver purchase act of 1890 which required the government to purchase silver and pay for it in gold.
but the government allowed only existing silver coinage.
it did not allow any newly minted silver money.
at the same time the nations gold reserves were steadily dropping.
president cleveland believed that the chief cause of the weakening gold reserves was the sherman silver purchase act.
early in his second administration therefore congress responded to his request and repealed the sherman act although only after a bitter and divisive battle that helped create a split in the democratic party.
from crisis to empire 465 a cross of gold republicans watching the failure of the democrats to deal effectively with the depression were confident of success in 1896 party leaders led by the ohio boss marcus a hanna settled on former congressman william mckinley author of the 1890 mckinley nominated tariff act and now governor of ohio as the partys presidential candidate.
the tariff they believed should be the key issue in the campaign.
but they also opposed the free coinage of silver except by agreement with the leading commercial nations which everyone realized was unlikely.
thirty four delegates from the mountain and plains states walked out of the convention in protest and joined the democratic party.
the cartoonist grant hamilton created this image of william jennings bryan shortly after he made his famous cross of gold speech at the democratic national convention which subsequently nominated him for president.
the cartoon highlights two of the most powerful images in bryans speech a crown of thorns and a cross of gold both biblical references and both designed to represent the oppression that the gold standard imposed on working people.
granger nyc all rights reserved.
bearing the cross of gold 466 chapter 20 presidential ambitions and claimed that his real purpose was to pressure taft to return to progressive policies.
two events however changed his mind.
the first on october 27 1911 was the announcement by the administration of a suit against u s steel which charged among other things that the 1907 acquisition of the tennessee coal and iron company had been illegal.
roosevelt had approved that acquisition in the midst of the 1907 panic and he was enraged by the implication that he had acted improperly.
roosevelt was still reluctant to become a candidate for president because senator robert la follette the great wisconsin progressive had been working since 1911 to secure the presidential nomination for himself.
but la follettes candidacy stumbled in february 1912 when exhausted and distraught over the illness of a daughter he appeared to suffer a nervous breakdown during a speech in philadelphia.
roosevelt announced his candidacy on february 22 roosevelt versus taft for all practical purposes the campaign for the republican nomination had now become a battle between roosevelt and taft.
roosevelt scored overwhelming victories in all thirteen presidential primaries.
taft however remained the choice of most party leaders who controlled the nominating process.
the battle for the nomination at the chicago convention revolved around an unusually large number of contested delegates 254 in all.
roosevelt needed fewer than half the disputed seats to clinch the nomination.
but the republican national committee controlled by the old guard awarded all but 19 of them to taft.
at a rally the night before the convention opened roosevelt addressed 5 000 cheering supporters.
we stand at armageddon he told the roaring crowd and we battle for the lord the next day he led his supporters out of the convention and out of the party.
the convention then quietly nominated taft on the first ballot.
roosevelt summoned his supporters back to chicago in august for another convention this one to launch the new progressive party and to nominate himself as its presidential can bull moose party didate.
roosevelt approached the battle feeling as he put it fit as a bull moose thus giving his new party an enduring nickname.
but roosevelt was also aware that his cause was almost hopeless partly because many of the insurgents who had supported him during the primaries refused to follow him out of the republican party.
it was also because of the man the democrats had nominated for president.
woodrow wilson and the new freedom the 1912 presidential contest was not simply one between conservatives and reformers.
it was also one between two brands of progressivism.
and it matched the two most important national leaders of the early twentieth century in an unequal contest.
woodrow wilson reform sentiment had been gaining strength within the democratic party as well as the republican party in the first years of the century.
at the june 1912 democratic convention in baltimore champ clark the conservative speaker of the house was the progressives 513 unable to assemble the two thirds majority necessary for nomination because of progressive opposition.
finally on the forty sixth ballot woodrow wilson the governor of new jersey and the only genuinely progressive candidate in the race emerged as the partys nominee.
wilson had been a professor of political science at princeton until 1902 when he was named president of the university.
elected governor of new jersey in 1910 he quickly earned a national reputation for winning passage of progressive legislation.
as a presidential candidate in 1912 wilson presented a progressive program that came to be called the new freedom roosevelts new nationalism supported economic concentration and using government to regulate and control it.
wilsons new freedom wilson seemed to side with those who like louis brandeis believed that bigness was both unjust and inefficient that the proper response to monopoly was not to regulate it but to destroy it.
the 1912 presidential campaign was an anticlimax.
taft resigned to defeat barely campaigned.
roosevelt campaigned energetically until a gunshot wound from a would be assassin forced him to the sidelines during the last weeks before the election but he 29 15 24 10 12 8 12 candidate party electoral vote popular vote woodrow wilson democratic theodore roosevelt progressive bull moose william h taft republican 6 293 454 41 9 eugene v debs socialist other parties prohibition socialist labor 4 119 538 27 4 3 484 980 23 2 900 672 6 0 235 025 58 8 of electorate voting the election of 1912 was one of the most unusual in american history because of the dramatic schism within the republican party.
two republican presidents william howard taft the incumbent and theodore roosevelt his predecessor ran against each other opening the way for a victory by the democratic candidate woodrow wilson who won with only 42 percent of the popular vote.
a fourth candidate the socialist eugene v debs received a significant 6 percent of the vote.
what events caused the schism between taft and roosevelt.
the election of 1912 514 chapter 21 the road to war by 1914 the european nations had created an unusually precarious international system.
it careened into war very quickly on the basis of what seemed to be a minor series of provocations.
the collapse of the european peace the major powers of europe were organized by 1914 in two great competing alliances.
the triple entente linked britain france and russia.
the triple alliance united germany the austro hungarian empire and italy.
the conflict emerged most directly out of a controversy involving nationalist movements within the austro hungarian empire.
on june 28 1914 archduke franz ferdinand heir to the throne of the tottering empire was assassinated while paying a state visit to sarajevo the capital of bosnia then a province of austria hungary.
slavic nationalists wished to annex bosnia to neighboring serbia.
the killer of the archduke and his wife sophie was a serbian nationalist.
austria immediately blamed serbia for the murders and issued impossible ultimatums.
russia serbias slavic ally and a seeker of greater influence in the balkans mobilized its armies along the border with austria hungary.
the germans faced with that provocation against their ally and concerned about a two front war against russia and france declared war against both.
germanys subsequent assault on france ran through neutral belgium prompting britain to declare war on germany.
the coalitions soon changed in name and membership.
on one side were the central powers germany and austria hungary joined in the fall by the ottoman empire.
on the allies and central powers other side were the allies made up of britain france and russia.
hoping to seize territory from the central powers italy and japan soon threw in their lot with the allies.
as these changes suggest the alliance system did not necessarily bind nations to act as they did.
leaders made the decision for war based on their own interests and ambitions on the assumption that national self defense required it and on the erroneous belief that their objectives could be met quickly.
what the alliance system did was provide a framework within which the choices for war were made.
as tragic as those choices seem in retrospect no one expected or wanted the ghastly world war that followed.
wilsons neutrality wilson called on his fellow citizens in 1914 to remain impartial in thought as well as deed but that was impossible.
most americans sympathized with britain.
lurid reports of german atrocities in belgium and france sometimes but not always exaggerated by british propagandists strengthened the hostility of many americans toward germany.
economic realities also made it impossible for the united states to deal with the belligerents on equal terms.
the british had imposed a naval blockade on germany to prevent munitions and supplies from reaching the enemy.
as a neutral the united states had the right in theory to trade with germany but the british blockade made that impossible.
a truly neutral response to the blockade would have been to stop trading with britain as well.
but while the united states could survive an interruption of its relatively modest trade with the central powers it could not easily weather a break in its much more america and the great war 525 extensive trade with the allies.
so america tacitly accepted the blockade of germany and continued trading with britain.
by 1915 the united states had continued trade with britain gradually transformed itself from a neutral power into the arsenal of the allies.
the germans in the meantime were resorting to a new and in american eyes barbaric tactic submarine warfare.
unable to challenge british domination on sinking of lusitania the oceans surface the germans announced early in 1915 that they would sink enemy vessels on sight.
months later on may 7 a german submarine or u boat a name derived from the german unterseeboot sank the british passenger liner lusitania without warning causing the deaths of 1 198 people 128 of them americans.
the ship was carrying both passengers and munitions but most americans considered the attack an unprovoked act on civilians.
wilson angrily demanded that germany promise not to repeat such outrages and the germans reluctantly agreed.
but early in 1916 in response to an announcement that the allies were now arming merchant ships to sink submarines germany proclaimed that it would fire on such vessels without warning.
a few weeks later it attacked the unarmed french steamer sussex injuring several american passengers.
again wilson demanded that germany abandon its unlawful tactics again the german government relented.
preparedness versus pacifism despite the presidents increasing bellicosity in 1916 he was still far from ready to commit the united states to war.
one obstacle was american domestic politics.
the question of whether america should make military and economic preparations for war sparked a heated debate between pacifists and interventionists.
wilson at first denounced the idea of an american military buildup as needless and provocative.
in the fall of 1915 however he endorsed an ambitious proposal by american military leaders for a large and rapid increase in the nations armed forces.
still the peace faction wielded considerable political strength as became clear at the democratic national convention in the summer of 1916 the convention became especially enthusiastic when the keynote speaker punctuated his list of the presidents diplomatic achievements with the chant what did we do.
what did we do.
we didnt go to war.
we didnt go to war that speech helped produce one of the most prominent slogans of wilsons reelection campaign he kept us out of war during the campaign wilson did nothing to discourage those who argued that the republican candidate the progressive new york governor charles evans hughes was more likely than he to lead the nation into war.
wilson ultimately won reelection by fewer than 600 000 popular votes and only 23 electoral votes.
but he was uncomfortable about a slogan that had aided his victory.
any little german lieutenant he said of the u boat situation can put us into the war at any time by some calculated outrage intervention wilson was right but it was the german leadership that provoked him.
in january 1917 germany made a desperate gamble declaring unrestricted submarine warfare against all maritime traffic in the hopes of defeating the allies before wilson could mobilize an army.
meanwhile the german foreign secretary arthur zimmermann zimmermann telegram sent a telegram to the german ambassador in mexico instructing him to offer the mexicans a deal if they would join a military alliance germany would help mexico take back 526 chapter 22 henry ford for example shortened the workweek raised wages and instituted paid vacations.
by 1926 nearly 3 million industrial workers were eligible for at least modest pensions upon retirement.
when labor grievances surfaced despite these efforts workers could voice them through the so called company unions that emerged in many industries workers councils and shop committees organized by the corporations themselves.
but welfare capitalism in the end gave workers no real control over their own fates.
company unions were feeble vehicles.
and welfare capitalism survived only as long as industry prospered.
after 1929 with the economy in crisis the entire system collapsed.
welfare capitalism affected only a relatively small number of firms in any case.
most laborers worked for employers who were interested primarily in keeping their labor costs low.
workers as a whole therefore received wage increases that were proportionately far below the growth of the economy.
at the end of the decade the average annual income of a worker remained below 1 500 when 1 800 was considered necessary to maintain a minimally decent standard of living.
only by relying on the combined earnings of several family members could many working class families make ends meet.
the new era was a bleak time for labor organization in part because many unions themselves were relatively conservative and failed to adapt to the realities of the modern economy.
the american federation of labor afl led after samuel gomperss death by the cautious william green sought peaceful cooperation with employers and remained wedded to the concept of the craft union.
in the meantime the rapidly rising number of unskilled industrial workers received little attention from the craft unions.
but whatever the unions weaknesses the strength of the corporations was the principal reason for the absence of effective labor organization in the 1920s.
after the turmoil of 1919 corporate leaders worked hard to spread the doctrine that a crucial element of democratic capitalism was the protection of the open shop a shop in which no worker could be required to join a union.
the crusade for the open shop euphemistically titled american plan the american plan became a pretext for a harsh campaign of unionbusting.
as a result union membership fell from more than 5 million in 1920 to under 3 million in 1929 women and minorities in the workforce a growing proportion of the workforce consisted of women who were concentrated in what have since become known as pink collar jobs low paying service occupations.
large numbers of women worked as secretaries salesclerks and telephone operators and in other nonmanual service capacities.
because technically such positions were not industrial jobs the afl and other labor organizations were uninterested in organizing these workers.
similarly the half million african americans who had migrated from the rural south into the cities during the great migration after 1914 had few opportunities for union representation.
the skilled crafts represented in the afl usually excluded black workers.
partly as a result of that exclusion most blacks worked in jobs in which the afl took no interest at all as janitors dishwashers garbage collectors and domestics and in other service capacities.
a philip randolphs brotherhood of sleeping car porters brotherhood of sleeping car porters was one of the few important unions dominated and led by african americans.
the new era 549 the frail union movement among african americans in the 1920s led by a philip randolph and others slowly built up a constituency within the black working class.
here an aspiring dairy worker draws attention to the unjust treatment of african american men who had demonstrated their patriotism during the war.
photo by john vachon anthony potter collection getty images african american worker protesting in the west and the southwest the ranks of the unskilled included considerable numbers of asians and hispanics.
in the wake of the chinese exclusion acts japanese immigrants increasingly replaced the chinese in menial jobs in california.
they worked on railroads construction sites farms and in many other low paying workplaces.
some japanese managed to escape the ranks of the unskilled by forming their own small businesses or setting themselves up as truck farmers and many of the issei japanese immigrants and issei and nisei nisei their american born children enjoyed significant economic success so much so that california passed laws in 1913 and 1920 to make it more difficult for them to buy land.
other asians most notably filipinos also swelled the unskilled workforce and generated considerable hostility.
anti filipino riots in california beginning in 1929 helped produce legislation in 1934 virtually eliminating immigration from the philippines.
mexican immigrants formed a major part of the unskilled workforce throughout the southwest and california.
nearly half a million mexicans entered the united states in the 1920s.
most lived in california texas arizona and new mexico and by 1930 most lived in cities.
large 550 chapter 23 the party was active as well in organizing the unemployed in the early 1930s and staged a hunger march in washington d c in 1931 party members were among the most effective union organizers in some industries.
and the party was virtually alone among political organizations in taking a firm stand in favor of racial justice its active defense of the scottsboro defendants was but one example of its efforts to ally itself with the aspirations of african americans.
the american communist party was not however the open patriotic organization it tried to appear.
it was always under the close and rigid supervision of the soviet union.
the subordination of the party leadership to the soviet union was most clearly demonstrated in 1939 when stalin signed a nonaggression pact with nazi germany.
moscow sent orders to the american communist party to abandon the popular front and return to its old stance of harsh criticism of american liberals.
communist party leaders in the united states immediately obeyed although thousands of disillusioned members left the party as a result.
the socialist party of america under the leadership of norman thomas also cited the socialist party message the economic crisis as evidence of the failure of capitalism and sought vigorously to win public support for its own political program.
among other things it attempted to mobilize support among the rural poor.
the southern tenant farmers union stfu supported by the party and organized by a young socialist h l mitchell attempted to create a biracial coalition of sharecroppers tenant farmers and others to demand economic reform.
neither the stfu nor the party itself however made any real progress toward establishing socialism as a major force in american politics.
antiradicalism was a powerful force in the 1930s.
hostility toward the communist party in particular was intense at many levels of government.
congressional committees chaired by hamilton fish of new york and martin dies of texas investigated communist influence wherever they could find or imagine it.
white southerners tried to drive communist organizers out of the countryside just as growers in california and elsewhere tried unsuccessfully to keep communists from organizing mexican american and other workers.
at few times before and few since in american history did being part of the left seem leftist ideas in the arts so respectable and even conventional among workers intellectuals and others.
the 1930s witnessed an impressive if temporary widening of the ideological range of mainstream art and politics.
the roosevelt administrations new deal for example sponsored artistic work through the works projects administration that was frankly challenging to the capitalist norms of the 1920s.
the filmmaker pare lorentz with funding from new deal agencies made two powerful documentaries the plow that broke the plains 1936 and the river 1937 that combined a celebration of new deal programs with a harsh critique of the exploitation of people and the environment that industrial capitalism had produced.
other new deal sponsored artists also sought to reveal the harshness of poverty and the human cost of social neglect.
notable among them were numerous documentary photographers many of them employed by the farm security administration who traveled through rural areas recording the ravaged nature of agricultural life.
they included some of the great photographers of their era dorothea lange margaret bourke white arthur rothstein russell lee walker evans ben shahn and others.
writers too devoted themselves to exposing social injustice some of them working through the new deals federal writers project and federal art project.
the great depression 581 migrant family this photograph by the great depression photographer dorothea lange portrays a family of migrants leaving texas in search of work in california.
it suggests the plight of hundreds of thousands of families who fled the regions affected by drought in the 1930s a devastation that became known as the dust bowl.
granger nyc all rights reserved.
the ordeal of herbert hoover herbert hoover began his presidency in march 1929 believing like most americans that the nation faced a bright and prosperous future.
for the first six months of his administration he attempted to expand the associational policies he had advocated during his eight years as secretary of commerce.
the economic crisis that began before the year was out forced hoover to deal with a new set of problems.
but for most of the rest of his term he continued to rely on the principles that had always governed his public life.
the hoover program hoover first responded to the depression by attempting to restore public confidence in the economy.
the fundamental business of this country that is production and distribution of commodities he said in 1930 is on a sound and prosperous basis he then summoned leaders of business labor and agriculture to the white house and urged them to adopt a program of voluntary cooperation for recovery.
he implored businessmen not to cut production or lay off workers he talked labor leaders into forgoing demands for 582 chapter 24 lewis douglas roosevelts first budget director resigned in response to the presidents determination to spend deficit funds to help provide relief to the unemployed.
al smith the former new york governor and twice the democratic candidate also turned against the president partly because of jealousy but also because he considered the new deal much too far to the left.
however for the most part the new deal lacked a clear ideology and instead experimented in many ways some that conservatives found offensive.
conservative business leaders were the most committed leaders of the attack on the liberty league established new deal.
they formed a new organization called the liberty league led by the du pont family owners of the nations largest chemical company.
its goal was to arouse public opposition to what its members called the dictatorial policies of the new deal and to what they considered its attacks on free enterprise.
it was led by john jacob raskob a former head of the democratic national committee a former director of general motors and a trustee of du pont who had abandoned the democratic party and joined the league.
within a year of its founding in 1934 there were more than 35 000 members of the league reaching a peak of 125 000 in 1936 it also recruited college students from 345 institutions gaining over 10 000 members.
many followers were northeastern industrialists.
the league described itself as a nonpartisan organization founded to defend the constitution and defend the rights and liberties guaranteed by that constitution its purpose was to teach the necessity of respect for the rights of persons and property as fundamental to every form of government.
to teach the duty of government to encourage and protect individual and group initiative and enterprise to foster the right to work earn save and acquire property and to preserve the ownership and lawful use of property when acquired.
the liberty league attracted considerable attention but it had relatively little impact on the new deal.
its leaders tried to remain nonpartisan even though its members were staunchly anti roosevelt.
they became a target for the presidents 1936 reelection campaign.
soon after roosevelts landslide victory the league dissolved.
hatred of roosevelt did not disappear but there was little organized opposition after 1936 the populist criticism of the new deal roosevelts critics on the far left also managed to produce alarm among some supporters of the administration.
the communist party the socialist party and other radical and semiradical organizations were at times harshly critical of the new deal.
but like the conservatives they failed to attract genuine mass support.
more menacing to the new deal than either the far right or the far left was a group of dissident political movements that defied easy ideological classification.
some gained substantial public support within particular states and regions.
and three men succeeded in mobilizing genuinely national followings.
dr francis e townsend an elderly california physician rose from obscurity to lead a movement of more than 5 million members with his plan for federal pensions for older adults.
according to the townsend the townsend plan plan all americans over the age of sixty would receive monthly government pensions of 200 provided they retired thus freeing jobs for younger unemployed americans and spent the money in full each month which would pump needed funds into the economy.
by 1935 the townsend plan had attracted the support of many older men and women.
the new deal 597 few public speakers could arouse a crowd more effectively than huey long of louisiana known to many as the kingfish a nickname borrowed from a scheming character on the popular radio show amos n andy.
it was longs effective use of radio however that contributed most directly to his spreading national popularity in the early 1930s.
archive photos getty images huey long father charles e coughlin a catholic priest in the detroit suburb of royal oak michigan achieved even greater renown through his weekly nationally father charles coughlin broadcast radio sermons.
he proposed a series of monetary reforms remonetization of silver issuing of greenbacks and nationalization of the banking system that he insisted would restore prosperity and ensure economic justice.
at first a warm supporter of roosevelt coughlin had become disheartened by late 1934 by what he claimed was the presidents failure to deal harshly enough with the money powers in the spring of 1935 he established his own political organization the national union for social justice.
most alarming to the administration was the growing national popularity of senator huey p long of louisiana.
long had risen to power in his home state through his huey long strident attacks on the banks oil companies and utilities and on the conservative political oligarchy allied with them.
elected governor in 1928 he launched an assault on his opponents so thorough and forceful that they were soon left with virtually no political power.
but he also maintained the overwhelming support of the louisiana electorate in part because of his flamboyant personality and in part because of his solid record of conventional progressive accomplishments building roads schools and hospitals revising the tax codes distributing free textbooks lowering utility rates.
barred by law from succeeding himself as governor he ran in 1930 for a seat in the united states senate and won easily.
598 chapter 24 long like coughlin supported franklin roosevelt for president in 1932 but within six months of roosevelts inauguration long had broken with the president.
as an alternative to the new deal he advocated a drastic program of wealth redistribution a program he ultimately named the share our wealth plan.
the government he claimed could end the depression easily by using the tax system to confiscate the surplus riches of the wealthiest men and women in america and distribute these surpluses to the rest of the population.
that would he claimed allow the government to guarantee every family a minimum homestead of 5 000 and an annual wage of 2 500.
in 1934 long established his own national organization the share our wealth society which soon attracted a large following through much of the nation.
a poll by the democratic national committee in the spring of 1935 disclosed that long might attract more than 10 percent of the vote if he ran as a third party candidate possibly enough to tip a close election to the republicans.
members of the roosevelt administration considered dissident movements and the broad popular discontent they represented a genuine threat.
an increasing number of advisers were warning roosevelt that he would have to do something dramatic to counter their strength.
the second new deal roosevelt launched the so called second new deal in the spring of 1935 in response both to growing political pressures and to the continuing economic crisis.
the new proposals represented a shift in the emphasis of new deal policy.
perhaps the most conspicuous change was in the administrations attitude toward big business.
symbolically at least the president was now willing to attack corporate interests openly.
in march for example he proposed to congress an act designed to break up the great utility holding companies.
the holding company act of 1935 was the result although furious lobbying by the utilities led to amendments that sharply limited its effects.
equally alarming to affluent americans was a series of tax reforms proposed by the president in 1935 apparently designed to undercut the appeal of huey longs share ourwealth plan the roosevelt proposals called for establishing the highest and most progressive peacetime tax rates in history although the actual impact of these rates was limited.
the supreme court decision in 1935 to strike down the national industrial recovery act also invalidated section 7 a of the act which had guaranteed workers the right to organize and bargain collectively.
a group of progressives in congress led by senator robert e wagner of new york introduced what became the national labor relations act of 1935 the new law popularly known as the wagner act provided workers with a crucial enforcement mechanism missing from the 1933 law the national labor relations national labor relations board board nlrb which would have power to compel employers to recognize and bargain with legitimate unions.
the president was not entirely happy with the bill but he signed it anyway.
that was largely because american workers themselves had by 1935 become so important and vigorous a force that roosevelt realized his own political future would depend in part on responding to their demands.
labor militancy the emergence of a powerful trade union movement in the 1930s occurred partly in response to government efforts to enhance the power of unions.
it was also a result of the increased militancy of american workers after a lull during the 1920s.
business leaders the new deal 599 and industrialists lost at least temporarily the ability to control government policies.
equally important new and more powerful labor organizations emerged.
the american federation of labor afl remained committed to the idea of the craft union organizing workers on the basis of their skills.
but that concept had little to offer unskilled laborers who now constituted the bulk of the industrial workforce.
during the 1930s therefore a newer concept of labor organization challenged the craft union ideal industrial unionism.
advocates of this approach argued that all workers in a particular industry should be organized in a single union regardless of what functions the workers performed.
united in this way workers would greatly increase their power.
leaders of the afl craft unions for the most part opposed the new concept.
but industrial unionism found a number of important advocates most prominent among them john l lewis the leader of the united mine workers.
at first lewis john lewis and the cio and his allies attempted to work within the afl but friction between the new industrial organizations lewis was promoting and the older craft unions grew rapidly.
at the 1935 afl convention lewis became embroiled in a series of angry confrontations with craft union leaders before finally walking out.
a few weeks later he created the committee on industrial organization.
when the afl expelled the new committee and all the industrial unions it represented lewis renamed the committee the congress of industrial organizations cio and became its first president.
the cio expanded the constituency of the labor movement.
it was more receptive to women and to african americans than the afl had been in part because cio organizing drives targeted previously unorganized industries textiles laundries tobacco factories and others where women and minorities constituted much of the workforce.
the cio was also more militant than the afl.
by the time of the 1936 schism it was already engaged in major organizing battles in the automobile and steel industries.
organizing battles the united auto workers uaw gradually emerged preeminent in the early and mid1930s.
but although it was gaining recruits it was making little progress in winning recognition from the corporations.
in december 1936 however autoworkers employed a controversial and effective new technique for challenging corporate opposition the sit down strike.
employees in several general motors plants in detroit simply sat down inside the plants refusing either to work or to leave thus preventing the company from using strikebreakers.
the tactic spread to other locations and by february 1937 strikers had occupied seventeen gm plants.
the strikers ignored court orders and local police efforts to force them to vacate the buildings.
when michigans governor refused to call up the national guard to clear out the strikers and when the federal government also refused to intervene on behalf of employers general motors relented.
in february 1937 it became the first major manufacturer to recognize the uaw.
other automobile companies soon did the same.
in the steel industry the battle for unionization was less easily won.
in 1936 the steel workers organizing committee swoc later the united steelworkers of america began a major organizing drive involving thousands of workers and frequent at times bitter strikes.
in march 1937 to the surprise of almost everyone united states steel the giant of the industry recognized the union rather than risk a costly strike.
but the smaller companies known collectively as little steel were less accommodating.
on memorial day 1937 a group of striking workers from republic steel gathered with their families 600 chapter 24 the works progress administration funded an enormous variety of work projects to provide jobs for unemployed individuals.
the majority of wpa employees however worked on construction sites.
joseph schwartz corbis wpa workers on the job reflected a widespread assumption that men should constitute the bulk of the paid workforce.
yet millions of women were already employed by the 1930s.
the 1936 referendum by the middle of 1936 with the economy visibly reviving there could be little doubt that roosevelt would win a second term.
the republican party nominated the moderate governor of kansas alf m landon who waged a relatively dull campaign.
roosevelts dissident challengers now appeared powerless.
one reason was the assassination of their most effective leader huey long in louisiana in september 1935 another reason was the ill fated alliance among father coughlin dr townsend and gerald l k smith an intemperate henchman of huey long who joined forces that summer to establish a new political movement the union party which nominated an undistinguished north dakota congressman william lemke.
the result was the greatest landslide in american history to that point.
roosevelt polled just under 61 percent of the vote to landons 36 percent and carried every state except maine and vermont.
the democrats increased their already large majorities in both houses of congress.
the election results demonstrated the party realignment that the new deal had produced.
the democrats now controlled a broad coalition of western and southern farmers the urban working classes the poor and unemployed and white southerners as well as the new deal 603 traditional progressives and committed new liberals.
new deal aid flowing to black communities in northern cities helped pry that constituency from the republican column.
the resulting coalition constituted a substantial majority of the electorate.
it would be decades before the republican party could again create a lasting majority coalition of its own.
the new deal in disarray roosevelt emerged from the 1936 election at the zenith of his popularity.
within months however the new deal was mired in serious new difficulties.
the court fight the 1936 mandate franklin roosevelt believed made it possible for him to do something about the supreme court.
no program of reform he believed could long survive the conservative justices who had already struck down the nra and the aaa.
in february 1937 roosevelt sent a surprise message to capitol hill proposing an overhaul of the federal court system included among the many provisions was one to add up to six new justices to the supreme court.
the courts were overworked the president claimed and needed additional manpower and younger blood to enable them to cope with their increasing burdens.
but roosevelts real purpose was to give himself the opportunity to appoint new liberal justices and change the ideological balance of the court.
see consider the source franklin d roosevelt speaks on the reorganization of the judiciary conservatives were outraged at the court packing plan and even many roosevelt supporters were disturbed by it.
still roosevelt might well reaction to court packing plan have persuaded congress to approve at least a compromise measure had not the supreme court itself intervened.
of the nine justices three reliably supported the new deal and four reliably opposed it.
of the remaining two chief justice charles evans hughes often sided with the progressives and associate justice owen j roberts usually voted with the conservatives.
on march 29 1937 roberts hughes and the three progressive justices voted together to uphold a state minimum wage law in the case of west coast hotel v parrish thus reversing a 5 to 4 decision of the previous year invalidating a similar law.
two weeks later again by a 5 to 4 margin the court upheld the wagner act and in may it validated the social security act.
whatever the reasons for the decisions the courts newly moderate position made the court packing bill seem unnecessary.
congress ultimately defeated it.
on one level franklin roosevelt had achieved a victory.
the court was no longer an obstacle to new deal reforms.
but the court packing episode did lasting political damage to the administration.
from 1937 on southern democrats and other conservatives voted against roosevelts measures much more often than they had in the past.
retrenchment and recession by the summer of 1937 the national income which had dropped from 82 billion in 1929 to 40 billion in 1932 had risen to nearly 72 billion.
other economic indices also showed similar advances.
roosevelt seized on these improvements as a justification for trying to balance the federal budget.
between january and august 1937 co ns ider t he s o urc e franklin d roosevelt speaks on the reorganization of the judiciary franklin d roosevelt made masterful use of the radio to explain his policies to the american people and win their support and affection.
on tuesday march 9 1937 he went on the air to defend his controversial proposal for reforming the courts.
the president couched his appeal within a broader summary of the new deals accomplishments.
tonight sitting at my desk in the white house i make my first radio report to the people in my second term of office.
i am reminded of that evening in march four years ago when i made my first radio report to you.
we were then in the midst of the great banking crisis.
soon after with the authority of the congress we asked the nation to turn over all of its privately held gold dollar for dollar to the government of the united states.
todays recovery proves how right that policy was.
in 1933 you and i knew that we must never let our economic system get completely out of joint again that we could not afford to take the risk of another great depression.
we also became convinced that the only way to avoid a repetition of those dark days was to have a government with power to prevent and to cure the abuses and the inequalities which had thrown that system out of joint.
we then began a program of remedying those abuses and inequalities to give balance and stability to our economic system to make it bomb proof against the causes of 1929 today we are only part way through that program and recovery is speeding up to a point where the dangers of 1929 are again becoming possible not this week or month perhaps but within a year or two.
604 national laws are needed to complete that program.
individual or local or state effort alone cannot protect us in 1937 any better than ten years ago.
it will take time and plenty of time to work out our remedies administratively even after legislation is passed.
to complete our program of protection in time therefore we cannot delay one moment in making certain that our national government has power to carry through.
four years ago action did not come until the eleventh hour.
it was almost too late.
if we learned anything from the depression we will not allow ourselves to run around in new circles of futile discussion and debate always postponing the day of decision.
the american people have learned from the depression.
for in the last three national elections an overwhelming majority of them voted a mandate that the congress and the president begin the task of providing that protection not after long years of debate but now.
the courts however have cast doubts on the ability of the elected congress to protect us against catastrophe by meeting squarely our modern social and economic conditions.
we are at a crisis in our ability to proceed with that protection.
it is a quiet crisis.
there are no lines of depositors outside closed banks.
but to the far sighted it is far reaching in its possibilities of injury to america.
i want to talk with you very simply about the need for present action in this crisis the need to meet the unanswered challenge of one third of a nation ill nourished illclad ill housed.
last thursday i described the american form of government as a three horse team provided by the constitution to the american people so that their field might be plowed.
the three horses are of course the three branches of government the congress the executive and the courts.
two of the horses are pulling in unison today the third is not.
those who have intimated that the president of the united states is trying to drive that team overlook the simple fact that the president as chief executive is himself one of the three horses.
it is the american people themselves who are in the drivers seat.
it is the american people themselves who want the furrow plowed.
it is the american people themselves who expect the third horse to pull in unison with the other two.
s ince the rise of the modern movement for social and economic progress through legislation the court has more and more often and more and more boldly asserted a power to veto laws passed by the congress and state legislatures.
in the last four years the sound rule of giving statutes the benefit of all reasonable doubt has been cast aside.
the court has been acting not as a judicial body but as a policy making body.
when the congress has sought to stabilize national agriculture to improve the conditions of labor to safeguard business against unfair competition to protect our national resources and in many other ways to serve our clearly national needs the majority of the court has been assuming the power to pass on the wisdom of these acts of the congress and to approve or disapprove the public policy written into these laws.
we have therefore reached the point as a nation where we must take action to save the constitution from the court and the court from itself.
we must find a way to take an appeal from the supreme court to the constitution itself.
we want a supreme court which will do justice under the constitution and not over it.
in our courts we want a government of laws and not of men.
what is my proposal.
it is simply this whenever a judge or justice of any federal court has reached the age of seventy and does not avail himself of the opportunity to retire on a pension a new member shall be appointed by the president then in office with the approval as required by the constitution of the senate of the united states.
those opposing this plan have sought to arouse prejudice and fear by crying that i am seeking to pack the supreme court and that a baneful precedent will be established.
what do they mean by the words packing the court.
understand analyze evaluate 1 according to president roosevelt what had been most important for economic reform and recovery.
how did he assess this recovery.
2 how were the three branches of government supposed to work in the presidents view.
3 what criticism did the president level against the courts.
what solution did he offer.
was this conflict between the executive branch and the united states supreme court unique to the new deal.
source on the reorganization of the judiciary tuesday march 9 1937 35 28 wh fireside chats of franklin d roosevelt franklin d roosevelt presidential library hyde park new york.
for example he cut the wpa in half laying off 1 5 million relief workers.
a few weeks later the fragile boom collapsed.
the index of industrial production dropped from 117 in august 1937 to 76 in may 1938 four million additional workers lost their jobs.
economic conditions were soon almost as bad as they had been in the bleak days of 1932 1933.
605 606 chapter 25 the spanish civil war many americans took up arms to help the republican forces fight against franco and his army.
the novelist ernest hemingway joined them in spain as a reporter and supporter of the republicans and he spent much of his time talking with both american and spanish troops.
his novel for whom the bell tolls was inspired by his experience in the civil war.
robert capa international center of photography magnum photos sailed the yangtze river in china.
but so reluctant was the roosevelt administration to antagonize the isolationists that the united states eagerly seized on japanese claims that the bombing had been an accident accepted japans apologies and overlooked the attack.
the failure of munich in 1936 hitler had moved the revived german army into the rhineland rearming an area that had been off limits to german troops since world war i in march 1938 german forces marched without opposition into austria and hitler proclaimed a union or anschluss between austria his native land and germany his adopted one.
neither in america nor in most of europe was there much more than a murmur of opposition.
germany had by now occupied territory surrounding three sides of western czechoslovakia a region hitler dreamed of annexing.
in september 1938 he demanded that czechoslovakia cede him the sudetenland a part of czechoslovakia in which many ethnic germans lived.
although czechoslovakia was prepared to fight to stop hitler it needed assistance from other nations.
but most western governments including the united states were willing to pay almost any price to settle the crisis peacefully.
on september 29 hitler met with the leaders of france and great britain at munich in an effort to resolve the crisis.
the french and british agreed to accept the german demands in czechoslovakia in return for hitlers promise to expand no farther.
americans watched these events nervously and the fear of war became a fixture of domestic the global crisis 1921 1941 619 thought and culture.
see patterns of popular culture orson welles and the war of the worlds the munich agreement which roosevelt supported at the time was the most prominent element of a policy that came to be known as appeasement and that came to be identified not altogether fairly with british prime minister neville chamberlain.
whoever was to blame the policy was a failure.
in march 1939 hitler occupied the remaining areas of czechoslovakia violating the munich agreement unashamedly.
and in april he began issuing threats against poland.
at that point both britain and france assured the polish government that they would come to its assistance in case of an invasion they even tried too late to draw the soviet union into a mutual defense agreement.
but the soviet leader josef stalin who had not even been invited to the munich conference had decided he could expect no protection from the west.
he signed a nonaggression pact with hitler in august 1939 freeing the germans for a while from the danger of a two front war.
shortly after that hitler staged an incident on the polish border to allow him to claim that germany had been attacked and on september 1 1939 he launched a full scale invasion of poland.
invasion of poland britain and france true to their pledges declared war on germany two days later.
world war ii already under way in asia had begun in europe.
from neutrality to intervention this nation will remain a neutral nation the president declared shortly after the hostilities began in europe but i cannot ask that every american remain neutral in thought as well there was never any question that both he and the majority of the american people favored britain france and the other allied nations in the contest.
the question was how much the united states was prepared to do to assist them.
neutrality tested at the very least roosevelt believed the united states should make armaments available to the allied armies to counter the military advantage the large german munitions industry gave hitler.
in september 1939 he asked congress to revise the neutrality acts and lift the arms embargo against any nation engaged in war.
congress maintained the prohibition on american ships entering war zones.
but the 1939 law did permit belligerents to purchase arms on the same cash and carry basis that the earlier neutrality acts had established for the sale of nonmilitary materials.
after the german armies quickly subdued poland the war in europe settled into a long quiet lull that lasted through the winter and spring a phony war some called it.
but in the spring of 1940 germany launched a massive invasion known as the blitzkrieg lightning war to the west first attacking denmark and norway sweeping the blitzkrieg next across the netherlands and belgium and driving finally deep into the heart of france.
on june 10 mussolini invaded france from the south as hitler was attacking from the north.
on june 22 france fell and nazi troops marched into paris.
a new french regime assembled in vichy largely controlled by the german occupiers and vichy regime in france in all of europe only the shattered remnants of the british and french armies daringly rescued from the beaches of dunkirk by a hastily organized armada of english boats trawlers and yachts remained to oppose the axis forces.
patterns of popular culture orson welles and the war of the worlds on the evening of october 30 1938 about 6 million americans were listening to the weekly radio program the mercury theatre on the air produced by the actor filmmaker orson welles and broadcast over the cbs network.
a few minutes into the show an announcer interrupted some dance music with a terrifying report at least forty people including six state troopers lie dead in a field east of grovers mill new jersey their bodies burned and distorted beyond recognition.
good heavens somethings wriggling out of the shadow like a gray snake.
now its another one and another.
its large as a bear and it glistens like black leather.
but that face.
its indescribable.
i can hardly force myself to keep looking at it.
the panicky announcer was describing the beginning of an alien invasion of earth and the appearance of martians armed with death rays determined to destroy the planet.
later in the evening an announcer claiming to be broadcasting from times square r eported the destruction of new york city before falling dead at the microphone.
the dramatic news bulletins were part of a radio play by howard koch loosely adapted from h g wellss 1898 novel the war of the worlds.
announcers reminded the audience repeatedly throughout the broadcast that welles on the air welles top right is shown here during the broadcast of the war of the worlds in 1938 although announcers told listeners throughout the broadcast that it was fiction welles came under intense criticism in following days for the panic it caused among many listeners.
bettmann corbis 620 they were listening to a play but many people either did not hear or did not notice the disclaimers.
by the end of the hour according to some estimates as many as a million americans were flying into panics convinced that the end of the world was imminent.
thousands of listeners in new york and new jersey fled their homes and tried to drive along clogged highways into the hills or the countryside.
in newark people ran from their buildings with wet towels wrapped around their faces or wearing gas masks as if defending themselves against the chemical warfare that many remembered from the trenches in world war i in cities across the country people flocked into churches to pray called police and hospitals for help flooded the switchboards of newspapers magazines and radio stations desperate for information.
i never hugged my radio so closely as i did last night one woman later explained.
i held a crucifix in my hand and prayed while looking out of my open window for falling meteors the new york times described it the next day as a wave of mass hysteria for weeks thereafter orson welles and other producers of the show were the focus of a barrage of criticism for what many americans believed had been a deliberate effort to create public fear.
for years sociologists and other scholars studied the episode for clues about mass behavior.
welles and his colleagues claimed to be surprised by the reaction their show created.
the broadcast proved more effective than they had expected because it touched on anxieties that ran deep in american life at the time.
the show aired only a few weeks after the war fever that had preceded the munich pact among germany britain and france americans already jittery about the possibility of war proved easy prey to fears of another kind of invasion.
the show also tapped longer standing anxieties about the fragility of life that afflicted many americans during the long depression of the 1930s and it seemed to frighten working class people those most vulnerable to unexpected catastrophes in particular.
most of all however the war of the worlds unintentionally exploited the enormous power that radio had come to exercise in american life and the great trust many people had developed in what they heard over the air.
for many people the broadcasts they received over the radio had become their principal even their only source of information about the outside world.
when the actors from the mercury theatre began to use the familiar phrases and cadences of radio news announcers it was easy for members of their audience to assume that they were hearing the truth.
welles concluded the broadcast by describing the play as the mercury theaters own radio version of dressing up in a sheet and jumping out of a bush and saying boo.
so goodbye everybody and remember please for the next day or so the terrible lesson you learned tonight.
the grinning glowing globular invader of your living room is an inhabitant of the pumpkin patch and if your doorbell rings and theres no one there that was no martian.
its halloween but the real lesson of the war of the worlds was the lesson of the enormous and at times frightening power of the medium of broadcasting.
from war of the worlds by howard koch.
copyright 1938 howard koch.
understand analyze evaluate 1 why did welless war of the worlds broadcast create so much panic and hysteria.
2 what responsibility did welles and his producers bear for the hysteria that followed the program.
could they have done more to prevent that hysteria and reassure their audience.
if so should they have done more.
3 do the media today hold as much power and influence as radio did in the 1930s.
would an audience today be as likely to react with panic and hysteria to a broadcast similar to that of the war of the worlds.
621 622 chapter 26 terrible losses regained control of the central pacific.
the united states destroyed four japanese aircraft carriers without losing one of its own.
the americans took the offensive several months later in the southern solomon islands to the east of new guinea.
in august 1942 american forces assaulted three of the islands gavutu guadalcanal tulagi and guadalcanal.
a struggle of terrible ferocity continued at guadalcanal for six months inflicting heavy losses on both sides.
in the end however the japanese were forced to abandon the island and with it their last chance of launching an effective offensive to the south.
the americans with aid from the australians and the new zealanders now began the slow arduous process of moving toward the philippines and japan itself.
holding off the germans in the european war the united states fought in cooperation with among others britain and the exiled free french forces in the west and tried also to conciliate its new ally the soviet union which was now fighting hitler in the east.
the army chief of staff general george c marshall supported a plan for a major allied invasion of france across the english channel in the spring of 1943 and he placed a previously little known general dwight eisenhower dwight d eisenhower in charge of planning the operation.
the soviet union which was absorbing the brunt of the german war effort wanted the allied invasion bel.
farthest extent of axis conquest paris vichy france france allied occupied territory vienna budapest austria switz.
hungary vichy allied forces yugoslavia italy marseille st tropez madrid sardinia spain safi nov 8 1942 morocco tunisia algeria pat athens greece sicily messina n bulgaria turkey salerno sept 10 1943 palermo invasion of sicily july 10 1943 rhodes malta m port lyautey nov 8 1942 casablanca nov 8 1942 monte cassino may 11 18 1943 taranto sept 9 1943 alb.
k rome june 4 1944 anzio jan 22 bone tunis nov 12 may 7 algiers bougie nov 8 nov 11 oran nov 10 kasserine pass feb 14 22 cl ar to gibraltar british romania bucharest battles portugal soviet union czech.
neutral countries lisbon poland prague germany mareth mar.
20 26 on tg e om ry medi terranean sea tripoli jan 23 1943 mo n tg benghazi nov 20 tobruk nov 13 1942 british forces o m e ry libya cyprus crete el alamein oct 23 nov 4 1942 alexandria cairo egypt world war ii in north africa and italy the allied counteroffensive 1942 1943 the united states and great britain understood from the beginning that an invasion of france across the english channel would eventually be necessary for a victory in the european war.
in the meantime however they began a campaign against axis forces in north africa and in the spring of 1943 they began an invasion across the mediterranean into italy.
this map shows the points along the coast of north africa where allied forces landed in 1942 with american forces moving east from morocco and algeria and british forces moving west from egypt.
the two armies met in tunisia and moved into italy from there.
why were america and britain reluctant to launch the cross channel invasion in 1942 or 1943.
america in a world at war 631 to begin at the earliest possible moment.
but the british wanted first to launch a series of allied offensives around the edges of the nazi empire in northern africa and southern europe before undertaking the invasion of france.
roosevelt ultimately decided to support the british plan in part because he was eager to get american forces into combat quickly and knew that a cross channel invasion would take a long time to prepare.
at the end of october 1942 the british opened a counter offensive against general erwin rommel and the nazi forces in northern africa who were threatening the suez canal.
in a major battle at el alamein they forced the germans to retreat from egypt.
in early november anglo american forces landed at oran and algiers in algeria and at casablanca in morocco areas under the nazi controlled french government at vichy and began moving east toward rommel.
the germans threw the full weight of their forces in africa against the inexperienced americans and inflicted a serious defeat on them at the kasserine pass in tunisia.
general george s patton however regrouped and began an effective counteroffensive.
with the help of allied air and naval power and of british forces attacking from the east under field marshall bernard montgomery the hero of el alamein the american offensive finally drove the last germans from africa in may 1943 the north african campaign had tied up a large proportion of allied resources postponing the planned may 1943 cross channel invasion of france despite battle of stalingrad angry complaints from the soviet union.
by now however the threat of a soviet collapse seemed much diminished for during the winter of 1942 1943 the red army had successfully held off a major german assault at stalingrad in southern russia.
hitler had committed such enormous forces to the battle and had suffered such appalling losses that he could not continue his eastern offensive.
the soviet successes persuaded roosevelt to agree in a january 1943 meeting with churchill in casablanca to a british plan for an allied invasion of sicily.
churchill argued that the operation in sicily might knock italy out of the war and tie up german divisions that would otherwise be stationed in france.
on the night of july 9 10 1943 american and british armies landed in southeastern sicily thirtyeight days later they had conquered the island and were moving onto the italian mainland.
in the face of these setbacks mussolinis government collapsed italy invaded and the dictator himself fled north toward germany.
he was later captured by italian insurgents and hanged.
mussolinis successor pietro badoglio quickly committed italy to the allies.
germany moved eight divisions into italy and established a powerful defensive line south of rome.
the allied offensive which began on september 3 1943 got bogged down at that line.
not until may 1944 did the allies break through the german defenses to resume their northward advance.
on june 4 1944 they captured rome.
the invasion of italy delayed the invasion of france by as much as a year deeply embittering stalin but also giving the soviets time to begin moving toward the countries of eastern europe.
america and the holocaust in the midst of this intensive fighting the leaders of the american government confronted one of historys great tragedies the nazi campaign to exterminate the jews of europe which became known as the holocaust.
as early as 1942 high officials in washington had incontrovertible evidence that hitlers forces were rounding up jews and others 632 chapter 26 stabilizing the boom and mobilizing production the fear of deflation the central concern of the 1930s gave way during the war to a fear of inflation particularly after prices rose 25 percent in the two years before pearl harbor.
the office of price administration fighting inflation was the task of the office of price administration opa which helped moderate what had been a serious problem during world war i even so the agency was never popular.
black marketing and overcharging grew in proportions far beyond opas policing capacity.
from 1941 to 1945 the federal government spent a total of 321 billion twice as much as it had spent in the entire 150 years of its existence as a nation to that point and ten times as much as the cost of world war i the national debt rose from 49 billion in 1941 to 259 billion in 1945 the government borrowed about half the revenues it needed by selling 100 billion worth of bonds.
much of the rest it raised by radically increasing income tax rates through the revenue act of 1942 to simplify collection congress enacted a withholding system of payroll deductions in 1943 in january 1942 to mobilize the wartime economy the president created the war production board wpb.
throughout its troubled history the wpb was never able to win complete control over military purchases the army and navy often circumvented the board.
nor was it able to satisfy the complaints of small business which charged correctly that most contracts went to large corporations.
gradually the president transferred much of the wpbs authority to a new office located within the white house the office of war mobilization owm.
but the owm was only slightly more successful than the wpb.
despite the administrative problems however the war economy managed to meet almost all of the nations critical war needs.
by the beginning of 1944 american factories were in fact producing more than the government needed.
their output was twice that of all the axis countries combined.
wartime science and technology more than any previous american war world war ii was a watershed for technological and scientific innovation.
that was so partly because the american government poured substantial funds into research and development beginning in 1940 in that year government financing of research the government created the national defense research committee which later became the office of scientific research and development.
by the end of the war the new agency had spent more than 100 million on research more than four times the amount spent by the government on military research and development in the previous forty years.
in the first years of the war all the technological advantages seemed to lie with the germans and japanese.
germany had made great advances in tanks and other mechanized armor in the 1930s particularly during the spanish civil war when it had helped arm francos forces.
german submarine technology surpassed british and american capabilities in 1940 japan had developed extraordinary capacity in its naval air technology as indicated by the successful raid on pearl harbor.
but britain and america had advantages of their own.
american techniques of mass production the great automotive assembly lines in particular were converted efficiently to military production in 1941 and 1942 and soon began producing airplanes ships tanks and other armaments in much greater numbers than could the germans and japanese.
allied scientists and engineers moved quickly as well to improve anglo american aviation and naval technology particularly submarines and tanks.
by late 1942 allied america in a world at war 635 eaponry was at least as advanced as and more plentiful than that of the enemy.
the w allies likewise enjoyed superiority in radar technology and developed effective naval mine detection systems.
anglo american antiaircraft technology both on land and on sea also improved but never to the point where it could defeat bombing raids altogether.
germany made substantial advances in the development of rocket technology in the early years of the war and managed to launch some rocket propelled bombs the v1s and v2s across the english channel aimed at london.
the psychological effects of the rockets on the british people were considerable.
but the germans were never able to create a production technology capable of building enough such rockets to make a real difference in the balance of military power.
beginning in 1942 british and american forces seized the advantage in the air war by producing new and powerful four engine bombers in great numbers.
at higher altitudes and with new navigation systems they were able to conduct extensive bombing missions over germany and later japan with much less danger of being shot down.
long range bombing the allies also benefited from a radio device that sent a sonic message to airplanes to tell them when they were within 20 yards of their targets first introduced in december 1942 the area in which the allies had perhaps the greatest advantage was the gathering of intelligence much of it through britains top secret ultra project.
some of the advantages the allies enjoyed came from the capture of german and japanese intelligence devices.
more important however were the efforts of cryptologists or code breakers.
much of germanys coded communication made use of the so called enigma machine which constantly changed the coding systems it used.
in the first months of the war polish intelligence had developed an electromechanical computer.
it was called the bombe and it could decipher some enigma messages.
after the fall of poland british scientists led by the brilliant computer pioneer alan turing took the bombe and greatly improved it.
on april 15 1940 the new improved high speed bombe deciphered a series of german messages within hours not days as had previously been the case.
a few weeks later it began decrypting german messages at the rate of 1 000 a day providing the british and later the americans with a constant flow of information about enemy operations throughout the war.
british scientists working for the intelligence services meanwhile built the first real programmable digital computer the colossus ii which became the colossus ii operational less than a week before the beginning of the normandy invasion and which could decipher an enormous number of intercepted german messages almost instantly.
the united states similarly developed the ability to crack a japanese coding system.
race and ethnicity in wartime america the war loosened many traditional barriers that had restricted the lives of minorities and women.
there was so much demand for fighting men so much demand for labor and so much fluidity and mobility that the social and cultural barriers could not survive intact.
african americans and the war in the summer of 1941 a philip randolph president of the mostly african american brotherhood of sleeping car porters union began to insist that the a philip randolph government require companies receiving defense contracts to integrate their workforces.
636 chapter 26 were usually assigned more menial tasks and paid at a lower rate than their white counterparts.
but some women began to take on heavy industrial jobs that had long been considered rosie the riveter mens work the famous wartime image of rosie the riveter symbolized the new importance of the female industrial worker.
women joined unions in substantial numbers and helped erode at least some of the prejudice including the prejudice against mothers working that had previously kept many of them from paid employment.
most women workers during the war however were employed not in factories but in service sector jobs.
above all they worked for the government whose bureaucratic needs expanded dramatically alongside its military and industrial needs.
even within the miliwaacs and waves tary which enlisted substantial numbers of women as waacs army and waves navy most female work was clerical.
many mothers whose husbands were in the military had to combine work with child care.
the scarcity of child care facilities or other community services meant that some women had no choice but to leave young children at home alone or sometimes locked in cars in factory parking lots or with relatives or neighbors while they worked.
perhaps in part because of the family dislocations of the war juvenile crime rose markedly.
young boys were arrested at increasing rates for car theft burglary vandalism and vagrancy.
for many children however the distinctive experience of the war years was not crime but work.
more than a third of all teenagers between the ages of fourteen and eighteen were employed during the last years of the war causing some reduction in high school enrollments.
the return of prosperity helped increase the marriage rate and lower the age at which people married but many marriages were unable to survive the pressures of wartime separation.
the divorce rate rose rapidly.
even so the rise in the birthrate that accompanied the increase in marriages was the first sign of what would become the great postwar baby boom the growth of wartime conservatism late in 1943 franklin roosevelt publicly suggested that dr.
new deal as he called it had served its purpose and should now give way to dr.
win the war the statement reflected the presidents own genuine shift in concern victory was now more important than reform.
but it reflected too the political reality that had emerged during the first two years of war.
the greatest assault on new deal reforms came from conservatives in congress who seized on the war as a reason to do what many had wanted to do in peacetime dismantle many of conservative assault on the new deal the achievements of the new deal.
they were assisted by the end of mass unemployment which decreased the need for such relief programs as the civilian conservation corps and the works progress administration both of which congress abolished.
they were assisted too by their own increasing numbers.
in the congressional elections of 1942 republicans gained 47 seats in the house and 10 in the senate.
republicans approached the 1944 election determined to exploit what they believed was resentment of wartime regimentation and unhappiness with democratic reform.
they democrats drop wallace nominated as their candidate the young and vigorous governor of new york thomas e dewey.
roosevelt was unopposed within his party but democratic leaders pressured him to abandon vice president henry wallace an advanced new dealer and hero of the cio.
roosevelt agreed to replace him with a more moderate figure senator harry s truman of missouri.
truman had won acclaim as chairman of the senate war investigating committee known as the truman committee which compiled an impressive record uncovering waste and corruption in wartime production.
america in a world at war 643 the election revolved around domestic economic issues and indirectly the presidents health.
he was in fact gravely ill suffering from among other things advanced arteriosclerosis.
but the campaign seemed momentarily to revive him.
roosevelt made several strenuous public appearances late in october which dispelled popular doubts about his health and ensured his reelection.
he captured 53 5 percent of the p opular roosevelt reelected vote to deweys 46 percent and 432 electoral votes to deweys 99 democrats lost 1 seat in the senate gained 20 in the house and maintained control of both.
the defeat of the axis by the middle of 1943 america and its allies had succeeded in stopping the axis advance in both europe and the pacific.
in the next two years the allies themselves seized the offensive and launched a series of powerful drives that led the way to victory.
iceland allied offensives norwegian sea allies and allied controlled areas neutral nations axis powers faeroe is.
sweden shetland is.
finland norway great britain a se ba latvia l t lithuania east prussia moscow sp yalta black sea se a ca n tehran it.
turkey iran sicily algeria fr.
stalingrad august 1942 february 1943 greece morocco fr.
soviet union ia algiers battles sardinia it.
oran vichy france controlled by axis prior to allied invasion 1942 1944 ic denmark y casablanca por tu ga l north sea london germany 1944 calais neth.
1945 d day berlin warsaw belg.
june 1944 battle of the bulge poland december 1944 c ze paris chos dresden lux.
lovak ia france austria ary 1944 switz.
vichy ng u h romania u g o sl italy av a ri ia corsica spain ga rome fr.
bul 1 albania morocco sp.
farthest axis control leningrad estonia ireland at l a n t i c ocean dodecanese cyprus it.
kasserine pass february 1943 tunisia fr.
me crete dit erra n ea n s e a libya it.
lebanon fr.
palestine br.
transjordan br.
suez el alamein canal october november 1942 egypt saudi arabia world war ii in europe the allied counteroffensive 1943 1945 this map illustrates the final climactic movements in the war in europe the two great offensives against germany that began in 1943 and culminated in 1945 from the east the armies of the soviet union having halted the germans at stalingrad and moscow swept across eastern europe toward germany.
from the west and the south american british and other allied forces moved toward germany through italy and after the normandy invasion in june 1944 through france.
the two offensives met in berlin in may 1945 note too the northern routes that america and britain used to supply the soviet union during the war.
what problems did the position of the allied forces at the end of the war help produce.
644 chapter 26 the european offensive by early 1944 american and british bombers were attacking german industrial installations and other targets almost around the clock drastically cutting production and impeding transportation.
a february 1945 incendiary raid on dresden created a great firestorm that destroyed three fourths of the previously undamaged city and killed approximately 135 000 people almost all civilians.
an enormous offensive force had been gathering in england for two years before the spring of 1944 almost 3 million troops and perhaps the greatest array of naval vessels and armaments ever assembled in one place.
on the morning of june 6 1944 d day d day this vast invasion force moved into action.
the landing came not at the narrowest part of the english channel where the germans had expected and prepared for it but along sixty miles of the cotentin peninsula on the coast of normandy.
while airplanes and battleships offshore bombarded the nazi defenses 4 000 vessels landed american british canadian and other troops and supplies on the beaches.
three divisions of paratroopers had been dropped chaotically behind the german lines the night before.
fighting was intense along the beach but the superior manpower and equipment of the allied forces gradually prevailed.
within a week the german forces had been dislodged from virtually the entire normandy coast.
for the next month further progress remained slow.
but in late july in the battle of saint l general omar bradleys first army smashed through the german lines.
george s pattons third army spearheaded by heavy tank attacks then moved through the hole bradley had created and began a drive into the heart of france.
on august 25 free french forces arrived in paris and liberated the city from four years of german occupation.
by mid september the allied armies had driven the germans almost entirely out of france and belgium.
the normandy invasion this photograph taken from a landing craft shows american troops wading ashore and onto the normandy beaches where one of the decisive battles of world war ii was taking shape.
the invasion was launched despite threatening weather and rough seas.
popperfoto getty images america in a world at war 645 the great allied drive came to a halt however at the rhine river against a firm line of nazi defenses.
in mid december german forces struck in desperation along fifty miles of front in the ardennes forest.
in the battle of the bulge named for a battle of the bulge large bulge that appeared in the american lines as the germans pressed forward they drove fifty five miles toward antwerp before they were finally stopped at bastogne.
it was the last major battle on the western front.
while the western allies fought their way through france soviet forces swept westward into central europe and the balkans.
in late january 1945 the russians launched a great offensive toward the oder river inside germany.
by early germany invaded this photograph taken near the end of world war ii shows a group of imprisoned children behind a barbed wire fence in one of the most notorious nazi concentration camps.
by the time this picture was taken the nazis had been driven out of auschwitz and were under the control of allied soldiers.
keystone getty images auschwitz december 1944 646 chapter 28 postwar electronic research the 1940s and 1950s saw dramatic new developments in electronic technology.
researchers in the 1940s produced the first commercially viable televisions and created a technology that made it possible to broadcast programming over large areas.
in the late 1950s scientists at radio corporation of america better known as rca developed color television which first became widely available in the early 1960s.
in 1948 bell labs the research arm of at t produced the first transistor a solid state device capable of amplifying electrical signals that was much smaller and more efficient than the cumbersome vacuum tubes that had powered most electronic equipment in the past.
transistors made possible the miniaturization of many devices radios televisions audio equipment hearing aids and were also important in aviation weaponry and satellites.
they contributed as well to another major breakthrough in electronics the development of integrated circuitry in the late 1950s.
integrated circuits combined a number of once separate electronic elements transistors resistors diodes and others and embedded them into a single microscopically small device.
they made it possible to create increasingly complex electronic devices requiring complicated circuitry that would have been impractical to produce through other means.
most of all integrated circuits helped advance the development of the computer.
television postwar computer technology prior to the 1950s computers had been constructed mainly to perform complicated mathematical tasks such as breaking military codes.
in the 1950s they began to perform commercial functions for the first time.
the first significant computer of the 1950s was the universal automatic computer or univac which was developed initially for the u s bureau of the census by the remington rand company.
it was able to handle both alphabetical and numerical information easily.
it used tape storage and could perform calculations and other functions much faster than its predecessor the electronic numerical integrator and computer.
searching for a larger market for its very expensive new device remington rand arranged univac to use a univac to predict the results of the 1952 election for cbs television news.
analyzing early voting results the univac accurately predicted an enormous landslide victory for eisenhower over stevenson.
few americans had ever heard of a computer before that night and the univacs television debut became a critical breakthrough in public awareness of computer technology.
remington rand had limited success in marketing the univac but in the mid 1950s the international business machines company ibm introduced its first major data processing computers and marketed them among businesses in the united states and abroad.
these early successes combined with the enormous amount of money ibm invested in research and development made the company the worldwide leader in computers for many years.
bombs rockets and missiles in 1952 the united states successfully detonated the first hydrogen bomb.
the soviet union tested its first h bomb a year later.
unlike the plutonium and uranium bombs developed during world war ii the hydrogen bomb derives its vastly greater power not nuclear fusion from fission the splitting of atoms but fusion the joining together of lighter atomic elements with heavier ones.
the affluent society 685 the hydrogen bomb gave considerable impetus to a stalled scientific project in both the united states and the soviet union the effort to develop unmanned rockets and missiles capable of carrying the new weapons not suitable for delivery by airplanes to their targets.
both nations began to put tremendous resources into their development.
the united states benefited from the emigration to america of some of the german scientists who had helped develop rocketry for germany during world war ii.
in the united states early missile research conducted almost entirely by the air force produced significant early successes in developing rockets capable of traveling several hundred miles.
but american and soviet leaders struggled to build longer range missiles that were capable of traveling through space and across oceans and continents to reach distant targets intercontinental ballistic missiles or icbms.
american scientists experimented icbms in the 1950s first with the atlas and then the titan icbm.
despite some early successes the difficulty of massing sufficient stable fuel to provide the tremendous power needed to launch missiles beyond the atmosphere stymied progress.
by 1958 however scientists had created a solid fuel to replace the volatile liquid fuels of the early missiles.
they had also produced miniaturized guidance systems capable of ensuring that missiles could travel to reasonably precise destinations.
within a few years a new generation of missile capable of traveling several thousand miles known as the minuteman became the basis of the american atomic weapons arsenal.
american scientists also developed a nuclear missile capable of being carried and fired by submarines the polaris which is launched from below the surface of the ocean by compressed air and fires its engines only once it is above the surface.
a polaris was first successfully fired from underwater in 1960 the space program in the beginning the american space program was a by product of the rivalry with the soviet union.
its origins can be traced most directly to a dramatic event in 1957 when the soviet union announced that it had launched an earth orbiting satellite sputnik into outer space.
the united states had yet to perform any similar feats and the sputnik american government and much of american society reacted with alarm.
federal policy began encouraging and funding strenuous efforts to improve scientific education in the schools to create more research laboratories and above all to speed the development of americas own exploration of outer space.
the united states launched its own first satellite explorer i in january 1958 the centerpiece of space exploration however soon became the manned space program established in 1958 along with a new agency the national aeronautics and space administration nasa.
the first american space pilots or astronauts quickly became revered heroes.
on may 5 1961 alan shepard became the first american launched into space.
but his short suborbital flight came several months after a soviet cosmonaut yuri gagarin had made a flight in which he had actually orbited the earth.
on february 2 1962 john glenn later a united states senator became the first american to orbit the globe.
nasa later introduced the gemini program whose spacecraft could carry two astronauts at once.
these early successes led to the creation of the apollo program whose purpose was to land astronauts on the moon.
it suffered some catastrophic setbacks most apollo program notably a fire in january 1967 that killed three astronauts during a training session.
but on july 20 1969 neil armstrong edwin buzz aldrin and michael collins successfully traveled in a space capsule into orbit around the moon.
armstrong and aldrin then 686 chapter 28 the nations culture too helped create a broad sense of stability and calm.
television which emerged in the 1950s as the most powerful medium of mass culture presented largely uncontroversial programming dominated by middle class images and traditional values.
movies theater popular magazines and newspapers all contributed to a broad sense of well being.
but the 1950s were not in the end as calm and contented as the politics and popular culture of the time suggested.
a powerful youth culture emerged in these years displaying a considerable level of restiveness and even disillusionment.
african americans began to escalate their protests against segregation and inequality.
the continuing existence of widespread poverty among large groups of americans attracted increasing attention as the decade progressed.
these pulsing anxieties combined with frustration over the continuing tensions of the cold war produced by the late 1950s a growing sense of impatience with the calm placid public culture of the time.
that was one reason for the growing desire for action and innovation as the 1960s began.
key terms people places events afl cio 681 apollo program 685 army mccarthy hearings 700 baby boom 680 beats 692 brinksmanship 700 brown v board of education of topeka 696 ddt 683 echo park 691 elvis presley 693 federal highway act of 1956 699 fidel castro 702 ho chi minh 701 icbms 685 john foster dulles 700 levittown s 687 martin luther king jr 698 rosa parks 697 sputnik 685 the organization man 692 the other america 694 u 2 crisis 702 univac 684 recall and reflect 1 how did the economic boom of the postwar era change american lifestyles.
2 what were some of the significant scientific and technological breakthroughs especially in medicine chemistry electronics weaponry and space exploration of the 1950s and 1960s.
how did these developments affect american life.
3 how did the increasing popularity of the automobile change the american landscape and american society.
4 how did the cold war progress under eisenhower.
the turbulent sixties expanding the liberal state the battle for racial equality response and the cold war the agony of vietnam the traumas of 1968 looking ahead 1 what was the domestic reform agenda of kennedys new frontier and how did johnsons great society programs continue and expand on that agenda.
2 why did the civil rights movement become increasingly assertive and militant over the course of the 1960s.
3 how did u s involvement in vietnam escalate through the 1960s.
what were the political and social consequences of that escalation in both vietnam and the united states.
by the late 1950s a growing restlessness was bubbling beneath the apparently placid surface of american society.
ultimately that restlessness would make the 1960s one of the most turbulent and divisive eras of the twentieth century.
but at first it contributed to a bold and confident effort by political leaders to attack social and international problems within the framework of conventional liberalism.
707 expanding the liberal state time line kennedy elected president freedom rides cuban missile crisis bay of pigs berlin wall erected march on washington johnson launches war on poverty civil rights act kennedy assassinated johnson becomes president civil rights demonstrations in birmingham gulf of tonkin resolution johnson elected president malcolm x assassinated voting rights act u s troops in vietnam racial violence in watts antiwar movement grows racial violence in detroit tet offensive martin luther king jr assassinated robert kennedy assassinated nixon elected president 708 those who yearned for a more active government in the late 1950s and who accused the eisenhower administration of allowing the nation to drift in matters of social affairs hoped for vigorous new leadership.
the two men who served in the white house through most of the 1960s john kennedy and lyndon johnson seemed for a time to embody these liberal hopes.
john kennedy the campaign of 1960 produced two young candidates who claimed to offer the nation active leadership.
the republican nomination went almost uncontested to vice president richard nixon who promised moderate reform.
the democrats in the meantime emerged from a spirited primary campaign united although somewhat uneasily behind john fitzgerald kennedy an attractive and articulate senator from massachusetts who had narrowly missed being the partys vice presidential candidate in 1956 john kennedy was the young son of the wealthy powerful and highly controversial joseph p kennedy former american ambassador to britain.
he premised his campaign he said on the single assumption that the american people are uneasy at the present drift in our national course but his appealing public image was at least as important as his political positions in attracting popular support.
kennedy regularly appeared on television talk shows before and during his run for president and his appearances helped comfort the american people despite his perceived weaknesses as a presidential candidate.
he overcame doubts about his youth he turned forty three in 1960 and religion he was catholic to win with a tiny plurality of the popular vote 49 7 percent to nixons 49 6 percent and only a slightly more comfortable electoral majority 303 to 219.
the turbulent sixties 709 27 13 25 7 1 8 12 candidate party john f kennedy democratic richard m nixon republican harry f byrd dixiecrat other candidates prohibition socialist labor constitution socialist workers states rights electoral vote popular vote 34 227 096 49 7 34 108 546 49 6 501 643 0 7 197 029 64 of electorate voting the election of 1960 the election of 1960 was in the popular vote at least one of the closest in american history.
john kennedys margin over richard nixon was less than one third of 1 percent of the total national vote but greater in the electoral college.
note the distribution of electoral strength of the two candidates.
kennedy was strong in the industrial northeast and the largest industrial states of the midwest and he retained at least a portion of his partys traditional strength in the south and southwest.
but nixon made significant inroads into the upper south carried florida and swept most of the plains and mountain states.
what was the significance of this distribution of strength to the future of the two parties.
kennedy had campaigned promising a set of domestic reforms he described as the new frontier but his thin popular mandate and a congress dominated by a coalition of republicans and conservative democrats frustrated many of his hopes.
kennedy did manage to win approval of tariff reductions his administration had negotiated and he began to build a legislative agenda including a call for a significant tax cut to promote economic growth.
more than any other president of the century except perhaps the two roosevelts and later ronald reagan kennedy made his own personality an integral kennedy assassination part of his presidency and a central focus of national attention.
nothing illustrated that more clearly than the popular reaction to the tragedy of november 22 1963 in texas with his wife and vice president lyndon johnson for a series of political appearances as the presidential motorcade rode slowly through the streets of dallas shots rang out.
two bullets struck the president one in the throat the other in the head.
he was sped to a nearby hospital where minutes later he was pronounced dead.
lee harvey oswald a young man who had spent time in the soviet union and later in cuba was arrested for 710 chapter 30 attention to sexual discrimination.
also in 1963 the kennedy administration helped win passage of the equal pay act which barred the pervasive practice of paying women less than men for the same work in some fields.
a year later congress incorporated into the civil rights act of 1964 an amendment title vii that extended to women many of the same legal protections against discrimination that were being extended to african americans and other minorities.
in 1966 friedan joined with other feminists to create the national organization for now women now which was to become the nations largest and most influential feminist organization.
now responded to the complaints of women by demanding greater educational opportunities for women and denouncing the domestic ideal and the traditional concept of marriage.
but the heart of the movement was an effort to address the needs of women in the workplace.
womens liberation by the late 1960s new and more radical feminist demands were also attracting a large following especially among younger white educated women.
many of them drew inspiration from the new left and the counterculture.
some were involved in the civil rights movement others in the antiwar crusade.
many had found that even within those movements they faced discrimination and exclusion and were subordinated to male leaders.
in its most radical form the new feminism rejected the whole notion of marriage family and even heterosexual relationships a vehicle some women claimed of male domination.
few women embraced such extremes.
but by the early 1970s large numbers of women were coming to see themselves as an exploited group banding together against oppression and developing a culture of their own.
in cities and towns across the country feminists opened womens bookstores bars and coffee shops.
they founded feminist newspapers and magazines.
they created womens health clinics centers to assist victims of rape and abuse day care centers and particularly after 1973 abortion clinics.
expanding achievements in 1971 the government extended its affirmative action guidelines to include women linking sexism with racism as an officially acknowledged social problem.
women made rapid progress in the meantime in their efforts to move into the economic and political mainstream.
the nations all male educational institutions began to crack open their doors to women.
princeton and yale did so in 1969 and many others soon did the same.
in 1972 congress approved legislation known as title ix requiring universities to support male and female athletic programs at equal levels.
women were also becoming an important force in business and the professions.
nearly half of all married women held jobs by the mid 1970s and almost 90 percent of all women with college degrees worked.
the two career family in which both the husband and the wife maintained active professional lives slowly became a widely accepted middle class norm.
it had been common within much of the working class for decades.
there were also important symbolic changes such as the refusal of many women to adopt their husbands surnames when they married and the use of the term ms in place of mrs or miss to signal the irrelevance of a womans marital status in the professional world.
by the mid 1980s women were serving in both houses of congress on the supreme court in numerous federal cabinet positions as governors of several states and in many the crisis of authority 747 other political positions.
in 1981 ronald reagan named the first female supreme court justice sandra day oconnor in 1993 bill clinton named the second ruth bader ginsburg.
in 1984 the democratic party chose a woman representative women in government geraldine ferraro of new york as its vice presidential candidate.
madeleine albright under clinton and condoleezza rice under george w bush became the first women to serve as secretary of state.
and in 2008 hillary clinton nearly became the democratic candidate for president.
she too became secretary of state in the obama administration.
in academia women were expanding their presence in traditional scholarly fields they were also creating new fields womens and gender studies which in the 1980s and 1990s were among the fastest growing areas of american scholarship.
in 1972 congress approved the equal rights amendment era to the constitution and sent it to the states.
for a while ratification seemed almost the equal rights amendment certain.
by the late 1970s however the momentum behind the amendment had died because of a rising chorus of objections to it from people including many antifeminist women who feared that it would disrupt traditional social patterns.
in 1982 the ten years allotted for ratification expired.
the abortion issue a major goal of american feminism since the 1920s has been the effort by women to win greater control of their own sexual and reproductive lives.
in its least controversial form this impulse helped produce an increasing awareness beginning in the 1970s of the problems of rape sexual abuse and domestic abuse.
the dissemination of contraceptives and birth control information became more widespread and less controversial than it had been earlier in the century.
a related issue however stimulated as much popular controversy as any question of its time abortion.
abortion had once been legal in much of the united states but by the beginning of the twentieth century it was banned by statute in most of the country and remained so into the 1960s although many abortions continued to be performed quietly and often dangerously out of sight of the law.
the womens movement created strong new pressures for the legalization of abortion.
several states had abandoned restrictions on abortion by the end of the 1960s.
and in 1973 the supreme courts decision in roe v wade roe v wade based on an implied but not specified right to privacy first protected by the court only a few years earlier in griswold v connecticut invalidated all laws prohibiting abortion during the first trimester the first three months of pregnancy.
but even then the issue remained far from settled.
environmentalism in a turbulent society like feminism environmentalism entered the 1960s with a long history but relatively little public support.
also like feminism environmentalism profited from the turbulence of the era and emerged by the 1970s as a powerful force in american life.
the rise of this new movement was in part a result of the intensifying level of environmental degradation in advanced industrial societies of the late twentieth century.
it was a result too of the growth of ecology a science that provided environmentalists with new and powerful arguments.
748 chapter 30 president nixons 1972 visit to china was an important step in normalizing relations between the united states and the peoples republic of china.
here nixon toasts the developing relationship with prime minister zhou enlai.
universal images group getty images nixon in china nations admitted the communist government of china and expelled the representatives of the taiwan regime.
finally in february 1972 nixon paid a formal visit to china.
it erased much of the deep animosity between the united states and the chinese communists.
nixon did not yet formally recognize the communist regime but in 1972 the united states and china began low level diplomatic relations.
the initiatives in china coincided with an effort by the nixon administration to improve relations with the soviet union an initiative known by the french word dtente.
in 1971 american and soviet diplomats produced the first strategic arms limitation treaty salt i which froze the arsenals of some nuclear missiles icbms on both sides at present levels.
in may of that year the president traveled to moscow to sign the agreement.
the next year the soviet premier leonid brezhnev visited washington.
dealing with the third world the policies of rapprochement with communist china and dtente with the soviet union reflected nixons and kissingers belief in the importance of stable relationships among the great powers.
but as americas experience in vietnam already illustrated the socalled third world remained the most volatile and dangerous source of international tension.
since the end of world war i the united states and the european powers had lost or withdrawn control over former colonies.
the result was a number of newly independent but economically fragile and politically unstable nations around the globe.
see america in the world the end of colonialism the nixon kissinger policy toward the third world tried to maintain the status quo without involving the united states too deeply in local disputes.
in 1969 and 1970 the nixon doctrine president described what became known as the nixon doctrine by which the united states would participate in the defense and development of allies and friends the crisis of authority 755 but would leave the basic responsibility for the future of those friends to the nations themselves.
in practice the nixon doctrine meant a declining american interest in contributing to third world development.
there was also a growing contempt for the united nations where underdeveloped nations were gaining influence through their sheer numbers.
and there was increasing american support for authoritarian regimes attempting to withstand radical challenges from within.
in 1970 for example the cia poured substantial funds into chile to help support the government against a communist challenge.
when the marxist candidate for president salvador allende came to power through an open election despite allende overthrown american efforts the united states began funneling more money to opposition forces in chile to help destabilize the new government.
in 1973 a military junta seized power from allende who was subsequently murdered.
the united states developed a friendly relationship with the new repressive military government of general augusto pinochet.
in the middle east conditions grew more volatile in the aftermath of a 1967 war in which israel had occupied substantial new territories dislodging many palestinian arabs from their homes.
the refugees were a source of considerable instability in jordan lebanon and the other surrounding countries into which they moved.
in october 1973 on the jewish high holy day of yom kippur egyptian and syrian forces attacked israel.
for ten days the israelis struggled to recover from the surprise attack finally they launched an effective counteroffensive against egyptian forces in the sinai.
at that point the united states intervened placing heavy pressure on israel to accept a cease fire rather than press its advantage.
the yom kippur war demonstrated the growing dependence of the united states and its allies on arab oil.
a brief but painful embargo in 1973 1974 by the arab members of the organization of the petroleum exporting companies opec against opec embargo the united states and other allies that supported israel provided an ominous warning of the costs of dependence on foreign oil.
it also prompted congress to pass fuel economy standards requiring automakers to raise average mileage from 13 5 miles per gallon to 27.
the standard has since been raised to 54 5 mpg by 2025.
politics and economics in the nixon years nixon ran for president in 1968 promising a return to more conservative social and economic policies and a restoration of law and order.
once he was in office however his domestic policies sometimes continued and even expanded the liberal initiatives of the previous two administrations.
domestic initiatives many of nixons domestic policies were a response to what he believed to be the demands of his constituency the silent majority of conservative mostly silent majority middle class people who he believed wanted to reduce federal interference in local affairs.
he tried unsuccessfully to persuade congress to pass legislation prohibiting school desegregation through the use of forced busing.
he forbade the department of health education and welfare now called the department of health and human services to cut off federal funds from school districts that had failed to comply with court america in the world the end of colonialism on july 4 1946 less than a year after the close of world war ii a ceremony in manila marked what senator millard tydings of maryland called one of the most unprecedented most idealistic and most far reaching events in all recorded history on that day the united states voluntarily ended nearly five decades of colonial control of the philippines which it had acquired as part of the spoils from the 1898 spanish american war.
philippine independence was only a small part of a dramatic change in the political structure of the world.
the close of world war ii marked not only the defeat of fascism in germany italy and japan but also the beginning of the end of the formal system of imperialism that european powers had maintained for centuries.
the repudiation of colonialism was driven in part by the heightened belief in democracy and self determination that the war helped strengthen through much of the world.
it was also driven by the weakness of the european powers after world war ii and their inability to sustain control over their increasingly restive colonies.
like most great geopolitical changes the drive for colonial independence was turbulent and often violent.
the united states had been a latecomer to the imperialist system.
but even its peaceful divestiture of the philippines reflected the challenges many imperial powers and postcolonial nations faced in renegotiating colonial relationships.
america was not quite as ready to cede military presence and economic influence in the region as it was to give up political responsibility over the islands.
philippine independence came with important caveats that the united states maintained control of fillipino military bases and that required through the bell trade act passed by congress in 1946 that the philippines not engage in any direct economic competition with the united states and that it revise its constitution to allow american interests free and unfettered access to the nations natural resources.
many filipinos argue that their nation did not achieve full independence until 1991 when the philippine senate refused to ratify a treaty that would have extended the american lease on the subic bay naval base once the largest u s navy installation in the pacific.
a year later the united states closed the base and left marking the first time in 400 years that the philippines once a spanish possession was not home to a foreign military power.
englands imperial holdings were the vastest in the world and the existence of the british empire was deeply embedded in englands economic life and national self image.
but it too withdrew from most of its colonies in the decades after world war ii beginning in 1947 with its largest and most important colony india.
the british raj as the colonial government was known withdrew from south asia in response to a growing independence movement on the subcontinent.
as often happened as colonial rule ended suppressed conflicts in the native population quickly emerged in the case of india between hindus and muslims.
the price of indian independence therefore was the partition of the country into india and pakistan and several decades later bangladesh.
a year later the british gave up its world war i mandate of palestine ceding the territory to the united nations and allowing for the creation of israel as well as many of its holdings in southeast asia including burma and ceylon.
malaya followed in 1957 and singapore in 1965 in 1982 england passed the canada act effectively severing canada from the united kingdom and culminating a move toward full canadian self government that had begun several d ecades earlier.
in 1997 england returned one of its last important overseas territories hong kong to the control of china bringing nearly to an end the era of the british empire.
the dissolution of the british empire did not always proceed smoothly.
the suez crisis of 1956 in which the combined efforts of britain france and israel failed to halt egypts nationalization of the suez canal dealt a decisive blow to englands status as a major power in the middle east.
in 1982 englands dispute over the tiny falkland islands erupted into war with argentina which claimed the islands just off its coast as its own.
after the deaths of 258 english and 649 argentine soldiers england maintained its control of the falklands although argentina continues to assert its right to the islands.
despite these controversies the dissolution of the british empire proceeded relatively smoothly compared to the experience of the french who became engaged in several major conflicts after 1945 in late 1946 vietnamese nationalists rose up against the french colonial government that had recently reoccupied the region after the defeat of japan in world war ii.
frances effort to return to vietnam culminated ultimately in its defeat at dien bien phu in 1954 and its subsequent withdrawal from indochina.
france also became embroiled in and tried to suppress by force a number of other violent colonial uprisings in madagascar cameroon and most notably algeria.
the algerian war 1954 1962 was a particularly bloody and costly conflict taking on aspects of a civil war and involving guerrilla warfare torture acts of terrorism and eventually the collapse of the french government in 1958 algeria ultimately won its independence.
the end of the colonial system had its greatest impact on africa.
european powers had carved up almost all of sub saharan africa in the nineteenth century.
in the decades after world war ii almost all the african colonies won their independence even if not always easily morocco 1956 ghana 1957 the congo 1960 nigeria 1960 uganda 1962 kenya 1963 and gambia 1965.
african nationalism was troubled for decades by political instability and in some countries extreme poverty.
the caribbean also saw many new independent nations born in the postwar era including jamaica 1961 trinidad and tobago 1962 barbados 1966 and guyana 1966.
the most recent epicenter of independence movements has been in the lands that used to comprise the former soviet union.
a long and costly war in afghanistan began in the 1970s as the soviet union struggled to retain control of the nation in the face of powerful local insurgencies.
the war was one of the principal factors in the unraveling of the soviet empire that began in 1991 many of the former soviet republics which considered themselves colonies of russia soon separated from russia and became independent nations.
these included estonia latvia and lithuania the formerly independent baltic nations seized by the soviet union during world war ii.
other former soviet possessions that became independent nations included ukraine moldavia armenia georgia azerbaijan kazakhstan uzbekistan tajikistan and turkmenistan.
russia continues to deal with the problems of empire.
a vicious conflict with chechnya an islamic area of russia insisting on independence created terror and instability for years.
the end of colonialism was one of the most epochal global changes of the last several centuries a change that brought to an end a system that was based on the assumption of european and american superiority over non western peoples.
despite the many problems new postcolonial nations have encountered since their independence few if any such nations would choose to become colonies again.
although formal colonialism came to an end in the post world war ii era other aspects of imperialism did not.
many former colonies which comprise much of the nonindustrialized world still struggle with the indirect exercise of economic power that wealthy western nations continue to exert over them.
understand analyze evaluate 1 how did the experience of world war ii contribute to the end of colonialism.
2 what have been the effects of colonialism and the end of colonialism on africa.
why have the effects been so pronounced on that continent more so than in other areas of the world.
758 chapter 32 roads airports and other projects that they claimed would be ecologically dangerous taking advantage of new legislation protecting endangered species and environmentally fragile regions.
in the late 1980s the environmental movement began to mobilize around a new and ominous challenge global warming it produced a steady rise in the earths temperature as a result of emissions from the burning of fossil fuels most notably coal and oil.
although considerable controversy has continued for years over the pace and even the reality of global warming by the early twenty first century a growing consensus began to emerge in part as a result of the leadership of significant public figures such as former vice president al gore who won a nobel peace prize in 2007 for his efforts to draw attention to the problem.
in 1997 representatives of the major industrial nations met in kyoto japan and agreed to a broad treaty establishing steps toward reducing carbon emissions and thus slowing or reversing global warming.
the clinton administration formally signed the kyoto protocol but nothing came of it.
reading the handkyoto protocol writing on the wall clinton never even submitted it for ratification because the senate had earlier passed the byrd hagel resolution by a vote of 95 to 0 that rejected the treatys key tenets.
president george w bush while proclaiming grave concern over climate concern refused to support the kyoto protocol because it excluded developing countries like china and india.
since 2009 president obama has met with mixed success on climate change issues.
while major international agreements have not materialized during his presidency the president did champion and sign legislation raising fuel efficiency in passenger cars and trucks in 2012 and has since directed the environmental protection agency to regulate coal ash a major co2 emitter primarily used in creating electricity to intense political scrutiny.
deepwater horizon disaster in 2010 a bp british petroleum offshore well deepwater horizon suffered a crippling explosion that sent approximately 5 million barrels of oil into the gulf of mexico.
this photograph shows the attempt to cap the well.
the oil leaked for months destroying local fisheries and the effects to the environment from the oil and the dispersants used to clean it up are still unknown.
the event galvanized the global environmental movement.
julie dermansky corbis the age of globalization 815 america in the world the celebration of the beginning of a new millennium on january 1 2000 was an important moment not just because of the change in the calendar.
it was notable above all as a global event a shared and for the most part joyous experience that united the world in its exuberance.
but if the millennium celebrations suggested the bright promise of an interconnected world other events at the dawn of the new century suggested its dark perils.
indeed the united states increasing role as an economic and military superpower triggered fears among many americans about a foreign policy that was too aggressive and trade initiatives that took advantage of low wage workers in other countries and unfairly benefited large international businesses.
the rise of mass protests over americas global economic policies and terrorism painfully brought home the dangers of living in the twenty first century.
opposing the new world order in the united states and other industrial nations opposition to globalization or to what president george h w bush once called the new world order took several forms.
to many americans on both the political left and right the nations increasingly interventionist foreign policy was deeply troubling.
critics on the left charged that the united states was using military action to advance its economic interests in the 1991 gulf war and above all in the iraq war that began in 2003 critics on the right criticized humanitarian interventions in somalia in 1993 and the balkans in the late 1990s as too costly and risky.
others complained that the united states was ceding its sovereignty to international organizations such as united nations led peacekeeping missions.
labor unions insisted that the rapid expansion of free trade agreements led to the export of jobs from advanced nations to less developed ones.
other groups attacked working conditions in new manufacturing countries on humanitarian grounds arguing that the global economy was creating new classes of slave laborers working in conditions that few western nations would tolerate.
environmentalists argued that globalization in exporting industry to low wage countries also exported industrial pollution and toxic waste into nations that had no effective laws to control them and contributed significantly to global warming.
and still others opposed global economic arrangements on the grounds that they enriched and empowered large multinational corporations and threatened the freedom and autonomy of individuals and communities.
varied opponents of globalization found a common enemy in the multinational institutions that policed and advanced the global economy.
among them were the world trade organization which monitored the enforcement of the general agreement on tariffs and trade gatt treaties of the 1990s the international monetary fund imf which controlled international credit and exchange rates and the world bank which made money available for development projects in many countries.
in november 1999 when leaders of leading industrial nations gathered for their annual meeting in seattle washington tens of thousands protested most of them peacefully.
but some of them clashed with police smashed store windows and all but paralyzed the city.
a few months later a smaller but still substantial demonstration disrupted meetings of the imf and the world bank in washington d c and in july 2001 at a meeting of the same leaders in genoa italy an estimated 50 000 demonstrators clashed violently with police in a melee that left one protester dead and several hundred injured.
the participants in the meeting responded to the demonstrations by pledging 1 2 billion to fight the aids epidemic in developing countries and by deciding to hold future meetings in remote locations far from major cities.

chapter 1 1 15 central square of mexico city spanish urban planners sought to project imperial power onto the colonial landscape.
in this painting of the town square in mexico city the buildings most closely identified with church and state the cathedral and the headquarters of the government tower over the central plaza.
people in motion the atlantic world to 1590 much of the economy of new spain was based on a highly exploitive system of labor.
ensuring an adequate labor supply for the arduous mining and agricultural work became a top economic priority of spanish colonial officials.
rather than enslave the inhabitants of central and south america as they had done to the native peoples in the caribbean islands the spanish developed a system of forced labor the encomienda that was only marginally less exploitive than slavery itself.
the crown declared indians vassals who owed their labor to noblemen who in turn were required to provide for the indians spiritual welfare.
the system provided labor and in theory demonstrated the spanish commitment to saving the souls of the indians by converting them.
in reality it led to what types of labor systems were employed in the spanish colonies.
the brutal exploitation of indians.
criticism of the system by religious reformers such as las casas combined with high mortality among the indigenous population which easily succumbed to diseases brought by the spanish eventually led to the use of other types of labor including conscript enrolled by compulsion labor wage labor and slavery.
fishing and furs frances north atlantic empire in 1493 the pope had settled a colonial dispute between spain and portugal by dividing the atlantic world between them a decision later ratified by a treaty between both countries in 1494 france view the map spanish america to 1610 european colonization of the atlantic world rejected the authority of the treaty and sent fleets to take advantage of the abundant cod fisheries in the waters off what is now newfoundland.
in 1524 france dispatched giovanni da verrazano an italian mariner working for the king of france to find the so called northwest passage that would allow ships to sail through the waterways of the americas to asia.
although verrazano failed to find such a route it did not exist his mapping of the north american coast aroused the interest of the french monarch who decided to commit additional resources for further exploration of north america.
in the 1530s french explorer jacques cartier made a more extensive and detailed investigation of the north atlantic eventually traveling up the st lawrence river where he encountered a group of micmac indians an algonquian speaking eastern woodlands indian nation.
their offer of furs in exchange for european goods such as 1 16 two europeans show a religious painting to a group of native americans this image from an early french traveler account of new france underscores the way in which images were used to help indians understand christianity.
knives kettles and beads led the french to recognize the potential of furs as a lucrative commodity.
furs could be sold to europeans who valued their warmth and treated them as a high status luxury item.
in 1604 the french established port royal in nova scotia and four years later founded the city of quebec now the capital of the province of quebec on the banks of the st lawrence river.
located on a high ridge at a strategic bend in the river quebec was well placed to allow the french to trade with the local indians who were skilled fur trappers.
the beaver pelts traded to the french fetched a good price in the european markets.
the french encounter with native americans differed from that of the spanish and portuguese in three significant ways.
first the relatively small size of the settlement in new france and the dependence of the french on indians to provide furs necessitated maintaining good relations with local tribes.
second the predominantly male french population intermarried with local indians.
eventually the french government even encouraged intermarriage believing it would lead to the gradual assimilation of the indian population into the french culture of new france.
third the french like the spanish were committed to converting the indians to their catholic faith but rather than trying to impose catholicism by force french jesuit missionaries lived among indians and learned their languages and customs.
the french jesuits were just as eager as the spanish to convert the indians but they recognized the need to understand the culture of those they wished to convert.
the french also took advantage of religious art and images to help convert the indians.
this early account of life in new france includes an image that shows how religious painting was used to introduce indians to christian ideas 1 16.
what were the most important differences between new france and new spain.
chapter review aztec empire becomes dominant power in mesoamerica print revolution transforms the way knowledge is organized and spread founding of spanish empire in what is now mexico henry becomes the leader of a new english church review questions 1 what were the chief advantages of fixed agriculture and how did it contribute to the rise of more complex civilizations.
2 how did new technology affect european overseas expansion in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
4 what role did food and animals play in the columbian exchange.
5 compare the impact of spanish french and english approaches to colonization on the indigenous populations of the americas.
3 what were the most important ideas associated with the renaissance.
key terms paleo indians the name given by scientists to the first inhabitants of the americas an ice age people who survived largely by hunting big game and to a lesser extent by fishing and collecting edible plants.
archaic era period beginning approximately 9 000 years ago lasting an estimated 6 000 years.
it was marked by more intensive efforts by ancient societies to shape the environment to enhance food production.
aztec led by the mexica tribe the aztec created a powerful empire whose capital the great city of tenochtitln was built on an island in lake texcoco in 1325 ce.
capitalism an economic system in which the market economy determines the prices of goods and services.
humanists individuals who advocated a revival of ancient learning particularly ancient greek and roman thought and encouraged greater attention to secular topics including a new emphasis on the study of humanity.
reformation the movement for religious reform started by martin luther.
spanish inquisition a tribunal devoted to finding and punishing heresy and rooting out spains jews and muslims.
columbian exchange the term used by modern scholars to describe the biological encounter between the two sides of the atlantic including the movement of plants animals and diseases.
plantation an english settlement or fortified outpost in a foreign land dedicated to producing agricultural products for export.
later the term would become synonymous with a distinctive slave based labor system used in much of the atlantic world.
privateer a form of state sponsored piracy usually directed against spanish treasure fleets returning from the americas.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 go and see the forts our french father has created and you will see that the land beneath their walls is still hunting ground.
whilst the english on the contrary no sooner get possession of a country than the game is forced to leave the trees fall down before them the earth becomes bare contemporary indian account of the french and english settlement late eighteenth century to a french colonial official the different views of paternal authority in their respective cultures when you command all the french obey and go to war.
but i shall not be heeded and obeyed by my nation in such a manner although a gulf continued to exist between the two cultures intermarriage between french traders and indian women nevertheless promoted cultural exchange and mutual understanding.
the expansion of british settlement beyond the appalachian mountains threatened the middle ground created in the great lakes region.
rather than seek to preserve a middle ground the british hoped to incorporate this region into their colonial empire.
as had been true for so much of british colonization the idea was to eliminate indigenous populations transplant british agricultural practices and establish permanent settlements.
the struggle for north america the great military powers of atlantic europe britain france and spain remained locked in a struggle for political supremacy.
in 1739 european conflicts once more spilled over into north america when britain again went to war this time with spain.
british ships smuggled goods into spanish america depriving spain of valuable trade and tax revenues.
spain responded by capturing british ships seizing their crews and cargos.
british outrage over spanish policy reached a critical moment when captain robert jenkins testified before parliament that after capturing his ship the spanish placed him in custody and cut off his ear as punishment for his alleged smuggling.
jenkins presented his ear in a pickle jar to an outraged parliament.
the resulting conflict between britain and spain was dubbed the war of jenkins ear 1739 1748.
why did british expansion threaten the middle ground.
king georges war 1744 1748 a conflict in which france joined with spain against britain and the american colonies soon overshadowed the war of jenkins ear.
the most important military victory from the colonists point of view occurred at louisbourg where new englands militias achieved a stunning triumph over the french and seized the mighty fortress on cape breton island that guarded atlantic access to the gulf of st lawrence and french canada.
although the fortress was returned to the french as part of the peace treaty ending the conflict the victory became a source of colonial pride.
the conflict between france and britain occurred during a period when colonists were particularly eager to settle in the ohio valley a region controlled by the french.
the formation of the ohio company of virginia in 1747 facilitated the exploration and settlement of this region a development that prompted the french to solidify their hold on it by establishing a string of forts 3 19.
the most important of these was fort duquesne erected at a fork in the ohio river at what is now pittsburgh.
in 1754 the royal governor of virginia dispatched militiamen under the command of an ambitious young officer george washington to seize the strategic fort.
overwhelmed by french and indian warriors washington was forced to surrender.
washingtons defeat proved to be only the first skirmish in a protracted battle to control the ohio territory.
in 1755 the british dispatched general edward braddock with a larger force comprising british regular troops and colonial volunteers again including washington to take fort duquesne.
the french and their indian allies routed braddocks forces.
washington escaped but braddock was killed and his troops suffered a 70 percent casualty rate.
it was a shocking and ignominious defeat for the british and their colonial allies.
view the closer look european claims in north america 1750 and 1763 war and the contest over empire gulf of cape st lawrence breton is.
louisbourg france n ova scotia r new en halifax s t.
l aw r quebec e c port royal montreal cticut r lake champlain portsmouth conne crown point ft frontenac ft ticonderoga ft oswego ft william rio nta henry eo lak albany ft niagara atlantic ocean rie e ke boston ft presque isle la new york ft venango french settlements british settlements ft duquesne philadelphia ft cumberland british victories french forts williamsburg british forts 3 19 british conquest of new france the british and french battled one another across a huge arc of territory fighting pivotal battles at louisbourg quebec and montreal.
li ttl e ka oh land claimed by the ohio company of virginia french victories na wh io r ar.
ft necessity iroquois settlements the final phase of the great war for empire the seven years war what came to be known as the french and indian war in the american colonies lasted from 1756 to 1763 in england william pitt the ambitious secretary of state appointed by george ii to oversee the war effort believed that the balance of power in europe hinged on control of america.
in 1758 the british embarked on a bold new policy to root out the french and make a direct assault on the strongholds of quebec city and montreal.
pitt promoted young talented officers including jeffery amherst and james wolfe to lead the campaign against canada.
an army of 10 000 regulars and a sizeable fleet were dispatched to north america.
defeating the french also meant taking on their indian allies as well so the conflict was known as the french and indian war.
the british suffered an early setback when the french general louis de montcalm seized fort william henry on lake george in northern new york.
although montcalm had negotiated a traditional surrender that allowed the british to retreat honorably his indian allies refused to accept these terms and sought scalps and other trophies of war.
the massacre of fort william henry alienated montcalm from his indian allies and stiffened the resolve of both the british and the colonists to defeat the french.
british fortunes began to turn when jeffery amherst captured louisbourg again in 1758 a year later british forces captured the city of quebec.
general wolfe the british commander searched for a weakness in the citys formidable defenses and finally settled on a daring attack.
wolfe approached the city from its poorly guarded rear flank.
rather than risk a frontal assault on the heavily fortified city wolfes men scaled the heights behind the city and overpowered the small detachment of troops guarding the cliffs.
in the battle that followed wolfe and montcalm were both killed.
pennsylvania painter benjamin west commemorated the assault on quebec in the death of general wolfe 1771 3 20.
west shows the dying general cradled in the arms of one of his officers.
contemporary viewers would have recognized this arrangement from european painting and sculpture the pieta or the image of the dead jesus sprawled across the virgin marys lap after the crucifixion.
to heighten the drama in wests painting a british soldier runs toward the dying wolfe with what was william pitts new policy for north america.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 states in congress assembled because fighting the british was the top priority congress cobbled together the articles of confederation without providing many features that the individual states had included in their constitutions.
fear of british style government also shaped the minds of congress.
having just cast off a powerful central government with a king the articles abandoned the idea of a single unified executive to enforce the law.
nor did congress have the power to tax another power that the british had abused.
the articles created a weak government whose ability to raise revenue engage in military actions and conduct diplomacy depended entirely on the goodwill of the states.
african americans struggle for freedom the great english literary figure dr samuel johnson pointed out the hypocrisy of americans claiming to be champions of liberty while enslaving africans.
some slaves invoked the ideas of the revolution explicitly whereas others voted with their feet and freed themselves.
the dislocations associated with americas dr samuel johnson 1775 war for independence provided opportunities for african americans to escape bondage.
for some fleeing to the british provided the best chance for freedom.
other slaves seized on the ideas nurtured by the broader revolutionary changes that accompanied the war for independence.
the ideas of liberty and equality intensified the burgeoning movement for the abolition of slavery.
although the revolution did not eradicate slavery it did put it on the road to extinction in new england and the mid atlantic regions.
slaves eager to cast off their own shackles appropriated the revolutions language of liberty.
during the stamp act protests in south carolina 1765 slaves staged their own parade chanting liberty white south carolinians viewed such activities as evidence of a plan for rebellion.
to thwart the imagined threat they mobilized the militia which also served as slave patrols.
blacks in new england fared better when they invoked the revolutions ideals than did blacks in the south.
in 1773 1774 and 1777 slaves petitioned the government of massachusetts for their freedom using the language of the declaration of independence including the idea of natural rights and the notion that government rested how is it that we hear the loudest yelps for liberty among the drivers of negroes what was the impact of the american revolution on the institution of slavery.
on the consent of the governed.
they asserted we have in common with all other men a naturel right to our freedoms without being deprivd of them by our fellow men less than a decade later another slave mum bett successfully sued for her freedom.
a jury in western massachusetts based its verdict on the language of the states declaration of rights which stated that all men are born free and equal and have certain natural essential and unalienable rights among which may be reckoned the right of enjoying and defending their lives and liberties mum bett changed her name to elizabeth freeman worked as a housekeeper for the lawyer who defended her and became a respected midwife and nurse.
citing this precedent the states highest court abolished slavery in massachusetts in the 1780s.
new england went further than any other region in its support for the abolition of slavery.
vermonts 1777 constitution expressly prohibited slavery the first constitution in the nation to take such a step.
in the mid atlantic pennsylvania and new york adopted gradual emancipation laws.
the american revolution in indian country the struggle between britain and the american colonies had enormous consequences for american indians.
although neutrality appealed to many indians avoiding entanglement in the conflict between britain and america became impossible.
faced with the need to make a choice many indian nations sided with britain whose colonial policies including the proclamation of 1763 had blocked american westward expansion.
an american victory would mean more settlers streaming into indian country and destruction of the habitats that indians depended on for their survival.
the declaration of independence had underscored americas deep seated fear and hostility toward indians.
among the complaints jefferson leveled against the king was he has excited domestic insurrections amongst us and has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless indian savages whose known rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages sexes and conditions jeffersons description of indians as savages engaged in acts of barbarism rallied americans against the british.
one event that whipped up anti indian feelings among americans was the murder of jane mccrea read the document slave petition to the governor of massachusetts 1774 the radicalism of the american revolution in upstate new york by mohawk indians.
jane was traveling to meet her fianc a british soldier when probritish mohawks attacked her.
mccreas political sympathies did not prevent her from becoming a martyr for the patriot cause.
colonial newspapers lamented her fate which was also memorialized in poetry.
in 1780 a novel about her demise appeared and the painter john trumbull made several sketches of mccreas murder for a possible painting before moving on to other projects.
joel barlow a close friend of jefferson and important literary figure in early america memorialized the event in one of his poems and john vanderlyn portrayed the event in this dramatic painting 4 16 which was displayed in 1804 vanderlyns representation of the light skinned mccrea and the dark skinned indians underscores the role of the painting as a morality tale between good and evil.
the indians are depicted as cruel savages about to murder mccrea.
pro british tribes scored notable victories on the western frontier during 1782 after these successes many indians were stunned to learn that the british had surrendered at yorktown.
indians were excluded from the negotiations that ended the war.
many viewed the treaty of paris 1783 which ceded indian country between the appalachians and the mississippi river to america as a betrayal.
and virtuous american patriots whose names brutus and honestus signified their commitment to ancient roman republican virtue.
women also served in the war effort.
when mustered into service the militia often depended on support from women.
an eyewitness to such a mobilization in cambridge massachusetts in 1774 noted that women surpassed the men for eagerness spirit in the defense of liberty by arms women not only provided moral support animating their husbands sons to fight for their liberties but also helped making cartridges some women became molly pitchers who hauled water and carried supplies to soldiers.
deborah sampson disguised herself as a man and served in the continental army.
a physician discovered sampson while treating her for fever.
the continental army also had camp followers women including the wives of soldiers who washed cooked nursed and tended to other needs of soldiers.
the revolutions emphasis on liberty and equality boosted notions of gender equality.
abigail adams wife of john adams demanded that her husband remember the ladies and work toward greater legal equality for women see competing 4 16 death of jane mccrea john vanderlyn painted this scene decades after the event occurred.
he took liberties with history.
mccreas fianc the military figure rushing to rescue her circled in red wears the blue uniform of a continental soldier.
in reality mccrea was a loyalist and her fianc a british regular.
libertys daughters women and the revolutionary movement women took an active role in the revolutionary cause.
one of the most outspoken female patriots was mercy otis warren wife of patriot leader james warren and sister of james otis.
warrens gifts as a poet playwright and eventually historian allowed her to champion the american cause in literary endeavors.
her satirical plays mocked british policy and leading british politicians and military figures.
the fictional names of the characters in her plays communicated warrens disdain for the british.
her scathing satire mocked the actions of general hateall secretary of state dupe and governor rapatio.
these sinister plotters against american liberty were matched by talented why did so many indians side with the british during the american revolution.
chapter review thomas paine publishes common sense jane mccrea murdered by mohawk indians massachusetts constitution defeat of cornwallis at yorktown paine states the case for american independence in a pamphlet that becomes an instant best seller the murder becomes a rallying cry for americans against british treachery massachusetts introduces a range of legal innovations including the idea of special ratification conventions to approve its constitution american and french forces defeat british army at yorktown ending the revolutionary war declaration of independence american colonies declare independence pennsylvania declaration of rights and constitution pennsylvania constitution adopts simple democratic scheme of government myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of revolutionary america.
questions for analysis 1 why did colonists believe parliament could regulate trade but not tax them without representation.
other resources from this chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 george iii had no right whatever to grant away to the states of america their rights or properties without a manifest breach of all justice and equity given the absence of indian representation in the treaty that ended hostilities between the united states and britain it is hardly surprising that the interests of indian peoples were not reflected in the final terms.
the treaty of paris ceded the entire old northwest territory to the united states.
american diplomats were not sympathetic to the claims of indians.
operating under a theory of conquest in which indians were a subdued people american negotiators assumed that defeated tribes had to relinquish all claims to western lands.
rejecting this view indians organized to resist incursions.
rather than mark the start of an era of peace the period after the revolution was one of continued conflict between indians and americans.
those tribes that were best organized politically and militarily were better able to defend their interests against american expansionism.
the indian population east of the mississippi numbered between 150 000 and 200 000 and was divided into 85 different nations.
the white population of the new united states was approximately 2 4 million.
pressure to open up indian lands for white settlement created conflict.
indians had no illusions about the goal of american policy.
the insatiable desire for indian land led the creeks to bestow the name ecunnaunuxulgee on georgians people greedily grasping after the lands of red people when confronted with the determination of indians to defend their lands americans were forced to negotiate more fairly.
american leaders soon realized that missionary work and trade were more likely to secure harmonious relations than conquest and military confrontation.
by 1787 congress had shifted both its tone and strategy for dealing with indian policy.
in place of the theory of conquest congress recommended the utmost good faith in dealing with the indians.
the spanish presence in the old southwest was another threat.
navigation of the mississippi river was crucial for the economic development of this region.
goods traveling down the mississippi needed to be unloaded at new orleans and placed on ocean bound vessels.
spain denied americans free access to the mississippi and new orleans.
congress authorized secretary of foreign affairs john jay to negotiate with the spanish.
spain proposed opening its empire to trade with america if the united states renounced its claim to navigate the what was the theory of conquest and how did it influence diplomatic relations with indian peoples.
mississippi.
the terms would have been a boon to new england merchants who would have benefited from new trade opportunities with spanish america but alienated southerners particularly those in the southwest who viewed the mississippi as their pipeline to world markets.
settling the old northwest the most important achievement of the confederation period was the plan congress devised for western settlement.
a committee chaired by thomas jefferson devised the initial plan for settling the west 5 10.
this proposal imagined a rational mathematical scheme for carving out as many as 16 new states from the northwest territory.
jeffersons plan combined republican theories of self government with enlightenment ideas about geography.
boundaries would be drawn along an orderly grid after being surveyed.
reflecting his debt to classical republicanism jeffersons chose names for the new territories such as polypotamia land of many rivers republicanism guided this plan in other ways.
in his ordinance of 1784 jefferson proposed that new territories be incorporated into the union as states on an equal footing with the original thirteen.
jefferson also sought local selfgovernment for settlers almost immediately.
when the free population reached 20 000 a constitutional convention would set up a permanent state government.
the plan banned slavery after the year 1800 and recommended that land be made available in parcels small enough for average americans to purchase.
jefferson envisioned the northwest territory populated by white yeoman farmers.
the land ordinance of 1785 adopted by congress departed from jeffersons original proposal.
it called for the creation of townships of 36 square miles.
land was to be sold for no less than one dollar an acre in hard currency.
ordinary citizens would have had trouble raising this amount of cash and therefore had little chance to purchase land directly from the government.
jeffersons hope that western land could be sold directly to citizens and create a republic of small independent farmers was jettisoned in favor of a plan that favored speculators.
the northwest ordinance of 1787 was the final plan for the governance of the new territories.
this act was considerably less democratic than jeffersons original proposal but maintained life under the articles of confederation his orderly model for dividing up the territory.
governors appointed by congress would rule the northwest territories.
when the population reached 5 000 adult males settlers could elect their own territorial legislatures.
when the population reached 60 000 free inhabitants including women the territories could seek admission to the confederation.
the language of the northwest ordinance echoed the republican ideals of the revolution.
congress proclaimed that fundamental principles of civil and religious liberty were the foundation for the new states to be created from the territories.
in keeping with the republican ideas about virtue and the need for an educated citizenry the ordinance declared religion morality and knowledge being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged most important the ordinance rejected slavery in the new states to be carved out of the northwest territories.
shayss rebellion the postwar economic downturn hit farmers in massachusetts particularly hard.
as farm foreclosures increased and families saw their farms seized by their creditors frustration mounted.
revolutionary war veterans marched on the town of northampton to shut down the local courts and prevent further foreclosures.
the armed crowd prevented the judges dressed in formal judicial attire long black robes and gray wigs from entering the courthouse.
the protestors dubbed shaysites after their leader daniel shays believed they were protecting the good of the commonwealth and opposing the tyrannical government in the massachusetts state governor james bowdoin condemned the court closings as fraught with the most fatal and pernicious consequences that must tend to subvert all law and government shayss rebellion had begun.
when angry farmers in great barrington another town in western massachusetts closed their local court the governor dispatched the state militia.
one member of the crowd sympathetic to the shaysites 5 10 jeffersons plan for the west jeffersons gridlike map for the settlement of the west was influenced by the ideas of enlightenment thinkers.
the names that jefferson proposed for these territories were inspired by classical antiquity.
thus one potential state was named sylvania a forested region there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in the said territory otherwise than in the punishment of crimes whereof the party shall have been duly convicted northwest ordinance of 1787 view the closer look competing visions reactions to shayss rebellion what republican features distinguish the northwest ordinance.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 5 12 constitutional convention jeffersons observation that the framers of the constitution were an assembly of demigods is captured in thomas rossiters nineteenth century painting of the philadelphia convention.
rather than appearing in a dark conclave the members of the convention are bathed in light.
model of government that had both federal and national features.
the states would retain power but the new national government would be supreme in those areas in which it was given authority.
the virginia plan created a new government composed of a single executive the branch of government charged with among other things the execution of laws a two house legislature congress the lawmaking body and a separate judiciary courts.
the lower house of congress would be directly elected by the people and the upper house would be elected by the lower house from a list provided by the state legislatures.
under the articles of confederation small states such as maryland had the same vote as large states such as virginia.
rather than this one state one vote principle each state would have representation in proportion to its population.
the new congress would have the power to legislate in all cases to which the separate states are incompetent or in which the harmony of why did small states oppose the virginia plan.
the united states may be interrupted by the exercise of individual state legislation although this did not explicitly address nettlesome issues such as the power to tax such powers were clearly within the purview of this broad grant of authority.
the authors of the virginia plan especially james madison thought that a more general grant of authority rather than a long list of enumerated powers would be more politically acceptable to the delegates.
representatives from the small states opposed the virginia plan.
two weeks after the virginia plan was introduced william patterson of new jersey made a counterproposal often dubbed the new jersey plan.
it called for a modified federal system based on the existing articles of confederation.
it proposed a single legislature in which each state would have one vote which would maintain the parity between small and large states.
in contrast to the articles of confederation the new national legislature would be the supreme law read the document virginia or randolph plan the movement for constitutional reform of the land and would be binding on the states.
the national legislature would have the power to tax and regulate interstate commerce.
although the new jersey plan was defeated it had revealed the difficulty of reaching a consensus without accommodating the concerns of the small states which feared that the new system would give larger states inordinate influence over the new government.
the figure 5 13 shows the differences between the virginia and new jersey plans and how each differed from the articles of confederation.
although both of these plans would have given the new central government broad new powers particularly over economic matters representatives from the large and small states remained divided over how the legislature would be structured.
on june 29 1787 oliver ellsworth of connecticut reintroduced an earlier compromise that he and roger sherman also of connecticut had devised.
the plan provided for equal representation for large and small states in the upper house and a lower house in which representation would be apportioned on the basis of population.
on july 16 1787 the convention adopted the great compromise sometimes known as the connecticut compromise because of ellsworth and shermans role in framing it.
the great compromise solved one of the most difficult issues facing the convention the struggle over representation based on population versus equal representation among the states.
conflict over slavery although the connecticut compromise solved one of the most difficult problems faced by the convention it also focused attention on another equally contentious issue whether to count slaves in the apportionment of the new lower house.
the southern states seeking sufficient representation in the new legislature to protect slavery were determined that their slaves be counted.
opponents of slavery by contrast wished to see slaves taxed as property but did not wish to count them when calculating representation in the new lower house.
the convention settled on a solution in which slaves were counted as three fifths of a person for purposes of taxation and legislative apportionment.
the threefifths ratio had been worked out by the confederation congress earlier when it faced another issue pertaining to slavery.
conflict flared over the slave trade.
one of the most intense attacks on the slave trade was voiced by virginian george mason the largest slave owner in the convention who warned his fellow delegates of the threat to the republic of the institution of slavery every master of slaves is born a petty tyrant slavery discourages arts manufactures mason recommended ending the slave trade as a first step toward eliminating slavery.
several delegates viewed masons actions cynically.
virginia had an excess of slaves and would profit enormously from an internal slave trade if the external trade with africa were abolished.
south carolinian articles of confederation virginia plan new jersey plan structure of the legislature single house one state one vote two houses both determined by population single house one state one vote taxation no power to tax power to tax power to tax judicial power no judicial power apart from courts to hear admiralty cases federal judiciary federal judiciary single executive chosen by national legislature single or plural executive elected by congress executive power no permanent executive a committee of the states exercises executive functions when congress is not in session 5 13 comparison of the articles of confederation virginia and new jersey plans although the virginia and new jersey plans differed on representation each would have given the new government the vital power of taxation.
watch the video lecture slavery and the constitution how did the conflict over slavery shape the debates of the constitutional convention.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 choices and consequences to ratify or not by the time new yorks ratification convention met in poughkeepsie nine states had already ratified the constitution making it the new law of the land.
could anti federalists continue to oppose the constitution and thereby place new york outside the new nation.
many anti federalists considered such a prospect unrealistic so they turned to the question of amending the constitution.
the outcome of the convention depended on the decisions of moderate anti federalists led by the merchant melancton smith.
new york anti federalists faced a momentous decision continue to oppose the constitution or work within the new system of government.
choices support the constitution with the promise that the first congress would amend it.
support the constitution provisionally until it was amended but consider seceding from the union if amendments were not made.
block ratification and continue to oppose the constitution.
decision smith opted for the first choice making new york the eleventh state to ratify the constitution on july 25 1787 in a powerful speech in the new york convention he reiterated his hope for future amendments but recognized the need to work through the mode prescribed by the constitution consequences if smith and other swing anti federalist delegates in the convention had opposed ratification new york would have remained outside the union and the new nation might have split into separate confederacies.
if smith and other moderates had insisted on amendments before ratification federalists would likely have stood their ground and the convention might have failed to ratify the constitution.
as it was smiths decision put more pressure on rhode island and north carolina to accept the new constitution.
it also gave impetus to the move to amend the constitution after ratification.
federalist newspapers seized on the visual image of a roman style temple to represent the nation and added a new column for each state that voted to ratify the constitution.
the pillars and temple metaphor like jeffersons model for the virginia state capitol evoked roman ideals of virtue and liberty.
continuing controversies why did new york anti federalists accept the constitution and wait for amendments.
although the anti federalists were defeated in 1788 many of their fears and ideals about government still resonate in american politics.
were the anti federalists backward looking politicians who failed to grasp the genius of the new constitution or visionaries who predicted that the growth and centralization of american government might pose a threat to liberty.
americans still argue over the legacy of anti federalism.
why did new york anti federalists compromise on the question of amendments.
massachusetts newspaper celebrates new york as the eleventh pillar the great debate 5 17 pewterers banner in a new york city parade celebrating the constitution federalist artisans carried a banner that included the u s flag and depicted artisans crafting objects of pewter.
the verse at the top proclaims the bright future for america under the new constitution.
anti federalists could not provide a clear alternative.
some favored a new convention to revise the constitution.
others favored amending the constitution prior to ratification and some were content to amend the new document later.
finally federalists were more effective at getting their message into print.
many newspaper editors refused to print anti federalist materials.
the dynamics of ratification were complex.
no single theory accounts for why individuals and regions supported the constitution but the map shows several patterns in voting 5 18.
geography economics and individual experiences all shaped the vote on the constitution.
merchants and artisans in regions tied to commerce such as seacoasts and inland areas close to navigable rivers looked to a stronger union to protect their economic interests and became federalists.
inhabitants of frontier regions that faced indian threats also supported a stronger central 5 18 geographical distribution of the vote on ratification support for the constitution was strongest along coastal regions and frontiers exposed to threats from external enemies and among small states such as delaware maryland and new jersey.
anti federalism was strongest in the backcountry of new england the mid atlantic and the south.
disputed between the united states and great britain british canada.
or nc e r l aw maine to mass st la disputed between new hampshire and new york re vermont n lake superi u ro n lake m i ch i ga h ke l o new hampshire n ta r i o new york june 1788 massachusetts july 1788 e lak e eri feb 1788 rhode island pennsylvania may 1790 dec 1787 connecticut jan 1788 o hi o r virginia june 1788 new jersey dec 1787 delaware dec 1787 north carolina maryland april 1788 nov 1789 georgia south carolina atl antic ocean may 1788 jan 1788 federalist majority for gulf of mexico spanish florida government because of these security concerns.
except for rhode island small states supported the constitution.
officers of the continental army who had dealt with a weak congress under the articles also supported the constitution.
anti federalists drew together an equally diverse coalition that opposed any effort to centralize authority and lessen the power of the states.
backcountry farmers particularly those less closely connected to major commercial markets opposed the constitution.
state politicians especially the newly empowered men of moderate wealth and more humble origins who dominated politics in states such as pennsylvania and new york were strongly anti federalist.
finally wealthy planters in parts of the south who feared that a distant and powerful government would not represent their interests became anti federalists.
the creation of a loyal opposition despite the intensity of the struggle over ratification anti federalists did not continue their opposition to the constitution once the nine states needed to ratify adopted it.
indeed rather than choose to become an anti constitutional party anti federalists accepted having to work within the framework provided by the constitution.
continued opposition to the constitution would only have led to anarchy which most anti federalists wished to avoid as much as did their federalist opponents.
anti federalists turned their attentions to campaigning for election to the first congress and to securing amendments to the constitution.
anti federalist majority against evenly divided view the map interactive map ratification of the constitution why was there no anti constitution movement after ratification.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 the bank the mint and the report on manufactures in his report on a national bank hamilton recommended that the federal government charter a national bank.
the bank of the united states would serve as a depository for government funds bolster confidence in government securities make loans and provide the nation with a stable national currency.
the government would own part of the stock in the new bank but would allow private investors to buy the majority of stock.
at the time of his proposal there were only three private banks in the united states.
a national bank would help stabilize the economy of the new nation and link the interests of the wealthy to the prosperity of the new nation.
again madison opposed hamiltons plan.
much of the debate on this proposal focused on its constitutionality.
madison wanted to see the constitution interpreted according to the original understanding of the states that ratified it in 1788 arguing for the narrow interpretation of congressional power he denied that the constitution authorized congress to charter a national bank.
ultimately however hamiltons ideas prevailed and the federalist controlled congress chartered the bank of the united states.
republicans then hoped for a presidential veto.
washington sought advice from his cabinet about the constitutionality of the bank.
attorney general edmund randolph and thomas jefferson both agreed with madison.
jefferson took advantage of the occasion to articulate his own views on how to interpret the new constitution.
he acknowledged that the constitution empowered congress to enact laws that were necessary and proper however although the creation of a bank was convenient and useful it was not in his view necessary for congress to fulfill its obligations to raise revenues.
this theory of strict construction approached the text of the constitution in an almost literal manner.
if the constitution did not grant a power then according to the theory of strict construction the tenth amendment reserved that power to the states and the people.
madison and jefferson designed their slightly different theories of constitutional interpretation to protect the rights of the people and the powers of the states against encroachment by the federal government.
with the weight of randolph madison and jeffersons opinions weighing heavily in favor of a veto hamilton set out to refute his critics and how did hamilton and jefferson differ in their interpretations of the phrase necessary and proper in the process frame his own alternative theory of how to interpret the constitution.
hamiltons theory of loose construction interpreted the language of the constitution broadly.
hamilton believed the federal government enjoyed enormous latitude in determining the appropriate means for accomplishing any legitimate constitutional end.
even if a specific power was not listed such as the power to charter a bank hamilton believed the constitution implied such a power.
hamilton argued that jeffersons reasoning would restrict the powers of congress to enact only those laws that were absolutely necessary and proper in response to madison and jeffersons suggestion of consulting the original intent of the state ratification conventions hamilton argued that the intention is to be sought in the instrument itself interpreters of the constitution should follow well established legal rules for understanding statutes and apply them to the constitution.
in other words the actual text of the constitution not the arguments of federalists anti federalists or state ratification conventions ought to be given primary consideration in constitutional interpretation.
the struggle over the proper way of interpreting the constitution had emerged as a major political battlefield in the new republic.
indeed the proper interpretation of the constitution is still controversial and arguments over its original meaning are as contentious today as they were more than 200 years ago.
as he would throughout his first term in office washington sided with hamilton against madison and jefferson.
the chartering of the bank of the united states was hamiltons second major victory in the struggle to define the character of the new republic.
hamiltons report on the necessity of a federal mint was the one part of his program that jefferson enthusiastically endorsed.
hamilton proposed a currency that would include a variety of coins in different denominations emblazoned with patriotic symbols.
jefferson not only recognized the need for a federal currency but as a part time inventor he was also fascinated by the mechanics of minting money.
hamiltons report on manufactures detailed the remaining part of his plan to reshape the american economy.
he called for a comprehensive program to encourage domestic industry by providing incentives for industrial development and tariffs to help american industry compete against imported foreign goods which were cheaper.
congress refused hamiltons ambitious program 6 4 political views hamilton versus jefferson hamilton jefferson commercial republic agrarian republic broad construction strict construction standing army militia pro british pro french to follow hamiltons recommendation to raise these tariffs sharply.
hamiltons more grandiose scheme to encourage industrial development generated little interest in congress.
congress did enact new taxes including one on whiskey.
in the struggle to shape the new nations economy hamiltons federalists had defeated jefferson madison and the republican opposition at nearly every turn.
hamilton was largely successful at implementing his visionary economic program.
jefferson and hamilton contrasting visions of the republic jefferson and hamilton were a study in contrasts.
their backgrounds varied greatly jefferson was a southern slave owner hamilton a northerner with abolitionist sympathies.
jefferson grew up a virginia aristocrat with every advantage hamilton was a self made man who confessed that he was determined to escape his humble origins at almost any cost.
over several of the most important issues facing the new american nation the two men found themselves in separate camps as summarized in the table 6 4.
in general hamilton sought to endow the national government with additional powers jefferson sought to limit the powers of the federal government and protect state authority.
the two men also approached the economy from radically different philosophies.
hamiltons idea of a thriving commercial republic was diametrically opposed to jeffersons vision of a nation of independent yeoman farmers.
while we have land to labour jefferson wrote let us never wish to see our citizens occupied at a work bench hamilton believed that america needed to emulate the powerful diversified economy of britain and foster commerce and manufacture.
a gulf separated the two men over constitutional law as well.
hamilton believed in a broad or loose construction of the constitution the federal government had to have wide latitude to choose whatever means was best suited to accomplish its legitimate objects.
jefferson by contrast believed in a strict construction of the constitution so that the powers of the new government would be limited to those clearly established by the constitution.
in foreign affairs the two men also opposed one another.
hamilton was an anglophile who believed that britains path to economic power ought to guide america.
jefferson savored all things french from wine to pastry.
he thought americas interests were better served by supporting france.
read the document thomas jefferson notes on virginia what were the most important points of disagreement between hamilton and jefferson.
chapter 7 jeffersonian america an expanding empire of liberty 1800 1824 in 1800 republican thomas jefferson won the presidential election against his federalist opponent john adams.
after nearly a decade in opposition republicans celebrated their presidential triumph with toasts and songs about jefferson and liberty federalists however feared that the new president whom they had denounced as an atheist a tool of the french and a supporter of thomas paines radical democratic ideas would undo all their work of the previous decade.
in this federalist political cartoon from 1800 mad tom in a rage jeffersons ally thomas paine and the devil tear down the federal edifice created by washington and adams.
the federalist fears captured in the cartoon were not only unfounded but president jefferson turned out to be a very different person from vice president jefferson the leader of the republican opposition during the adams administration.
rather than mount a full scale attack on federalist policy jefferson adopted a less confrontational approach.
in his presidential inaugural he struck a conciliatory tone and reminded americans we are all republicans we are all federalists jefferson also promised the nation a wise and frugal government implementing this however proved difficult as he took over the reigns of power in his first term.
the opportunity to purchase the louisiana territory and double the size of the new nation led him to cast aside constitutional strict construction which restricted the powers of the federal government to those explicitly delegated by the constitution.
by the end of jeffersons second term in 1809 some americans believed that the jeffersonian republicans had become indistinguishable from their federalist opponents.
jeffersons anointed successor james madison made additional compromises that some of his supporters believed betrayed the ideas he had championed as a member of the republican opposition in the 1790s.
foreign affairs proved especially vexing for both jefferson and madison.
each man had tried to prevent american entanglement in the war between britain and france.
despite their efforts however america was dragged into the european conflict eventually going to war against britain in 1812 although the war was fought against the british the conspicuous losers in the conflict were the indian tribes in the northwest and southwest who lost a valuable ally in britain and suffered defeats by american troops.
the demands of fighting the war also forced republicans to reconsider the necessity of much of hamiltonian economic policy.
by the end of the presidency of james monroe in 1825 the fourth virginian to become president the old political labels of republican and federalist had become nearly meaningless and were soon to be supplanted by two new political parties.
the revolution of 1800 was as real a revolution in the principles of our government as that of 1776 was in its form not effected indeed by the sword as that but by the rational and peaceable instrument of reform the suffrage of the people thomas jefferson to judge spenser roane 1819 chapter 7 jeffersonian america an expanding empire of liberty 1800 1824 industrial production.
others later adapted his model by creating entirely new mill villages in which the company owned the adjacent farmland and rented it to men whose families worked in the mills.
this rhode island or family model of the mill village was an important economic development in manufacturing.
the present moment is every way favorable to the establishment of a great national policy and of great national institutions in respect to the army the navy the judicial and the commercial interests of the country justice joseph story 1816 judicial nationalism no figure captured the new nationalist spirit more fully than the young supreme court justice joseph story.
a brilliant lawyer story was only 32 when james madison appointed him to the court.
madison hoped that story an anti embargo republican from massachusetts would check the nationalism of chief justice john marshall.
madison would not be the last president to be shocked and disappointed by one of his supreme court appointments.
story proved to be as nationalistic as marshall.
storys decisions on the court supported the power of the federal judiciary and limited that of the states.
in landmark decisions marshall and story helped strengthen the federal government and the courts and paved the way for economic growth.
the most famous case dealing with federalism was mcculloch v maryland.
the case arose when the state of maryland levied a tax on the baltimore branch of the second bank of the united states.
most republicans had made their peace with the idea of a bank but some continued to resent this highly visible symbol of hamiltonian federalism.
marshall declared the maryland state tax unconstitutional and affirmed an essentially hamiltonian view of the powers of the federal government.
according to marshall the federal government enjoyed broad powers under the necessary and proper clauses of the constitution which allowed it to charter a bank.
marshall further argued that the power to tax was also the power to destroy and allowing the state to tax a federally chartered institution would have allowed maryland to undermine an act of the federal government.
while marshall conceded that the powers of the federal government were not unlimited he affirmed that within its sphere of authority it enjoyed enormous latitude to accomplish any legitimate constitutional objective.
in contrast to many republicans who accepted the jeffersonian idea that individual states could judge the constitutionality of federal acts the marshall court insisted that only the supreme court could determine when the federal government had exceeded its authority.
no other decision rendered by the court generated so much controversy as that of mcculloch v maryland.
for radical opponents of the marshall court mcculloch seemed to realize the anti federalists most dire predictions.
anger over mcculloch led many republicans particularly in the south to develop a more aggressive version of states rights.
they challenged the authority of the supreme court to decide arguments between the states and the federal government.
for nationalists such as marshall and story however the creation of a more powerful central government was essential to the survival of the united states.
the marshall court also decided cases dealing with the law and the economy.
one of the most important cases dealing with economic development also expanded the scope of federal power over commerce.
in gibbons v ogden 1824 a case involving steamboats the court grappled with the scope of federal powers over interstate commerce.
in that case marshall construed the word commerce broadly to encompass every species of commercial intercourse the court also held that federal power over interstate commerce did not end at the borders of each state but extended within states when that commerce was intermingled with economic activity that crossed state lines.
although in the nineteenth century the federal government did not exploit its power over interstate commerce to the fullest the power to regulate interstate commerce is currently one of the most far reaching possessed by the federal government.
which marshall court decisions best illustrate the courts nationalism.
crises and the collapse of the national republican consensus crises and the collapse of the national republican consensus the patriotic sentiments stirred by the war of 1812 and the emergence of a new consensus around a hamiltonian economic vision contributed to a period of prosperity and optimism.
the new consensus however proved fragile and a severe depression soon followed the postwar economic boom.
slavery also vaulted to national attention when missouri sought admission to the union as a slave state.
the hope that monroes creative synthesis of the jeffersonian and hamiltonian visions might usher in a new era of good feelings proved short lived as economic and political crises again divided the nation.
the panic of 1819 economic expansion in part driven by the demand for cotton led to a growth in the financial sector of the american economy.
states chartered new banks so that the number of banks doubled between 1815 and 1818 from just over 200 to more than 400 in 1816 congress chartered a second bank of the united states which further fueled economic expansion and land speculation.
between 1815 and 1818 land sales more than tripled.
however the price of cotton and other agricultural products exported by america dropped in 1819 leading to a severe economic downturn that affected nearly every aspect of the american economy.
since much of the expansion in credit by american banks was tied to agricultural production the crisis spread to financial institutions.
the value of land purchased on credit dropped sharply and when these loans came due speculators were unable to repay the banks that had loaned them the money to buy these properties.
the american economy now heavily dependent on cotton sank into depression.
as speculators defaulted on their obligations banks collapsed.
nearly every region of the country was affected.
the panic of 1819 the economic crisis triggered by the drop in agricultural prices and bank failures produced unprecedented economic hardship.
while the sudden downturn in the economy hurt western land speculators and cotton producers in the deep south it also devastated the growing urban centers of the northeast.
in philadelphia three out of four workers lost their jobs.
in new york the number of people classified as paupers increased from 8 000 to 13 000 in a year.
the missouri crisis the economic downturn was soon overshadowed by another crisis.
in 1819 missouri applied for admission to the union as a slave state.
congressman john tallmadge from new york demanded that missouri ban further imports of slaves and agree to eliminate slavery before joining.
public meetings across the northeast protested missouris proposed admission as a slave state.
slavery now came to the center of american politics.
agricultural languishes farmers cannot find profit in hiring labourers mechanics are in want of employment james flint comments on the panic of 1819 in letters from america 1822 the growth of cotton agriculture and the prospect of large swathes of territory in the west entering the union as slave states prompted a political crisis.
whereas northern congressmen denounced slavery as a violation of the ideals of the declaration of independence and the constitution southerners defended the institution invoking the what was the missouri crisis.
chapter review jefferson is accused of having a slave mistress marbury v madison john marshall asserts power of supreme court to decide constitutionality of acts of congress judicial review review questions 1 what role did honor play in the political culture of the new nation.
2 why was jefferson ridiculed as the mammoth of democracy.
4 what were the main causes of the war of 1812.
what were its most important economic consequences.
5 what was the era of good feelings.
3 which features of jeffersons domestic policy agenda were the most successful and why.
key terms louisiana purchase the acquisition by the united states of the louisiana territory from france in 1803 thereby securing control of the mississippi river and nearly doubling the size of the nation.
embargo act of 1807 the cornerstone of jeffersons plan of peaceable coercion that attempted to block u s trade with england and france to force them to respect american neutrality.
war of 1812 the war fought between britain and america over restrictions on american trade.
british trade with american indians particularly trade in weapons was also an issue.
hartford convention a meeting of federalists in hartford connecticut to protest the war of 1812 the convention proposed several constitutional amendments intended to weaken the powers of the slave states and protect new england interests.
era of good feelings a term that the press coined to describe the absence of bitter partisan conflict during the presidency of james monroe.
monroe doctrine a foreign policy statement by president monroe declaring that the americas were no longer open to colonization and that the united states would view any effort to reassert colonial control over independent nations in the western hemisphere as a threat to america.
cotton gin eli whitneys invention for removing seeds from cotton.
panic of 1819 a downturn in the american economy in 1819 that plunged the nation into depression and economic hardship.
missouri compromise the congressional compromise in which missouri entered the union as a slave state and maine was admitted as a free state to preserve the balance of slave and free states in congress.
the law also drew an imaginary line at 36 30 through the louisiana territory.
slavery was prohibited north of this line.
denmark vesey uprising an alleged plot led by a free black man denmark vesey to free slaves in charleston and kill their masters.
chapter democracy in america p 222 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 8 a black charge from a series of racist caricatures of black life in philadelphia this image lampoons african american aspirations to respectability.
a church official disciplines a church member for alleged misconduct.
source the library company of philadelphia democrats and whigs democracy and american culture 1820 1840 published 14 cartoons ridiculing philadelphias african american community.
in a black charge 8 10 clay mocks a black church official who must attempt to discipline a disorderly member of his community.
as was typical in this era the artist has exaggerated the physical appearances of african americans and caricatured their speech suggesting that blacks could only speak a distorted form of english.
jacksons vision of white mans democracy had tragic consequences for american indians.
his dealings with indian peoples during his presidency were also consistent with his view that they were culturally inferior to whites and that their civilization was on the path toward extinction.
in jacksons political calculus white settlers need for land was paramount and the rights of indians carried little if any weight.
these beliefs shaped his response to the conflict between the state of georgia and the cherokees.
the presidents views of indians had been formed during his early military career in which he was well known as an indian fighter.
at the conclusion of the creek wars 1812 1813 he had seized 23 million acres of creek land more than half of present day alabama and part of georgia.
jackson treated the indians as conquered subjects not as a sovereign people.
rather than continuing to mount violent resistance a number of indian tribes adopted american ways.
the cherokee were among the indian peoples who white americans described as the five civilized tribes cherokees choctaws seminoles creeks and chickasaws.
these five tribes had to varying degrees chosen the path of cultural assimilation rather than resistance to americas expansionist policies.
these tribes together numbered some 75 000 people spread out over the carolinas georgia alabama mississippi and tennessee.
adopting the agricultural practices of their white neighbors and converting to christianity were two major efforts the tribes made to accommodate to american culture.
no tribe was more committed to accommodation than the cherokee.
they converted to christianity established schools and practiced american style agriculture a few prosperous cherokees even kept slaves to work on their cotton plantations mimicking their white neighbors in georgia.
they also abandoned their traditional tribal governance declared themselves an independent republic and adopted a constitution modeled on the federal constitution.
as a sovereign nation they claimed to enjoy all the legal privileges that all nations enjoyed and were therefore not subject to the laws of the state of georgia.
however the cherokee effort to become an independent nation within the territorial confines of georgia did not sit well with the government of the state.
when georgians discovered gold on cherokee land in 1828 a horde of white prospectors tried to stake out claims on indian lands a clear violation of tribal authority and law.
declaring tribal law null and void georgia passed a law that stripped the tribe of any legal authority over their lands.
henceforth georgia law not cherokee law would govern the cherokee.
the state also created a special police force the georgia guard to patrol indian territory.
the tribe lobbied sympathetic opponents of jackson and turned to the federal courts for protection arguing that georgias actions violated treaties between the cherokee and the united states.
while the cherokee awaited their day in court jackson turned up the pressure on them.
the president refused the cherokees plea for federal troops to protect them.
because indians could not testify in georgia courts the cherokee were left without any legal means of defending their rights under the laws of georgia.
jackson seized the opportunity provided by the crisis to advance a plan to remove the cherokee from georgia and relocate them beyond the mississippi river.
he cast himself as benevolent father intervening to rescue the cherokee from extinction.
his program would not force indians to leave but it made it very unattractive for anyone to remain what does indian policy reveal about the limits of jacksonian democracy.
white mans democracy behind.
indians who refused to relocate were relegated to the status of free blacks who had only minimal legal rights under georgia law.
jackson presented the cherokee with two equally disastrous choices accept the legal destruction of their tribal identity and live as second class citizens in georgia or relocate to a distant territory far from their ancestral homes.
jacksons opponents in congress many of whom had close ties to protestant churches and missionary societies that had helped convert the cherokees to christianity attacked his proposals.
new jerseys senator theodore frelinghuysen wondered if it is one of the prerogatives of the white man that he may disregard the dictates of moral principles when an indian shall be concerned others attacked the presidents proposal as a sham that offered indians no legal protections if they stayed and allocated few resources to allow them to make a safe journey west.
in this cartoon critical of jacksons indian policy 8 11 the president leads a parade that includes the devil and caged indians.
the protestant clergymen who led the opposition to jacksons policy and who opposed removal were not great champions of indian culture.
indeed the religious defense of indian rights shared many of the racist assumptions about indians and their cultures that jackson and others eager to dispossess them espoused.
yet these supporters of indians rights believed that the supposed inferiority of indian culture did not sanction unjust treatment or the violation of indian rights.
womens reformers also rallied to the cause of indian rights.
womens groups touted themselves as disinterested guardians of public morality who were not subject to the blinding influence of party spirit jacksons aggressive removal policy threatened the ongoing effort to christianize and civilize the indians.
building on a tradition that extended back to the revolutionary era see chapter 8 8 13 parody of an anti masonic apron this parody of the anti masons contrasts their values persecution intolerance hypocrisy with the masons enlightenment ideals universal benevolence equal rights tolerance and scientific inquiry.
democrats and whigs democracy and american culture 1820 1840 religious groups especially evangelicals who believed that masons were anti christian.
these suspicions and resentments provided the backdrop to a sensational crime involving the freemasons.
in 1826 a disgruntled ex freemason william morgan threatened to expose the orders secret rituals.
when morgan was kidnapped and disappeared a clamor arose against the order.
the anti masonic party capitalized on this sensational crime.
meanwhile the freemasons did not remain silent.
in this image emblazoned on an apron the anti masons are cast as the mythical monster the hydra.
the image also links anti masons with a host of vices.
freemasons by contrast are associated with enlightenment values such as science and equality.
the apron also makes use of a pyramid a common masonic symbol 8 13.
the anti masons proved to be innovative politicians building an effective popular political movement.
although short lived their party the first third party movement in american history helped pioneer new political techniques that mainstream parties soon adopted.
the anti masonic party used what lasting contributions did the anti masons make to american politics.
as long as property is unequal or rather as long as it is so enormously unequal as we see it at present those who possess it will live on the labor of others thomas skidmore the rights of man to property.
1829 a national nominating convention to select a presidential candidate.
it was also the first party to adopt an official platform so that voters could judge the partys position on important questions.
this party also energized religious voters who were drawn into public life and politics by the partys efforts.
at the same time that the anti masonic party was organizing workers in philadelphia 1828 and new york 1829 formed their own political parties.
the workies as they were called won seats in the state legislatures.
among the political reforms they achieved was the abolition of imprisonment for debt.
in this pro workie cartoon 8 14 an honest working man exercises the ballot freely while a corrupt tool of the moneyed interest serves the devil.
the most radical voice of working class radicalism was that of the artisan thomas skidmore who advocated a comprehensive program to use inheritance taxes to equalize wealth.
in his book the rights of man to property.
1829 skidmore tackled the problem of economic inequality head on by proposing that wealth be subject to a huge inheritance tax.
although citizens would be free to accumulate as much wealth as they could during their lifetime they would not be able to pass it on to their children.
the goal was to prevent the creation of a monied aristocracy.
revenue from this inheritance tax would be used by the government to provide each new generation of citizens with a basic economic stake so that each citizen would start life with the same economic advantages.
this radical proposal to redistribute wealth went nowhere.
democrats whigs and the second party system 8 14 no more grinding the poor but liberty and the rights of man the devil hands money to buy a rich mans vote telling him to grind the workies a virtuous working man invokes liberty and the rights of man and casts his vote independently while the goddess of liberty holds out the ballot box.
but although the workies were unable to create a national labor party some of their proposals were popular enough to be picked up by mainstream democrats.
in particular the workies attack on banking resonated with jackson and his followers.
the class conscious rhetoric of the workies would affect how democrats framed their message for the american people.
the bank war and the rise of the whigs jacksons growing opposition to clays american system including a visceral hatred for the bank of the united states emerged as a defining feature of his presidency.
the political war that arose over the bank helped jacksons opponents to define their identity and create a new political party the whigs.
henry clay and daniel webster two influential figures within the anti jackson national republican party believed that the presidents hatred for the bank could be used to defeat him in the election of 1832 clay reasoned that jacksons opposition to the bank would alienate most voters because they would recognize the importance of a national bank.
clay approached nicholas biddle the head of the bank of hear the audio van buren the united states to petition congress for an early renewal of the banks charter in 1832 clay knew that jackson was opposed to the bank and might veto the new charter which clay believed would turn the public against the president.
jackson confided to martin van buren his intention to destroy the bank.
the bank mr van buren is trying to kill me but i will kill it when congress renewed the banks charter in 1832 jackson vetoed it and clay lacked the votes to override the veto.
the bank then became the central issue of the presidential campaign of 1832 although the bank had many supporters including some in jacksons administration the veto turned out to be popular.
jackson had managed to convert opposition to the bank into support for democracy itself.
in his bank veto speech jackson not only explained why he opposed re chartering the bank of the united states but also laid out his own vision of american democracy and constitutional government.
jackson attacked the rich and powerful who too often bend the acts of government to their selfish purposes his speech appealed to the humble members of society the farmers mechanics and laborers jackson portrayed the bank as a tool of the rich and powerful who had obtained a charter by corrupting congress.
thus while the bank veto speech sounded how did jackson use democratic rhetoric to rally support for his bank veto.
chapter review 1836 1837 south carolina nullifies federal tariff martin van buren elected president cherokee removal trail of tears william henry harrison elected president south carolina becomes the first state to invoke the doctrine of nullification democrats retain control of the white house after jacksons retirement from office jacksons policy of pressuring indians to give up their lands and homes and relocate to western lands is approved and implemented whigs exploit new methods of democratic politics to elect their candidate to the presidency panic of 1837 economic downturn is blamed on jacksons policies myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of democrats and whigs.
questions for analysis 1 why did so many commentators on american life discuss the democratic character of jacksonian america.
read the document michel chevalier society manners and politics in the u s p 226 2 who was davy crockett and why did his life become a symbol of america during the jacksonian period.
other resources from this chapter 10 revivalism reform and artistic renaissance 1820 1850 revivalism and reform 10 1 religious camp meeting a contemporary artist captured the intense emotional experience of a revival meeting.
the cane ridge revival in kentucky 1801 was the first stirring of the larger revival movement that constituted americas second great awakening.
for a discussion of the first great awakening see chapter 8.
wimars painting reflected one of two radically different visions of native americans that were deeply rooted in american culture.
from the beginning of european contact with the americas indians had been depicted as either bloodthirsty savages or noble savages see chapter 11 overspread the continent westward expansion and political conflict 1840 1848 societies of the west catlin believed that he had a responsibility to preserve a visual record of indian culture.
these themes are discussed in images as history george catlin and mah to toh pa representing indians for an american audience.
a few americans rejected both the image of the native american as a barbaric savage who ought to be exterminated and the noble savage tragically doomed to extinction.
whig and protestant reformers expressed sympathy for native americans and opposed the relocation of eastern tribes see chapter 10.
smith and his followers had been the victims of violent persecution wherever they settled in the east and midwest so the west appealed to them as a potential refuge from such hostility.
the mormon trek westward was the largest organized migration in american history.
prior to their exodus the mormons endured a long period of internal dissension and harassment by their non mormon neighbors.
after leaving new york joseph smith established mormon communities in ohio and missouri.
in ohio the mormons experimented with communal economic arrangements.
the mormon doctrine of consecration and stewardship required individuals to deed their property to the church which then provided an allotment of land whose size was tied to the size of the family unit.
mormons also created cooperative agricultural enterprises pooling their resources and labor.
for additional discussion of the communal dimensions of mormonism see chapter 10.
non mormons resented the economic advantages such cooperation brought to mormon farmers and businesses.
as tensions between mormons and nonmormons rose smith moved most of his followers to nauvoo illinois on the mississippi river.
the fastestgrowing town in the midwest in the 1840s surpassing even chicago nauvoo was a boomtown shaped by a distinctive religious vision.
by the end of the 1840s the mormon population of this booming city had soared to over 10 000 the mormon system of tithing required donations to the church enabled the church to buy land and build a monumental temple read the document black hawk from life of black hawk manifest destiny and changing visions of the west images as history george catlin and mah to toh pa representing indians for an american audience through his paintings of western indians george catlin sought to preserve a visual record of their culture and accomplishments.
he also felt obliged to portray these doomed peoples in a noble light.
capturing the nobility of indians required representing them in a way that would evoke sympathy and respect from his american audience.
one of the many indians catlin painted during his years in the west was the mandan chief mah totoh pa also known as four bears in his diary catlin noted that the chief wanted to be painted in a manner that reflected the mandan notions of beauty and masculinity.
both were closely tied to the ideal of the warrior.
accordingly mah to toh pa dressed for the painting in all the trappings of a warrior chief.
catlin noted in his journal his dress was complete in all its parts and consisted of a shirt or tunic leggings moccasins head dress necklace shield bow and catlins journal informed his viewers that only a warrior of extraordinary renown was allowed to wear horns on his headdress.
quiver lance tobacco sack and pipe robe belt and knife medicine bag tomahawk and war club yet catlin omitted most of these items believing that they distracted from the chiefs grace and simplicity the notions of beauty that shaped catlins artistic decisions stretched back to antiquity and were different from those of the mandan chief.
in essence catlin painted his subject as if he were a frontier cincinnatus an indian george washington see chapter 10 who defended the ideal of peaceful opposition by citizens to unjust government action.
see choices and consequences henry david thoreau and civil disobedience.
the mexican war was the first conflict america fought primarily on foreign soil.
it was also the most logistically complex war in the nations brief history involving multiple fronts long supply lines and the coordination of ground and amphibious assaults.
the mexican war also produced two of the greatest generals in american history zachary taylor and winfield scott.
taylor was the common soldiers general a man without pretensions whose reputation for bravery earned him the nickname among what were the most important differences between the leadership style of generals zachary taylor and winfield scott.
his troops old rough and ready scott was in many respects the opposite of taylor.
a brilliant tactician and strategist old fuss and feathers was arrogant and fond of pomp and ceremony.
the mexican war also provided a proving ground for a host of military leaders who later became important generals of the civil war era including ulysses s grant robert e lee thomas stonewall jackson george mcclellan george g meade and p g t beauregard.
the united states had clear military superiority over mexico.
american forces under zachary taylor scored an early victory in may 1846 at the battle of palo alto 11 9.
general stephen kearny then opened a second front by marching from fort leavenworth kansas to santa fe and then on to california where he joined up with an army under captain john c fremont.
fremont had already paved the way for the conquest of california by instigating a rebellion against mexican authority there known as the bear flag revolt for the grizzly bear emblem that decorated the rebel flag.
scotts successful amphibious assault at the port of vera cruz led to an assault on mexico city.
after five more months of fierce fighting scott captured the mexican capital on may 1 1847 the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo ended the war 1848.
it settled the border dispute between texas and mexico and ceded to the united states a vast swath of new territory in the southwest over 500 000 square miles comprising present day california new mexico arizona and parts of texas utah colorado and nevada.
the united states had seized 55 percent of mexicos territory.
read the document thomas corwin against the mexican war the mexican war and its consequences choices and consequences henry david thoreau and civil disobedience the author henry david thoreau was a committed abolitionist.
opposition to the war with mexico among abolitionists was intense and reflected their view that the war was an effort to expand slavery.
in the political cartoon young texas in repose an unsavory texan sits on a prostrate slave whose head is rendered as a bale of cotton.
abolitionist protest against the war took a variety of forms but none have had as profound impact on subsequent history as thoreaus refusal to pay his poll tax.
his actions landed him in jail for a night.
in thoreaus view jail was the only place for a just man in an unjust legal and political system.
thoreau explored the reasons for his act of defiance two years later.
in a lyceum lecture called the rights and duties of the individual in relation to government he sketched this theory of civil disobedience.
a year later a small literary journal published a revised version of this lecture entitled resistance to civil government thoreaus essay framed in concise terms the options available to citizens facing government action they believed to be immoral unjust laws exist shall we be content to obey them or shall we endeavor to amend them and obey them until we have succeeded or shall we transgress them at once here are the options thoreau envisioned choices accept the governments decision and not criticize it.
obey the law but work to change it.
protest the law by refusing to obey it and suffer the legal consequences for challenging it.
decision thoreau chose the third option and spent a night in the concord massachusetts jail.
consequences thoreaus actions had almost no impact at the time and his essay attracted little attention.
however it became one of the most influential political essays ever written.
his theory of civil disobedience influenced the twentieth century indian leader mohandas gandhis nonviolent protests against colonial british rule in india and the campaign of reverend martin luther king jr against racial discrimination.
protestors around the world continue to use thoreaus theory to advance human rights.
continuing controversies young texas in repose is the notion of a legal right of civil disobedience a contradiction in terms.
philosophers continue to debate the morality of civil disobedience.
if one condones civil disobedience does it invariably lead to anarchy that is lawlessness and political disorder or can one support the rule of law and still accept the moral legitimacy of civil disobedience.
another controversial issue that continues to divide supporters of resistance theory is the role of nonviolence.
must civil disobedience be nonviolent or can one legitimately use violence to secure justice.
abolitionists debated this latter issue as they pondered what to do about the evil of slavery.
the issue continues to divide supporters of the ideal of civil disobedience.
many affirm that the idea can only claim the moral high ground and be effective if it forswears violence.
how significant was thoreaus essay when it was published.
chapter 11 11 13 smoking him out in this political cartoon martin van buren is shown at the side of a burning barn while proslavery democrat lewis cass is perched on the roof ready to jump and rats flee the building.
antislavery democrats were nicknamed barnburners overspread the continent westward expansion and political conflict 1840 1848 as their partys candidate.
it also gathered abolitionist supporters of the liberty party the antislavery party founded in 1840.
under the slogan no more slave states and no more slave territories the free soil platform took the moderate position of opposing only the extension of slavery into the west.
the whig taylor won the election handily but his victory revealed the complexity the slavery issue posed for american politics.
see competing visions slavery and the election of 1848 he won eight of 15 slave states largely because he was a slave owner.
the race was much closer in the north but taylor prevailed in the key states of pennsylvania and new york.
he owed his narrow margin of victory in the latter state to the free soil party which drew votes away from the democrats.
the free soil party failed to win a single state but it polled 300 000 votes 10 percent of the total and elected two senators and nine representatives to congress from states in the northeast and midwest.
let the soil of our extensive domains be kept free for the hardy pioneers of our own land and the oppressed and banished of other lands seeking homes of comfort and fields of enterprise in the new world who were the barnburners.
free soil party platform 1848 the wilmot proviso and the realignment of american politics competing visions slavery and the election of 1848 what to do with the vast territory acquired from mexico became a contentious issue in the election of 1848 the two party system fractured producing a new third party the free soil party which opposed the spread of slavery westward.
the new party met in buffalo new york as reflected in the cartoon showing martin van buren its candidate riding a buffalo.
the party platforms of the democrats and whig party each adopted a different approach to slavery.
the democrat party platform reasserted its commitment to states rights and its corollary slavery was an issue that the constitution had left for the individual states to decide.
the whig platform avoided mentioning slavery.
instead it focused on the merits of the whig candidate zachary taylor who was presented as a war hero and a man who put the nation ahead of sectional interests.
the congress has no power under the constitution to interfere with or control the domestic institutions of the several states that such states are the sole and proper judges of everything appertaining to their own affairs not prohibited by the constitution that all efforts of the abolitionists or others made to induce congress to interfere with questions of slavery are calculated to lead to the most alarming and dangerous consequences.
that we look on general taylors administration of the government as one conducive to peace prosperity and union we have a candidate whose very position as a southwestern man reared on the banks of the great stream whose tributaries natural and artificial embrace the whole union renders the protection of the interests of the whole country his first trust.
the buffalo hunt what were the most important differences between the strategy of the whigs and democrats in the election of 1848.
chapter 11 young america promoted a nationalist vision of territorial expansion increased international trade and the spread of american ideals of democracy and free enterprise abroad.
america they argued possessed the right even the obligation to continue its expansion especially into latin america and the caribbean.
the young america program enjoyed broad appeal in both sections of the country and found expression in number of votes electoral votes democratic newspaper slave states won free states won editorials fourth of july speeches advertising imagery and paintings.
among the paint0 ings emanuel leutzes westward the course of empire takes its way depicts pioneers peering 155 825 out over a vast expanse 5 of western territory 12 8.
native americans are nowhere to be seen suggesting that the land john hale is ripe for the taking.
free soil by including babies and read the document john l osullivan the great nation of futurity 1845 political realignment children leutze indicates that generations of future americans will benefit from the lands bounty.
a radiant sunset implies gods blessing on the enterprise.
as president pierce proved an ardent proponent of expansion which he believed would strengthen the democratic party and unite the nation.
yet his efforts had nearly the opposite effect.
when pierce entertained proposals to annex hawaii and purchase alaska southerners in congress stymied the plans because the treaties would have outlawed slavery.
conversely northern representatives denounced his attempt in 1854 to acquire cuba with its plantation economy and 300 000 slaves from spain.
northerners likewise took a dim view of the invasions of latin american and caribbean countries by small armies of expansion minded adventurers known as filibusters an english corruption of the dutch word for pirate.
these operations delighted southern slave owners however who viewed these lands as ideal in the words of mississippi senator albert g brown for the planting and spreading of slavery pierces support for proslavery expansionism alienated northern supporters and threatened to upset the sectional peace achieved by the compromise of 1850 but the controversy over proposed expansion would pale by comparison with that sparked in 1854 over a plan to organize the territories of kansas and nebraska.
territories and eventually states in the land west of iowa and missouri essentially the northern half of the louisiana purchase.
he was not alone.
farmers were eager to settle in the regions fertile kansas and platte river valleys and promoters of a transcontinental railroad hoped to run a northern route through it.
neither settlement nor railroad construction could occur however before the federal government negotiated land treaties with indians and organized the area as a territory.
douglas faced strong opposition from southern congressmen who feared the new territories would eventually become two free states.
they also had their sights set on a southern route for the transcontinental railroad from new orleans through the new mexico territory to san francisco.
they told douglas they would support his plan only if it included a repeal of the ban on slavery north of 36 30 that had been a part of the missouri compromise in 1820 promises of popular sovereignty they warned would not be enough.
fully aware that it would raise a hell of a storm but hopeful it would boost his presidential ambitions for 1856 douglas introduced his kansas nebraska act as a solution to the issues arising over these western territories.
in addition to repealing the ban on slavery north of 36 30 the act 12 8 an enthusiastic vision of westward expansion this 1861 painting westward the course of empire takes its way by emmanuel leutze vividly expresses the expansionist spirit of the young america movement.
the kansas nebraska act stephen a douglas of illinois another leading young america figure saw the future development of the united states in the rapid organization of why did many southerners support efforts to annex cuba and seize other caribbean and latin american countries.
chapter 12 slavery and sectionalism the political crisis of 1848 1861 this surge in immigration caused antiimmigrant sentiment or nativism native born americans belief in their superiority to the foreign born to rise sharply.
as images as history the foreign menace shows americans were upset not merely by the number of immigrants arriving but also by their perceived character.
although most immigrants in previous decades had been protestants from britain many of them with money and skills a large majority of immigrants in the 1840s and 1850s were poor unskilled catholics from germany and ireland.
anti catholicism with roots in american history going back to the nations earliest european founders surged into near hysteria.
some of the best selling books in the antebellum period charged that catholicism with its emphasis on clerical authority and loyalty to the pope in rome was incompatible with democracy.
nativists those born in the united states also feared that immigrants took american jobs drank too much alcohol refused to assimilate and increased poverty disease and crime.
the ill clad and destitute irishman is repulsive to our habits and our tastes the christian examiner n y 1848 anti immigrant sentiment reached a fever pitch in 1854 with the emergence of the american party.
its core constituents were members of secret antiimmigrant societies founded in cities in the late 1840s.
because secrecy required them to answer i know nothing when asked about their organization they earned the name know nothings their political platform condemned both political parties as hopelessly corrupt and called for legislation restricting office to native born citizens barring public funds for parochial schools and raising the period of naturalization for citizenship from five to 21 years.
with the whig party in decline and the democrats closely associated with the immigrant vote know nothings achieved stunning success in 1854 winning control of the state governments in delaware pennsylvania and massachusetts.
about 75 know nothing congressmen were sent to washington.
elections one year later in 1855 saw the party what anti immigrant laws did the american party propose.
win maryland and kentucky elect scores of nativists in new york and california and post impressive tallies across the south.
after the elections of 1854 the big question was which of these two new political forces antislavery republicans or anti immigrant know nothings would replace the defunct whig party.
but the american party disintegrated almost as quickly as it arose splitting like the whig party along sectional lines over slavery.
most of its members eventually joined the republican party.
although many former members retained their dislike of foreigners they perceived the growing aggression of the slave power as a greater threat to the nations well being.
this threat seemed most menacing in the newly created territory of kansas.
ballots and blood even as opponents denounced douglass plan to allow popular sovereignty to decide the status of slavery in the territories they devised a plan to ensure the results went their way.
we will engage in competition for the virgin soil of kansas william seward warned his southern colleagues in congress just before passage of the kansas nebraska act and god give victory to the side which is stronger in numbers as in right wealthy new england abolitionists established the emigrant aid company and financed the migration of more than 2 000 antislavery settlers to kansas.
thousands more went on their own.
proslavery interests however proved equal to the task of opposing them.
to offset the soaring numbers of northern settlers in kansas they organized bands of proslavery border ruffians to cross into kansas from missouri.
although some came as settlers most were illegal voters determined to see kansas enter the union as a slave state.
in spring 1855 men from missouri cast nearly 5 000 illegal votes helping elect a proslavery territorial government that gathered in the town of lecompton and legalized slavery.
antislavery settlers rejected the legitimacy of this bogus legislature in fall 1855 they drew up a freestate constitution held elections that resulted in an antislavery legislature and governor located in the town of lawrence and asked congress to admit the territory as a free state.
kansas now had two governments bitterly opposed to each other.
kansas quickly became a divisive issue in congress.
although the senate controlled by political realignment images as history the foreign menace from the colonial period up to the present americans have held conflicted visions about immigration.
on the one hand americans proudly view their country as a nation of immigrants that has incorporated millions of newcomers while fashioning an ethos of tolerance.
on the other periods of virulent anti immigrant sentiment have punctuated american history.
in the 1840s and 1850s nativists native born americans who believed themselves superior to the foreign born mobilized to oppose immigration.
although they failed by clothing the irishman and german in whiskey and beer barrels the artist reflects the widely held view that immigrants drank too much alcohol.
to stop the mass influx of foreigners their movement revealed a vision of immigration as a serious threat to the well being of the republic.
the cartoon below reflects the belief that immigrants represented a threat to american democracy.
the drawing beneath it expresses the fear that catholic immigrants were part of a conspiracy to claim america for the pope.
what attitudes and actions might these kinds of images have inspired among native born americans.
the theft of the ballot box reveals the nativist fear of the rising political power of immigrants in the 1850s.
the brawl at the polling site suggests that immigrants threaten democracy because they use violence rather than persuasion to win elections.
immigrants as a threat to democracy c 1850 borrowed from the great seal of the united states this eagle emphasizes the importance of public schools to american democracy.
placing the bible under the popes foot played on the belief that catholic priests and bishops prohibited people from reading the bible on their own something protestants believed essential to salvation.
declaring catholicism un american the artist presents the pope as the antithesis of republican authority a royal figure seated on a throne.
alleging a papal plot to overthrow america the pope points to the public school while a priest in the schoolyard organizes an attack.
popery undermining free schools and other american institutions 1855 watch the video video lecture burn down the convent why did anti immigrant sentiment rise in the 1850s.
chapter 12 slavery and sectionalism the political crisis of 1848 1861 sign of wealth and status.
others embraced a longstanding southern doctrine that white freedom depended on slavery.
because slaves performed hard menial labor slavery established a floor in the southern economy below which even the poorest whites could not descend.
break down slavery argued one virginian and you would with the same blow destroy the great democratic principle of equality among men by which he meant white men.
above all poor southerners supported slavery because they accepted the essential tenets of white supremacy in particular the notion that blacks were inferior to whites and destined to live under their dominance.
now suppose they was free said a white alabama farmer about slaves to a northerner touring the south in the 1850s theyd all think themselves just as good as we how would you like to hev a nigger feelin just as good as a white man divergent visions southern society not only preached the superiority of whites over blacks but also the superiority of slave labor over northern wage labor.
the most prominent defender of slavery was george fitzhugh.
in books and pamphlets published in the 1850s he argued that all great societies in history practiced slavery and that the southern version was remarkably humane because masters felt obliged to feed clothe and shelter their slaves.
the negro slaves of the south he wrote are the happiest and in some sense the freest people in the world moreover argued fitzhugh and others such as the artist who drew this image that idealized slavery 12 17 slavery rescued africans from the so called barbarism of africa and exposed them to civilization and christianity.
pointing to the norths urban slums swelled with poor industrial workers fitzhugh ridiculed the northern contention that wage labor was morally superior to slavery.
northern factory workers he asserted were little more than wage slaves their condition was worse than that of the black slave because factory owners owed them nothing but the lowest possible wage.
capital exercises a more perfect compulsion over free laborers than human masters over slaves wrote fitzhugh for free laborers must at all times work or starve and slaves are supported whether they work or not northern society with its hireling labor claimed an official in charleston was characterized by pauperism rowdyism mobism and anti rentism why did southern whites who owned no slaves support slavery.
republicans had an answer for the likes of fitzhugh a free labor philosophy that celebrated the virtues of individualism independence entrepreneurship and upward mobility.
as fitzhugh did for the slave south they offered an idealized vision of the industrial north that conveniently ignored the hopeless plight of many poverty stricken city dwellers.
in the constitution of human nature wrote new york tribune editor horace greeley the desire of bettering ones condition is the mainspring of effort in contrast to the south which reserved hard labor for slaves argued greeley in the north all work was noble and moral no matter how menial.
better still for the ambitious wage labor need only be temporary.
if a man labored hard saved his money avoided drink and sought opportunity went the free labor philosophy he would soon possess his own farm or small business.
nothing not lack of money family ties formal education or american birth stood in the way of success.
a slave based society then for these republicans was the antithesis of this dynamic society of democratic opportunity.
enslave a man wrote greeley and you destroy his ambition his enterprise his capacity to northern abolitionists slavery also stifled the capacity of most poor and middling whites protecting the privileges of the aristocratic few and leaving the rest with little opportunity for success.
even worse slavery led to a culture that celebrated laziness luxury and decadence as opposed to the capitalist virtues of hard work thrift and self restraint.
northern writers like frederick law olmsted who traveled the south in the 1850s frequently commented on the backwardness of southern life its lack of public education railroads factories and substantial cities as well as a general tone of despair and fatalism among poor whites.
this ideological war of words intensified when a financial panic on wall street sent the economy plunging into a deep recession in late 1857 bringing unemployment and hard times to the industrial northeast and agrarian west.
but because the southern economy was so geared toward the export of cotton it experienced little of the panic of 1857 southern nationalists pointed to this as evidence that cotton is supreme in comparison to northern industry.
southerners also argued that it proved the south could prosper on its own should the union ever dissolve.
the development of these divergent philosophies in the 1850s played a major role in creating a climate of extreme mistrust between north and south.
given the moral and social dimension of view the closer look competing visions slavery and christianity two societies 12 17 proslavery propaganda slavery and free labor contrasted this 1852 woodcut captures the argument of george fitzhugh and other proslavery propagandists claiming that masters care for their slaves even when sick and unable to work whereas cold hearted northern factory owners simply dump their sick or injured workers at the poor house.
the proslavery argument southerners perceived northern criticism of slavery and attempts to prevent its spread as attacks on their way of life likewise southern celebration of slavery and criticism of capitalist free labor convinced many northerners that the slave power intended to spread slavery everywhere including into the industrial north.
the successful efforts by southerners in congress to defeat proposals for higher tariffs to protect northern industry land grants to promote a transcontinental railroad and a homestead act to give 160 acres of public land to western settlers accentuated hard feelings in the north.
in 1858 a leading ideologue of the republican party william seward predicted an irrepressible conflict between the two societies.
how did the panic of 1857 strengthen the southern argument for secession.
chapter review best selling antislavery novel convinces many northerners that slavery is wrong.
whig party collapses.
replaced by the republican party.
know nothing movement reaches high point.
nativist candidates elected throughout northeast and midwest but movement soon fades.
the bloodshed lasts into 1857 and discredits the principle of popular sovereignty.
senator sumner assaulted for his crimes against kansas speech.
increases sectional animosity as southerners hail brooks as a hero and northerners denounce him as a violent villain.
review questions 1 why did slavery emerge as a national political issue in the late 1840s.
2 what led to the rise of the republican party.
how did the party define its position on slavery.
3 what were the sources of nativism that led to the rise of the know nothings.
4 why did many northerners believe that southern slaveholding interests had gained control of the national government.
5 what role did economic development play in the rise of sectional tension.
key terms compromise of 1850 an attempt by congress to resolve the slavery question by making concessions to both the north and south including admission of california and a new fugitive slave act.
fugitive slave act a component of the compromise of 1850 that increased the federal governments obligation to capture and return escaped slaves to their owners.
underground railroad a network of safe houses and secret hiding places along routes leading to the north and into canada where slavery was prohibited that helped several thousand slaves gain their freedom between 1830 and 1860 young america the movement within the democratic party that embraced manifest destiny and promoted territorial expansion increased international trade and the spread of american ideals of democracy and free enterprise abroad.
350 kansas nebraska act an 1854 act designed to resolve the controversy over whether slavery would be permitted in the western territories.
it repealed the ban on slavery north of 36 30 the missouri compromise and created two separate territories kansas west of missouri and nebraska west of iowa.
know nothings the nickname for the constituents of the nativist or anti immigrant american party who called for legislation restricting office holding to native born citizens and raising the period of naturalization for citizenship from five to twenty one years.
bleeding kansas a phrase used to describe the wave of vigilante reprisals and counterreprisals by proslavery and antislavery forces in kansas in 1856 dred scott v sandford the highly controversial 1857 supreme court decision that rejected the claim of the slave dred scott who argued that time spent with his owner in regions that barred slavery had made him a free man.
it also declared that congress lacked the right to regulate slavery in the territories.
lincoln douglas debates a series of high profile debates in illinois in 1858 between senate candidates stephen a douglas and abraham lincoln that focused primarily on the slavery controversy.
john browns raid a failed assault led by the radical abolitionist on the federal arsenal at harpers ferry virginia on october 16 1859 intending to seize the guns and ammunition and then touch off a wave of slave rebellions.
crittenden compromise an unsuccessful proposal by kentucky senator john j crittenden to resolve the secession crisis in the spring of 1861 with constitutional amendments to protect slavery.
chapter 13 a nation torn apart the civil war 1861 1865 unfortunately for lincoln the union armys enthusiasm was no substitute for experience.
in 1861 there were only 16 000 professional soldiers in the army most of them stationed in the west.
one third of the armys officers joined the confederacy.
of those officers who remained few possessed any real combat experience.
to make matters worse because state officials named the officers to command the new regiments of volunteers they invariably chose men whose chief qualifications were their political connections and fondness for parading.
one regiment the 11th new york volunteer infantry was perhaps the most vivid example of this phenomenon.
as this print 13 4 shows these volunteers donned flashy uniforms patterned after the zouaves frances famous regiments in algeria replete with red silk pantaloons and green jackets.
the new york zouaves enjoyed great celebrity at the wars outset and one of them colonel elmer ephraim ellsworth at right became the unions first martyr when he was killed pulling down a confederate flag in virginia.
despite their stylishness however the 11th new york zouaves performed disastrously at bull 13 4 the zouaves of the 11th new york many regiments raised to fight for the union and the confederacy included inexperienced men whose romantic visions of warfare were expressed in their fanciful uniforms.
how did the doctrine of states rights hinder the southern war effort.
as the war progressed both armies replaced special regimental uniforms with union blue and confederate gray.
mobilization in the south unlike the north the confederacy needed to create an army from scratch.
immediately after seceding southern states revived reorganized and expanded their militias many of which were more like social clubs than military units.
in march 1861 the confederate congress established an army of 100 000 volunteers for one year terms of service leading to the merging of most state militia companies into the confederate army.
to thwart the unions intended blockade of the southern coastline the confederacy commenced creating a navy and authorizing privateers to seize union ships.
equipping their soldiers and sailors proved a far greater challenge.
lacking the industrial base of the north the south built arms factories that eventually turned out some 350 000 rifles.
they also imported 700 000 more.
nonetheless throughout the war confederate soldiers often needed to scavenge battlefields to find weapons and ammunition.
the confederate effort to thwart the union blockade was similarly hampered by a lack of shipyards.
the davis administration also had to pay for the war.
possessing few banks and limited reserves of gold and silver the government tried several schemes including requiring individual states to pay for the war and imposing an income tax.
when none of these policies worked the confederate government simply printed paper money.
with more than 1 billion in circulation by 1864 twice the amount issued in the north the citizens of the confederacy faced punishing inflation which reached 9 000 percent by 1865 as compared with 80 percent in the union.
another obstacle to confederate victory was the souths popular doctrine of states rights.
it envisioned the ideal national government as one that left most power and authority to the states.
even though the confederacy ultimately managed to overcome states rights opposition and create a centralized national government and military its efforts were hindered by vociferous critics.
governors zebulon b vance of north carolina and joseph e brown of georgia for example opposed the incorporation of their state militias into the confederate army.
later when the confederacy enacted a military draft they raised a loud protest and created hundreds of exemptions for friends and state officials.
mobilization strategy and diplomacy new york minnesota wisconsin nebraska territory michigan pennsylvania iowa oh i o r the struggle for the border states new jersey delaware oh o i while both sides maryland west indiana virginia readied for war they illinois created virginia en tuc washington d c kansas k y in 1863 also struggled for the r territory missouri kentucky loyalty of the border north states missouri carolina tennessee kentucky delaware south indian new arkansas carolina and maryland the territory mexico slave states along the territory alabama border of the congeorgia at l an t i c federacy that had not mississippi t e x a s seceded 13 5.
these o c e an held enormous stratelouisiana gic value for both sides.
florida missouri and kentucky bordered the vital mississippi gulf of mexico river.
kentucky also controlled key sections of the ohio and kenborder states did not secede tucky rivers.
a seceded delaware could confederacy cut off water access to philadelphia.
worst of union all if maryland seceded it would leave washington d c surrounded by confederate terrinote the western counties of virginia remained tory and cost the union its main railroad route loyal to the union and were admitted as the state west.
of west virginia in 1863 the davis administration had strong incentive 13 5 the vital border states to lure the border states into joining the confedthe border states missouri kentucky maryland and delaware eracy.
these four states contained nearly half the held enormous strategic military economic and symbolic value souths white male population and 80 percent of for both sides.
in the end the lincoln administration succeeded in keeping them in the union.
its industry.
given the souths disadvantages in manpower and manufacturing the loss of these states would seriously weaken the confederate war and suspend habeas corpus the right of a pereffort.
son to petition a judge for release from unlawful ultimately the union managed to hold all four imprisonment.
delaware where less than two percent of the securing union control of missouri also required white population owned slaves proved relatively a heavy hand.
the situation there resembled that of easy to hold.
kentucky remained divided between bleeding kansas in 1857 see chapter 13 a nation torn apart the civil war 1861 1865 13 9 the minie ball the conical shaped minie ball left replaced round musket balls right and increased the accuracy of rifle fire.
its adoption during the civil war contributed to the high death toll in combat.
killing a man from a distance of 400 to 500 yards versus 100 yards for traditional muskets.
the key technological breakthrough for the rifle was the minie ball invented in france in the 1840s.
as these photographs 13 9 show the conical shaped minie ball left replaced round musket balls right and were the forerunners of the bullet.
the grooves inside the rifle barrel caused the minie ball when fired to spiral much like a football increasing its accuracy.
other aspects of modern war included the emphasis on destroying the enemys army rather than merely seizing and holding territory and a willingness to inflict suffering on the civilian population.
military commanders on both sides however were slow to adjust to these changes.
schooled in traditional warfare at military academies such as west point most were reluctant to abandon the strategy of attacking entrenched enemy positions with massed infantry.
when defenders of these positions turned their modern weaponry on charging soldiers the results were horrific.
toward emancipation along with modern technology slavery also shaped the civil war.
at the outset of the conflict moderates like lincoln insisted the goal of the war was to preserve the union not to abolish slavery.
they realized that while many northerners opposed slavery they also rejected the idea of racial equality.
they also feared that talk of emancipation would cause the border states to secede and alienate pro union residents of the south who lincoln hoped would overthrow confederate rule and return their states to the union.
abolitionists however argued that because the southern states seceded to protect slavery reunion could occur only after it was destroyed.
but while white northerners debated emancipation enslaved african americans in the south how did lincoln expect the emancipation proclamation to benefit the union war effort.
took matters into their own hands by fleeing to union army lines.
only weeks after the war began in may 1861 an angry virginia slaveholder demanded the union army observe the terms of the 1850 fugitive slave act and return his three escaped slaves.
general benjamin butler refused declaring fugitive slaves contraband of war or seized property.
the lincoln administration endorsed the contraband policy as a shrewd war tactic likely to cause havoc in the south.
self emancipating slaves continued to arrive at union army camps in ever growing numbers totaling close to one million by the wars end see images as history who freed the slaves.
in response to these events congress slowly began the process of dismantling slavery.
in august 1861 the first confiscation act declared free any slaves used in the confederate war effort.
a second confiscation act in july 1862 empowered the army to seize and render forever free the slaves of anyone aiding the confederacy.
that same month congress authorized the president to let african americans fight in the union army.
these measures demonstrated a growing understanding among northerners that winning the war required the abolition of slavery.
the threat to slavery posed by these actions was not lost on southerners who feared not only the loss of their slaves but also a large scale slave insurrection.
slave escapes rumors of slave revolts and the increased insubordination of many slaves led to rising anxiety among southerners.
they accordingly stepped up slave patrols and scrutinized slave behavior for any sign of ill intent.
lincoln gradually came to see emancipation not merely as inevitable but as essential for union victory since it would strike at the heart of the rebellion and prevent british intervention.
on july 22 1862 he informed the cabinet of his intent to issue a decree of emancipation.
but to avoid the appearance of acting in desperation lincoln waited for a union victory before issuing this decree.
the union victory came two months later in mid september at the battle of antietam in maryland.
lee choosing to wage a bold offensive led his army north into maryland.
mcclellan even after acquiring a copy of the confederate battle plan reacted slowly allowing lee to consolidate his troops.
finally on september 17 1862 mcclellan attacked lees army.
after squandering several chances to defeat lee mcclellans forces were eventually stymied by the last minute arrival of confederate reinforcements.
the next day view the closer look lincoln visits mcclellan the early campaigns 1861 1863 images as history who freed the slaves.
why did abraham lincoln decide to issue the emancipation proclamation in 1862 after stating many many times that he had no intention of abolishing slavery.
there were several reasons not the least of which was that one year into the war the confederacy seemed as strong as ever.
lincoln decided that attacking slavery would hasten the end of the war.
but there is another often overlooked reason for lincoln to change and decide to embrace abolition from the moment the war began thousands of slaves began to flee to freedom often to the camps of union soldiers.
this wave of selfemancipation vividly captured in this 1867 painting by theodor kaufmann on to liberty forced the lincoln administration to formulate wartime policies regarding slavery a process that ultimately led to emancipation.
but even as kaufmann and others celebrated african americans role in their own liberation white americans after the war began to present a different and inaccurate version of the story see chapter 13 13 10 dead soldiers along the sunken road antietam 1862 the civil war was the first military conflict in american history captured by the relatively new medium of photography.
photographs such as this one taken by alexander gardner after the battle of antietam brought home to millions of americans the brutality of modern war.
a nation torn apart the civil war 1861 1865 mcclellan chose not to attack despite superior numbers and the shattered condition of lees army.
the following day lee led his army back into virginia handing mcclellan a technical victory a frustrated lincoln however soon removed him from command.
the battle as indicated by the grim scene 13 10 of its aftermath captured by photographer alexander gardner claimed 6 000 lives and left 17 000 wounded making it the deadliest single day of the war.
shortly after antietam in september 1862 lincoln issued his preliminary emancipation proclamation.
unless the seceded states and parts thereof that were not under union army control returned to the union by january 1 1863 the decree warned their slaves shall be then thenceforward and forever free even though the decree left slavery intact in the border states and areas held by the union army lincoln knew conservatives northern democrats and border state unionists would react negatively and that republicans might suffer at the polls that november.
still he reasoned the benefits of emancipation far outweighed the risks as it would cause chaos by encouraging slaves to flee their masters and make it highly unlikely that britain where anti slavery sentiment was strong would intervene in the conflict.
why did photography have a more powerful impact on the public than artists depictions of battles.
though some radicals and abolitionists expressed dismay because the proclamation freed slaves only in the seceded states they recognized that lincolns simple terse statement of military policy had transformed the meaning of the conflict.
if northerners by late 1862 realized the war was no mere insurrection they also understood that its goal was something greater than simply a restored union.
it was now a war of subjugation.
reunion would occur only after the fabric of southern society was destroyed.
slaughter and stalemate restoring the union and abolishing slavery of course depended entirely on victory in the field.
but the army of the potomac now commanded by general ambrose e burnside suffered a devastating defeat at the battle of fredericksburg on december 13 1862 burnside tried one more offensive on january 22 1863 a disastrous mid winter effort that became mired in muddy impassible roads.
a despondent lincoln replaced burnside with general joseph hooker.
not all the news from the union battlefields in late 1862 was negative.
on december 31 union troops under general william s rosecrans turned back an attempt by confederate general braxton bragg to regain western tennessee and kentucky in the battle of murfreesboro.
braggs retreat left the west firmly in the hands of the union army for the rest of the war.
lee and his army of northern virginia however continued to thwart the union effort to take richmond.
in the battle of chancellorsville april 30 may 6 1863 despite commanding a force half the size of hookers lee scored a smashing victory.
but it came at a price stonewall jackson the man lee had come to count on most was killed accidentally by his own men.
view the closer look images as history photography and the visualization of modern war behind the lines behind the lines the war brought challenges and hardships to the union and confederate home fronts.
civilians faced shortages of goods soaring inflation and conscription.
these conditions were more severe in the south where many civilians also came under union military rule.
these problems coupled with mounting death tolls led to sagging morale and rising criticism of political leaders in both regions.
occasionally discontent exploded into violent riots.
the war placed an especially great demand on women who assumed new occupational and civic roles.
meeting the demands of modern war while war raged in the east and west republicans took advantage of their dominant position in congress to enact legislation long opposed by southerners.
most were policies to promote industrialization a high tariff and westward settlement the homestead and pacific railway acts.
several laws however were part of an unprecedented effort to outfit and finance a modern army.
the national bank acts of 1863 and 1864 established a national banking system whereby member banks could issue treasury notes or greenbacks as currency.
the nations first income tax the sale of 400 million in bonds to the public and the borrowing of 2 6 billion from banks helped pay for the war.
the cost of the war increased the federal budget twenty fold during the war from 63 million in 1861 to 1 3 billion in 1865 all told the war effort greatly expanded the size and scope of the federal government.
in contrast to the unions ability to sustain the war effort davis and other confederate leaders soon discovered that there were limits to southerners willingness to adapt to the demands of modern warfare.
in response to the need for more soldiers and revenue the confederate congress established a military draft and an income tax in april 1862 officials across the confederacy denounced the measures as gross violations of states rights.
among the loudest protestors was alexander stephens daviss own vice president.
southerners evaded both the draft and income tax to such an extent that neither measure produced the needed men or money.
draft and tax evasion also occurred on a large scale in the north to be sure but greater supplies of men and money diminished their impact.
these limits were compounded by president davis.
despite his extensive political and military experience he proved an ineffective leader for a time of crisis.
unlike lincoln he selected a weak cabinet to prevent challenges to his authority and bristled at the slightest disagreement.
he also micromanaged the war department firing or driving to resignation five secretaries of war in four years.
the confederate armys success in the wars first two years obscured daviss flaws but as the armys fortunes declined after 1862 the presidents leadership style sparked rancor and disunity.
hardships on the home front while soldiers fought in the field civilians in the north and south faced a number of hardships.
in the north the arms metalworking boot making and shipbuilding industries boomed but the scarcity of cotton caused widespread layoffs and closures in the textile industry.
workers wages rose by 40 percent but prices rose even faster as inflation averaged 15 percent annually.
in response many workers formed and joined craft unions but appeals to patriotism and the use of strikebreakers discouraged strikes.
southerners faced far worse economic problems.
the southern economy was hard hit by the cessation of trade with the north and europe due to the union blockade.
southern industry and agriculture were hindered by chronic labor shortages due to military service and by the flight of slaves and the destruction or seizure of farms and factories by union armies.
as a result the production of goods and agricultural produce in the south decreased by 30 percent during the war.
by contrast northern output increased significantly.
these conditions led to shortages of nearly everything in the south how did the union fund the war.
chapter 13 a nation torn apart the civil war 1861 1865 choices and consequences equal peril unequal pay at first the war department planned to pay african american soldiers the same 13 per month plus 3 50 for clothes as white soldiers.
indeed as the recruitment poster below shows many early black recruits received equal pay.
but in june 1863 the lincoln administration fearing a backlash among white soldiers who did not see african americans as their equals adopted a two tier wage scale that paid black soldiers just 7 per month plus 3 for clothes.
outraged african american officers and enlisted men of the 54th and 55th massachusetts colored infantry pondered their options.
choices quietly accept the lower wages as a regrettable but unavoidable trade off that allowed them to enlist in the union army and fight to end slavery.
accept the unequal wages as better than nothing and necessary to maintain their families while protesting the injustice and lobbying for equal pay.
reject the lower wages on principle despite the financial hardship on their families while fulfilling their duties as soldiers protesting the injustice and lobbying for equal pay.
lay down their arms and refuse to obey orders until they received equal pay.
decision the men chose the third option rejecting the lower wages on principle despite the financial hardship on their families.
they even rejected an offer by the governor of massachusetts to pay the 6 per month difference out of the state treasury citing the principle of equality that was at stake.
meanwhile they fulfilled their duties as soldiers protested the injustice and lobbied the lincoln administration for equal pay.
consequences the soldiers and their families hung on for more than a year until congress in june 1864 authorized an equal pay scale for all soldiers regardless of race.
by then given the well documented professionalism and courage exhibited by black soldiers on the battlefield the distinction in pay had become an embarrassment to lincolns administration.
not all black regiments however made the same decision as the massachusetts 54th and 55th and the consequences of their actions were starkly different.
sergeant william walker of the 21st u s colored infantry had his men lay down their arms in protest over unequal pay.
he was convicted of mutiny and executed.
continuing controversies how were african americans in the military treated after the civil war.
the u s army eradicated the two tier pay scale but not racial segregation.
african american leaders protested segregation but for all subsequent wars through world war ii black soldiers and sailors served in segregated units under mostly white officers.
president harry truman ordered the military desegregated in 1948 what role did african american soldiers play in the union war effort.
read the document james henry gooding letter to president lincoln 1863 toward union victory regiments were not used judiciously critics would accuse the army of racism asserting it carelessly sent them into harms way.
the first well publicized test of african american soldiers came on july 18 1863 when the 54th massachusetts led a nighttime assault on fort wagner a key confederate outpost that guarded charleston harbor.
the confederates repulsed their attack.
but the courage exhibited by the soldiers the unit lost 100 dead and 146 were wounded won them universal praise and undermined the racist belief that blacks would not fight.
all told 198 000 blacks including 144 000 former slaves served in the union army and navy.
this number amounted to 10 percent of the total enlisted men even though african americans comprised only 1 percent of the northern population.
african american soldiers participated in over 449 separate engagements against confederate troops and 38 000 died during the war.
sixteen black soldiers and four black sailors received the medal of honor.
the colored soldiers in this four years struggle wrote one african american soldier have proven themselves in every respect to be men their contribution to the union war effort proved vital to winning the war.
most significant african american service in the war empowered them to claim full citizenship after the war.
once let the black man get upon his person the brass letters u s let him get an eagle on his button and a musket on his shoulder and bullets in his pocket said frederick douglass there is no power on earth that can deny that he has earned the right to citizenship the confederacy begins to crumble news of the losses at gettysburg and vicksburg caused dismay across the south.
moreover davis and the confederate leadership had other reasons to worry.
the immediate problem was a lack of men.
a draft instituted in april 1862 failed to attract enough recruits.
protests by poor whites forced the revision in 1863 of a provision in the draft law that exempted wealthy whites who held 20 or more slaves but still new recruits fell short of the number needed.
the continued loss of territory to the union army exacerbated this trend as did a sharp rise in desertions which topped 100 000 by late 1864.
see envisioning evidence human resources in the armies of the civil war.
read the document letter from a free black volunteer to the christian recorder 13 14 the massacre at fort pillow in april 1864 confederate soldiers slaughtered dozens of captured african american soldiers at fort pillow in tennessee.
why did lincoln initially agree to pay african american soldiers less than white soldiers.
chapter review clement vallandigham arrested prompts outrage from copperheads but lincoln defends action as necessary to win the war review questions 1 what advantages allowed the confederacy to enjoy military success in the early years of the war.
2 why did both north and south consider the border states vital.
3 how did african americans contribute to emancipation.
4 how did the war change northern society and the federal government.
5 what approach to warfare set generals ulysses s grant and william t sherman apart from less successful union military leaders.
6 how did social economic and class differences in southern society contribute to the confederacys defeat.
key terms border states the four slave states missouri kentucky maryland and delaware that bordered the confederacy.
the lincoln administration succeeded in keeping them in the union.
cotton embargo a ban imposed by confederates in 1861 on the export of cotton the souths most valuable commodity to prompt cotton importing nations like england and france to intervene to secure confederate independence.
trent affair a diplomatic incident in november 1861 when a u s navy vessel stopped the british ship trent and removed two confederates heading for europe to press for british and french intervention.
peninsular campaign the complex plan developed by general george b mcclellan to capture the confederate capital whereby 400 ships deposited 120 000 soldiers just east of richmond at fortress monroe between the james and york rivers.
emancipation proclamation the decree announced by lincoln in september 1862 and taking effect on january 1 1863 declaring slaves in the seceded states not under union army control forever free copperheads northern democrats sometimes called peace democrats who opposed the war and the lincoln administration and favored a negotiated settlement with the confederacy.
conscription act a law passed by congress in march 1863 to offset declining volunteers to the union army.
it declared all male citizens and immigrants who had applied for citizenship aged twenty to forty five eligible to be drafted into the union army.
the rich could pay a 300 fee to avoid the draft.
draft riots four days of rioting in new york city in july 1863 by mostly poor immigrant and working class men who opposed the draft.
shermans march to the sea the 285 mile scorched earth campaign of general william t sherman across georgia in late 1864 and early 1865 shermans soldiers seized or destroyed 100 million in goods hurting southern morale and depriving the confederate army of supplies.
special field order no.
15 the directive announced by general sherman in january 1865 during his march to the sea that set aside more than 400 000 acres of seized confederate land for distribution to former slaves in 40 acre plots.
chapter 14 now that we are free reconstruction and the new south 1863 1890 competing visions demanding rights protecting privilege in the aftermath of the civil war one question dominated the minds of americans north and south now that slavery was abolished what would be the status of the freedmen.
while newspaper editors clergymen and members of congress debated the issue white and black southerners set out to answer the question themselves.
as you read the following documents one from a convention of freedmen and the other from the state legislature of mississippi consider the starkly contrasted visions for the future of southern society.
why do the freedmen feel compelled to say they bear no ill will toward their former oppressors why do mississippi legislators define vagrancy in such vague terms.
address to the loyal citizens and congress of the united states of america proceedings of the convention of the colored people of virginia held in the city of alexandria august 2 3 4 5 1865 we the delegates of the colored people of the state of virginia solemnly declaring that we desire to live upon the most friendly and agreeable terms with all men we feel no ill will or prejudice toward our former oppressors are willing and desire to forgive and forget the past and so shape our future conduct as shall promote our happiness and the interest of the community in which we live we must on the other hand be allowed to aver and assert that we believe that we have among the white people of this state many who are our most inveterate enemies who hate us as a class who feel no sympathy with or for us who despise us simply because we are black and more especially because we have been made free by the power of the united states government we claim then as citizens of this state the laws of the commonwealth of virginia shall give to all men equal protection that each and every man may appeal to the law for his equal rights without regard to the color of his skin and we believe this can only be done by extending the franchise which we believe to be our inalienable right as freemen and which the declaration of independence guarantees to all free citizens of this government and which is the privilege of this nation.
we claim the right of suffrage mississippi legislators in december 1865 enacted the first black codes to limit the freedoms of african americans.
defining vagrancy in such vague terms allowed white southerners to arrest freedmen at will and to curtail their freedom of movement.
these measures were quickly copied in the remaining ex confederate states.
section 1 all rogues and vagabonds idle and dissipated persons persons who neglect their calling or employment misspend what they earn or do not provide for the support of themselves or their families or dependents shall be deemed and considered vagrants and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding one hundred dollars with all accruing costs and be imprisoned not exceeding ten days section 5 in case of any freedman free negro or mulatto shall fail for five days after the imposition of any or forfeiture upon him or her for violation of any of the provisions of this act to pay the same that it shall be and is hereby made the duty of the sheriff of the proper county to hire out said freedman free negro or mulatto to any person who will for the shortest period of service pay said fine and forfeiture and all costs colored mens convention 1869.
because we can see no other safeguard for our protection.
because we are citizens of the country and natives of this state.
because we are as well qualified to vote who shall be our rulers as many who do vote for that purpose who have no interest in us and do not know our wants.
what is significant about the freedmens use of the term citizen.
read the document address of the colored state convention to the people of the state of south carolina 1865 the struggle to define reconstruction hit the road seeking new opportunities could be arrested as a vagrant and fined.
if a freedman could not pay his fine he could be hired out for a time to a local plantation owner willing to pay his fine.
as this drawing 14 8 dramatically shows in some cases the contracts for such labor were auctioned off to local planters.
the artist intended to conjure in the minds of northerners a grim scene reminiscent of a slave auction suggesting that one of the wars chief accomplishments emancipation was being undermined.
some black codes required that the children of vagrant freedmen be forced to accept apprenticeships that bound them to an employer until age 21 others coerced blacks to sign long term work contracts as proof of employment a practice that left them at the mercy of employers who were not required to pay them for work performed if they quit before the contract expired.
other laws restricted freedmen to renting land only in rural areas to keep them on plantations prohibited ministers from preaching without a license outlawed interracial marriages and barred blacks from serving on juries.
congressional reconstruction and the fourteenth amendment republicans in congress vowed to block johnsons rapid and lenient reconstruction program for both idealistic and practical reasons.
excepting emancipation none of the republicans goals for changing southern society had been accomplished and the former slavocracy appeared poised to resume power a result certain to revive the democratic party.
a slower process of reconstruction would allow the republican party to take root in the south especially if african americans were granted the right to vote as many radicals like congressman thaddeus stevens of pennsylvania demanded.
the confrontation began in january 1866 when congress reconvened.
republicans first refused read the document affidavit of former slave enoch braston 1866 14 8 the black codes in action unable to pay his fine for vagrancy as defined in the black codes of florida a freedman is auctioned off.
the high bidder won the right to a freedmans labor for months or years.
how did black codes calling for freedmen to sign labor contracts curtail their freedom.
chapter review review questions 1 why did african americans want land.
how did they justify their claims to plantation lands.
2 why did reconstruction become violent.
how did congress and the grant administration try to curb the violence.
establishes the right to vote for all male citizens regardless of race color or previous condition of servitude enforcement acts passed empowers grant administration to weaken ku klux klan and like groups north carolina elects first redeemer government signals a return to white supremacy in the south other southern states soon follow 5 why did reconstruction end.
6 what was the lost cause.
what purposes did it serve in the post reconstruction south.
7 who were the bourbons and what was their vision for the new south.
3 how did feminists react to the fifteenth amendment.
how did this affect the womens rights movement.
key terms ten percent plan pardoned all southerners except highranking military officers and confederate officials who took an oath pledging loyalty to the union and support for emancipation.
as soon as 10 percent of a states voters took this oath they could call a convention establish a new state government and apply for congressional recognition.
freedmens bureau relief agency for the war ravaged south created by congress in march 1865 it provided emergency services built schools and managed confiscated lands.
black codes laws designed by the ex confederate states to sharply limit the civil and economic rights of freedmen and create an exploitable workforce.
fourteenth amendment drafted by congress in june 1866 it defined citizenship to include african americans guaranteed equal protection before the law and established the federal government as the guarantor of individual civil rights.
carpetbagger white southerners derogatory term for northerners who came south after the war to settle work or aid the ex slaves.
it falsely suggested they were penniless adventurers who came south merely to get rich.
scalawag white southerners derogatory term for fellow whites considered traitors to their region and race for joining the republican party and cooperating with reconstruction policy.
fifteenth amendment constitutional amendment passed by congress in 1869 providing an explicit constitutional guarantee for black suffrage.
mississippi plan campaign of violence and intimidation waged by armed groups of whites closely allied with the democratic party that drove republicans from power in the mississippi state elections of 1874 copied by other southern states.
redeemers name for white southern political leaders who successfully returned their states to white democratic rule in the mid 1870s.
the name was intended to depict these leaders as saviors of southern society from rule by freedmen scalawags and carpetbaggers.
civil rights act of 1875 passed by congress in 1875 it required state governments to provide equal access in public facilities such as schools and to allow african americans to serve on juries.
in 1883 the u s supreme court ruled it unconstitutional.
compromise of 1877 resolution of the disputed presidential election of 1876 that handed victory to republican rutherford b hayes over democrat samuel j tilden.
democrats agreed to the deal in exchange for patronage and the continued removal of federal troops from the south.
new south optimistic phrase white southerners used to describe the post reconstruction south reflecting the souths development of a new system of race relations based on segregation and white supremacy and pointing to a profound economic transformation that swept across the region.
chapter 15 conflict and conquest the transformation of the west 1860 1900 decades as they struggled with the loss of tribal lands the cultural erosion caused by the boarding schools and high levels of poverty and alcoholism native americans found ways to preserve their culture including languages artistic forms and religious beliefs.
they did so by maintaining traditions within families and establishing informal methods of passing on traditions from one generation to the next.
as a result when a native american rights movement emerged in the 1960s and 1970s it included a commitment to reaffirming and strengthening traditional native american cultures.
creating mythical heroes and images the story of the american west has long been the object of romanticism and myth.
the image of the west as a place of high adventure heroism rugged individualism and endless opportunity developed with the first enthusiastic reports of western explorers such as lewis and clarke see chapters in american history.
nowhere is this more apparent than at the site of the 1876 battle of little bighorn.
for more than a century following the battle the site memorialized custer and his men as heroic martyrs who died in the cause of western settlement.
named the custer battlefield national cemetery it featured a memorial to the seventh cavalry and some indian scouts on last stand hill.
native americans who of course won the battle were ignored.
but the influence of new western history and native american activism led to the renaming in 1991 of the site as the little bighorn battlefield national monument and in 2003 the unveiling of the native american memorial shown here 15 22.
only 100 yards from the seventh cavalry monument it features three bronze outline sculptures representing sioux cheyenne and arapaho warriors who participated in the battle.
its official theme is peace through unity but it also represents a growing awareness that for far too long americans relied on an incomplete and overly simplistic understanding of the history of the american west.
why are native americans so committed to reshaping the interpretation of historic sites like little bighorn.
chapter review reflects growing discontent of american farmers that eventually leads to the formation of the peoples party the vanderbilt ball a lavish exhibition of conspicuous consumption attended by the richest families in america the pendleton act becomes law intended to diminish nepotism and corruption it required civil service exams for 10 percent of federal jobs josiah strong publishes our country a best selling book written in an alarmist style it warned americans that cities and immigrants posed a grave threat to the republic.
review questions 1 why did cities grow in the late nineteenth century.
2 who supported political machines and why.
why did reformers dislike political machines so much.
3 how did the approach to poverty by reformers like jacob riis and jane addams differ from traditional approaches.
4 how did the roles and expectations for middleclass women change in the gilded age.
what social and economic developments made this possible.
5 what were the primary grievances of people who supported the peoples party.
how did they propose to resolve them.
6 what was the long term impact of the 1896 election.
key terms gilded age the name for the period 1877 1900 that suggested the amazing achievements of the period were like a thin gold layer that covered many unresolved social problems.
tenement multiple family dwelling of four to six stories housing dozens of families that became the most common form of housing for poor city dwellers by the 1860s.
political machine powerful urban political organization that mobilized large blocs of working class and immigrant voters and often engaged in corrupt and illegal activity.
peoples party a third party effort launched in 1890 by a coalition of farmer organizations reformers and labor unions and dedicated to curbing corporate power and increasing the voice of the masses in politics.
farmers alliance organization in the 1870s and 1880s dedicated to helping farmers struggling with rising costs and falling crop prices by advocating farmer cooperatives and laws to regulate banks and railroads.
settlement house institution established in cities beginning in the 1880s and dedicated to helping the poor by providing a wide range of social and educational services.
coxeys army a protest march from ohio to washington d c organized by jacob coxey in 1894 to publicize demands for the federal government to alleviate the suffering brought on by the panic of 1893 city beautiful movement a movement begun in the 1880s that advocated comprehensive planning and grand redesign of urban space to eliminate pollution and overcrowding.
company town a town built and owned by a corporation and rented to its employees reflecting both the corporations desire to help their workers and to control them.
new woman a phrase used to describe young women in the 1890s and early 1900s that reflected their rising levels of education economic independence and political and social activism.
pullman strike a bitter strike that began on may 11 1894 at the pullman palace car company and soon spread nationwide paralyzing the railroad system.
president cleveland sent in federal troops and broke the strike.
chapter 17.
formed in 1905 the socialists had won numerous local elections and grown to over 100 000 dues paying members.
roosevelt taft and wilson believed that with regulations in place although each favored different amounts of regulation capitalism would operate more fairly.
debs offered a competing view.
he proposed transferring ownership of existing railroad oil and steel trusts to the government to ensure fair prices and wages.
government run monopolies would be the first step toward ending the free market system altogether.
most voters agreed that the time had come to reform how the economy operated but they overwhelmingly chose progressivism over socialism.
wilson won the presidency in 1912 18 4 by a landslide in the electoral college while receiving only 41 9 percent of the popular vote.
roosevelt came in second with 27 4 percent of the popular vote followed by tafts 23 2 percent.
over 900 000 americans 6 percent of the electorate voted for debs.
nearly 70 percent of those who voted cast their ballots for wilson or roosevelt a resounding public endorsement of progressive principles and reforms.
once he entered the white house president woodrow wilson went beyond trust busting to weaken monopolies.
he accepted the democratic orthodoxy of cutting the tariff so foreign businesses could market lower priced goods in the united states thereby creating a more competitive marketplace where smaller businesses could thrive.
by 1913 most industrialists had dropped their longstanding opposition to lowering the tariff.
the heads of singer sewing machines eastman kodak and u s steel believed that other nations would reciprocate allowing american captains of industry to conquer foreign markets as well.
wilson offset the lost tariff reining in big business revenue which the government needed to fund its operations with the first federal income taxes now constitutional thanks to the newly ratified sixteenth amendment 1913.
only people making more than 4 000 a year paid federal income taxes less than one percent of the population at a time when many workers felt lucky to make 1 000 a year.
wilson also tried to help small businesses by improving the flow of credit.
most small and big businessmen agreed with wilson that the time had come to reform the countrys chaotic banking system.
they vividly remembered the panic of 1907 when financial giant j p morgan had used his own funds and those of other bankers to shore up the national banking system.
the nations 7 000 banks operated with complete independence issuing all forms of currency some backed by gold and silver others backed by government bonds.
no centralized authority existed to expand or contract the currency supply as the economy demanded or to move money around the country to stave off panics.
conflicting visions soon arose over whether private financiers or the government should control the nations financial institutions.
southern and western populists wanted a federally run banking system that would destroy the wall street money trust eastern bankers likened government oversight to socialism.
after much debate congress passed the federal reserve act 1913 creating a federally run federal reserve to serve as a bankers bank that held a portion of bank funds in reserve to help member banks in time of crisis.
the federal reserve also set rates for business loans and issued a new national paper currency.
wilson beefed up federal regulation of trusts as well.
in 1914 the clayton anti trust act prohibited interlocking directories the practice of setting up shadow companies that appeared to compete but were actually run by the same board of directors.
the law exempted trade unions from prosecution under the 1890 sherman anti trust act eliminating a tactic that businessmen had used to undercut the labor movement.
the federal trade commission 1914 had the power to order companies to cease unfair trading practices although its decisions were subject to court review.
forests water and minerals provoked another set of competing visions within progressive circles.
in 1867 john muir suffered an eye injury that caused temporary blindness while working as a mechanic.
after his eyes healed muir walked 1 000 miles from indianapolis indiana to the gulf of mexico to rejuvenate his spirit.
like muir roosevelt had turned to the revitalizing power of nature while recovering from personal tragedy when he retreated to his north dakota ranch in 1884 after both his mother and 22 year old first wife died on the same day in their new york city home.
in 1903 president roosevelt went camping with muir in yosemite an area of the california sierra nevada mountains filled with spectacular waterfalls massive rock formations and giant sequoia trees nearly 200 feet high and 3 000 years old.
a photo of the pair on glacier point 18 5 before yosemite falls the largest waterfall in north america commemorated the trip.
the two men dominate the frame suggesting the power they had to decide the fate of such national treasures.
this moment of unity was fleeting.
despite their mutual love of unspoiled forests muir and roosevelt became formidable opponents who embraced different environmental visions.
muir was a preservationist who championed preserving nature in its unspoiled state as a refuge for a tired nerve shaken over civilized people he accused businessmen of ravaging forests polluting water and destroying meadows with little regard for the long term social costs of ruining the environment.
muirs condemnation resonated well with members of the middle class who wanted to escape the 18 5 president roosevelt and john muir in yosemite 1903 despite their camaraderie during a camping trip roosevelt and muir embraced competing environmental visions.
preservation versus conservation roosevelt taft and wilson prescribed differing amounts of regulation and federal activism to rein in the trusts.
businesss access to the nations view the map interactive map resources and conflict in the west how did wilsons economic vision and policies differ from those pursued by the roosevelt and taft administrations.
chapter 18 18 8 an injured pittsburgh worker portraits of maimed workers helped generate a groundswell of support for state workers compensation laws.
creating a democratic paradise the progressive era 1895 1915 suggested that few were responsible for their accidents.
this young man 18 8 had his leg crushed when he fell under a coal car in a pittsburgh coal mine.
the company paid the hospital expenses for his amputation but nothing else.
in the image a nicely dressed passerby avoids making eye contact with the injured boy who stands idle on the street suggesting that the well off preferred to ignore the plight of disabled workers.
the boys tidy appearance reveals an effort to maintain personal dignity while relying on private charity to survive.
studies like hines convinced many states to establish worker compensation programs that provided employer funded disability payments and medical care to injured workers.
as a result employers began paying more attention to workplace safety.
the drive to limit hours for male workers was less successful.
employers had traditionally maintained that as property owners they had the sole power to decide the terms of employment.
in the 1874 slaughter house cases the supreme court had ruled that a state could not deny individuals control over their own labor.
industrialists claimed that this decision granted individual workers the constitutionally protected right to negotiate wages hours and workplace rules.
according to this line of reasoning state laws or unions that tried to impose restrictions on individual workers violated their right to control their own labor.
how effective were the different strategies that progressives and unions employed to reform the workplace.
the supreme court however proved willing to abridge this right to protect public health and safety.
in 1898 the court upheld an eight hour day for utah miners deciding that guarding the health of workers engaged in a dangerous occupation served the public interest.
progressives failed in their efforts to extend these protections to the entire workforce.
in lochner v new york 1905 the court ruled that unless long work hours directly jeopardized workers health the government could not abridge an employees freedom to negotiate his own work schedule with his employer.
this decision is explored more fully in choices and consequences regulating workers hours.
miserable and unsafe working conditions also persisted.
the colorado mining town of ludlow sat along the purgatory river a telling name that suitably described what working in a mine was like.
in ludlow the rockefeller owned mining company paid miners 2 a day in company issued currency called scrip redeemable only in the company run store.
the mining company required that workers live in company owned housing and claimed no responsibility for accidents that killed 200 miners between 1904 and 1914 in 1913 12 000 miners mostly italian greek and serbian immigrants went on strike to protest these conditions and demand company recognition of their umw union.
when the company expelled the strikers and their families from their homes the workers erected tent cities in the nearby hills.
after armed company detectives failed to dislodge the miners the colorado governor sent in state troops whose wages rockefeller agreed to pay.
the ludlow massacre ensued on april 20 1914 when troops set fire to one striking miners camp and thirteen women and children suffocated to death in a shallow underground shelter where they had sought refuge.
throughout the nation outraged laborers temporarily put their ideological divisions aside to stage protest marches in every major city.
the umw issued a call to arms and hundreds of neighboring miners flooded into ludlow to defend their comrades against the state militia.
faced with the prospect of all out class war the governor requested federal troops and president wilson immediately complied.
federal intervention left the union in tatters and rockefeller free to run his mining town as he saw fit.
incidents like these convinced many unions that the progressive proposal to rely solely on the government to solve their problems was not the answer.
throughout the twentieth century union folklore and songs used the memory of ludlow to inspire workers to organize.
view the image logo for the industrial workers of the world competing views on transforming the workplace choices and consequences regulating workers hours most city residents especially tenement dwellers who did not have ovens bought their bread from bakeries.
bakers worked long hours in hot poorly ventilated kitchens sleeping and washing where they baked bread.
in 1895 new york state passed a law that set sanitary standards and limited bakers to ten hours of work per day 60 hours per week.
joseph lochner a bakery owner in utica challenged the law after new york fined him 50 for making an employee exceed these limits.
the supreme court faced three choices when it heard the case in 1905 choices a state could use its police powers to protect workers health and safety.
a state could not limit an individuals right to buy or sell labor in nonhazardous occupations such as baking.
states had the right to enact any laws not expressly forbidden by the constitution to promote the general well being of society.
decision the court ruled 5 to 4 that the fourteenth amendment which declared that no state shall deprive any person of life liberty or property without due process of the law prevented states from using their police powers to regulate work that did not imperil the health or safety of the public.
consequences the decision curtailed progressives attempt to use regulation to transform the workplace.
during the subsequent 32 year lochner era the court struck down maximum hour minimum wage and child labor laws if no clear risk to the public existed.
dismayed progressives noted that many state laws restricted an individuals ability to buy or sell labor such as mandatory school laws or sunday closures to promote the general welfare.
they also accused the court of ignoring the disproportionate power that employers wielded over workers to set the terms of employment.
continuing controversies should the government limit work hours or set a minimum wage.
lochner remained the law of the land until 1937 when the supreme court ruled that it was reasonable for washington state hotel owners to pay female hotel maids the state mandated minimum wage because the state had a right to protect its residents.
defining an acceptable standard for work and pay has been controversial ever since.
is a reasonable days work six eight ten or twelve hours.
does it matter if the work involves strenuous physical labor or is sedentary.
is it better for unions to negotiate the terms of employment or for the government to step in.
how does regulating hours of work or setting a minimum wage hurt or benefit the general public.
these are questions that americans have debated for more than 70 years.
lochner bakery what competing views existed concerning a states right to regulate the workplace.
chapter becoming a world power p 562 p 565 why did the united states fight the spanish american war.
creating an american empire p 573 what conflicting visions divided imperialists and anti imperialists.
america and east asia p 579 how did the united states protect its economic and strategic interests in east asia.
in americas backyard p 584 why was it so difficult to build the panama canal.
source destruction of the battleship maine in havana harbor in the spanish american war havana cuba 1898 feb 15 creator kurz allison imperial america the united states in the world 1890 1914 on february 15 1898 a naval officer awoke president william mckinley in the middle of the night with the stunning news that the american battleship the maine had exploded in havana cuba killing 266 of the 354 crew members.
the explosion turned the battleship into a hunk of molten steel.
this illustration depicted the blast propelling bodies and debris sky high in havana harbor.
americans also read moving first hand accounts in the press including one from survivor james r young.
i was feeling a bit glum young recalled and in fact was so quiet that lieutenant j hood came up and asked laughingly if i was asleep.
i said no i am on watch scarcely had i spoken when there came a dull sullen roar.
would to god that i could blot out the sounds and the scenes that followed the united states and spain had long been at odds over the question of independence for cuba then a spanish colony.
mckinley had sent the maine to havana to stop spanish instigated attacks on american held property in cuba.
many americans suspected that spanish saboteurs had blown up the ship to protest the u s incursion into spanish territorial waters.
the shocking images and accounts of the maine explosion fueled public anger against spain for its supposed attack on the u s navy creating a crisis between the two nations.
an official investigation confirmed these widely held views blaming the maine explosion on a spanish mine in the harbor.
the exact cause of the blast however remained a mystery.
some experts now cite a spontaneous combustion from the coal stored alongside ammunition as the most likely culprit a misfortune thirteen american naval vessels shared between 1895 and 1898 others suggest that cuban revolutionaries may have planted the explosives expecting the united states to blame spain and declare war.
the maine explosion ignited a four month war between the united states and spain in 1898 this splendid little war as one official called it ended with an overwhelming american victory.
the overseas possessions that the united states gained from spain including puerto rico guam and the philippines gave the nation a new formal colonial empire.
the united states simultaneously constructed an informal economic empire throughout the caribbean and east asia.
as the united states established itself as a budding world power americans offered conflicting visions of how the united states should behave outside its borders.
remember the maine and to hell with spain newspaper slogan urging war with spain in the wake of the maine explosion chapter 19 19 3 charge up the san juan heights 1898 this painting depicted a horseback charge up the san juan heights that was glorious and heroic with flags flying and no casualties.
in reality the soldiers advanced slowly on foot to reach the crest.
imperial america the united states in the world 1890 1914 meanwhile military planners focused on defeating the spanish in cuba.
the accompanying map spanish american war 1898 19 2 illustrates how the navy immediately blockaded cuba trapping the spanish atlantic fleet in santiago.
americas small peacetime army however was woefully unprepared to train and equip the thousands of volunteers enlisting throughout the country.
theodore roosevelt resigned as assistant secretary of the navy and formed the first u s volunteer calvary by recruiting americans from wildly diverse backgrounds.
many of the recruits had personal connections to colonel roosevelt a result of his eclectic lifestyle that included attending harvard hunting expeditions in the west and a stint as police commissioner in new york city.
dubbed the rough riders this collection of cowboys ivy league athletes policemen and pawnee scouts was one of the few volunteer units that actually fought in the war.
although american forces swelled from 28 000 to 275 000 most never left the united states.
on june 22 17 000 u s troops landed in cuba to join cuban rebels on a slow march through heavy jungle to the port of santiago which sheltered the how accurate were the legends that surrounded the charge up the san juan heights.
bulk of the spanish navy and army.
hidden spanish sharpshooters harassed u s soldiers as they made their way to the san juan heights the hills that encircled santiago.
on july 1 the americans under the command of general william shafter attacked 750 spanish soldiers along the san juan heights.
i have seen many illustrations and pictures of this charge on the san juan hills but none of them seem to show it just as i remember it recalled journalist richard harding davis who watched the battle from the sidelines as the americans walked up the hill.
like most illustrations of the battle seen in newspapers at the time this painting 19 3 erroneously shows waves of eager american soldiers advancing on horseback with the flag flying suggesting an invincible overpowering weight of numbers davis noted.
yet he continued i think the thing which impressed one the most when our men started walking from cover was that they were so few.
it almost seemed as if someone had made an awful and terrible mistake.
ones instinct was to call to them to come back roosevelt led the rough riders to the top of the san juan heights a feat that garnered him and the unit acclaim.
they stood alongside african american watch the video roosevelts rough riders the spanish american war troops from the ninth and tenth calvary who had actually reached the top first which roosevelt and the mainstream media failed to mention when celebrating the victory.
the battle provided another opportunity for the yellow press to whip up war fervor on the home front.
responding to false rumors that spanish soldiers had mutilated the corpses of american servicemen killed during the clash a judge magazine cover 19 4 pictured a spaniard drenched in the blood of american soldiers who lay at his feet.
in one hand the ape like figure holds the bloody knife responsible for the atrocity.
his other hand rests on the gravestone of u s sailors whom he allegedly killed by exploding the maine.
this image of a brute that trampled on the american flag reinforced yellow press portrayals of spain as a beast that the united states needed to subdue.
the caricature also fed into racist notions of white supremacy just like african americans at home and soon the filipinos abroad the dark skinned spanish posed a threat to the civilized world.
in future conflicts american propaganda used strikingly similar images to arouse passionate hatred of the nations german and japanese enemies.
legendary accounts attributed the american success in charging up the san juan heights to heroic frontal charges in fact the americans three gatling machine guns made the decisive difference.
believing his exhausted troops could go no farther after reaching the top general shafter decided to lay siege to santiago instead of attacking the city directly.
while american troops encircled the city atop the surrounding hills u s ships blocked the port thus trapping the bulk of the spanish navy and army in santiago.
when the spanish fleet made a dash to leave on july 3 american ships sank or beached every spanish vessel.
in both manila and santiago the newly modernized u s navy outclassed the decrepit spanish fleet scoring easy one sided victories.
on july 17 the spanish surrendered the city and cuba to the americans.
after defeating the spanish in cuba u s forces landed in puerto rico also a caribbean spanish colony where they encountered only token opposition.
american troops fought one more battle to take manila on august 13 having not yet received word that the war between the united states and spain had ended the day before.
the war concluded on a sour note however.
with limited understanding of how malaria yellow fever and typhoid spread army physicians could not stop these diseases from ravaging view the image our victorious fleet in cuban waters the troops that occupied cuba during the summer of 1898 victory celebrations among u s troops soon gave way to panic when hundreds of soldiers fell ill and healthy young men became hollow eyed walking skeletons.
it was a heartbreaking sight to see her husband a yellow fever victim whose weight had dropped from 165 pounds to 89 pounds grace paulding recalled.
he needed a years nursing before he could work again.
despairing over the lack of qualified hospital attendants the surgeon general turned in desperation to the female nurses offering their services to the military.
eventually 1 500 professional and red cross female nurses worked side by side with army doctors at home and overseas.
overall the americans counted 385 officers and soldiers killed in combat excluding those killed on the maine and nearly 2 000 deaths from disease.
the peace treaty signed on december 10 1898 set the terms of the u s victory.
in the treaty of paris spain relinquished its claim to cuba and the united states received puerto rico 19 4 the spanish brute 1898 this wartime caricature portrayed the spanish as bloodthirsty beasts who murdered and mutilated american servicemen.
were americans right to characterize the spanishamerican war as the splendid little war.
chapter 19 imperial america the united states in the world 1890 1914 competing visions annexing the philippines debate over annexing the philippines did not follow party lines as revealed in the differing views of two leading republicans carl schurz a former secretary of the interior and senator from missouri and senator henry cabot lodge of massachusetts.
schurz and lodge both evoked the nations previous expansionist drives to strengthen their arguments offering historical analogies between the nations prior success acquiring and absorbing new territories and the present dilemma over the philippines.
did annexing the philippines represent a continuation or break with past expansionist methods and policies.
in this 1899 anti annexation speech carl schurz argued that the past offered no guide to the present crisis.
in 1900 senator henry cabot lodge saw strong continuities between the past and present in urging for annexation of the philippines.
has not the career of the republic almost from its very beginning been one of territorial expansion.
has it not acquired louisiana florida texas the vast countries that came to us through the mexican war and alaska and has it not digested them well.
if the republic could digest the old why not the new.
what is the difference.
it has been stated over and over again that we have done great wrong in taking these islands without the consent of the governed from which according to american principles all just government derives its powers.
the consent of the governed.
it is a fair phrase and runs trippingly upon the tongue but i have observed a great lack of definite meaning in those who use it most what do we mean by the consent of the governed we quote it from the declaration of independence.
what did jefferson mean by the phrase.
the declaration of independence was the announcement of the existence of a new revolutionary government upon american soil.
upon whose consent did it rest.
was it upon that of all the people of the colonies duly expressed.
most assuredly not.
in the first place we must throw out all negroes and persons of african descent who formed about one quarter of the population and who were not consulted at all as to the proposed change of government.
were women included in the word governed they certainly were not permitted by voice or vote to express an opinion on this momentous question.
they must therefore be excluded.
did the revolutionary government rest on the consent of all the white males in the colonies.
most assuredly not.
there was the usual age limitation everywhere the suffrage was limited generally by property qualifications sometimes by other restrictions under the guidance of thomas jefferson we took louisiana without the consent of the governed and ruled it without their consent so long as we saw fit.
who is there to day who will stand up and say that thomas jefferson did not do well and rightly when he bought louisiana.
then came the mexican war and by the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo we received a great cession of territory from mexico including all the california coast there were many mexicans living within the ceded territory.
we never asked their consent.
1 all the former acquisitions were on this continent and excepting alaska contiguous to our borders.
2 they were situated not in tropical but in the temperate zone where democratic institutions thrive and where our people could migrate in mass.
3 they were but very thinly peopled in fact without any population that would have been in the way of new settlements.
4 they could be organized as territories in the usual manner with the expectation that they would presently come into the union as self governing states with populations substantially homogeneous to our own.
5 they did not require a material increase of our army and navy either for their subjection to our rule or for their defense against any probable foreign attack provoked by their being in our possession.
did schurz and lodge interpret history correctly in their arguments.
view the closer look competing visions annexing the philippines creating an american empire on february 4 1899 when u s and filipino patrols as a motto and fill the blacks filipinos full of clashed in the darkness igniting a full scale battle lead before finding out whether or not they are on the outskirts of manila.
the u s government friends or enemies a soldier from utah wrote called the conflict the philippine insurrection home.
american soldiers burned villages and using insurrection a term used to describe an illecrops to deprive rebels of shelter and food tactics gitimate revolt against an established government that created a starving civilian refugee populato underscore that the philippines was now a u s tion and encouraged resentful peasants to join colony not an independent nation with the right to aguinaldos force.
critics were quick to point out wage war.
the conflict nonetheless soon became a that these tactics resembled those used by spain full fledged war.
in the philippine american war in cuba.
exposs in the american press and senfought from 1899 to 1902 the united states evenate investigations revealed the inventive tortures tually defeated filipino rebel forces.
the cost of the the army used to extract information from captwo and a half year war in human lives differentitured filipino rebels fueling the ongoing debate ated it immediately from the quick american vicover whether the united states was civilizing or tory in cuba.
between 1899 and 1902 70 000 u s conquering the philippines.
in the water cure soldiers nearly 70 percent of the army fought a for example interrogators shoved a bamboo grueling war against the insurrectionists and 4 196 shoot down a victims throat to keep his mouth u s troops lost their lives.
estimates place the open while they poured water into his throat and number of filipino soldiers and civilians killed as nose until his stomach swelled and he could not high as 220 000 breathe and then pushed the rebels used convenon the stomach to expel tional warfare tactics at the water.
the victim had a first but eventually turned few minutes to release the to ambushes sniping and desired information before sabotage to drive out u s his interrogators repeated an american soldier confronting occupying forces.
american the entire process.
filipino rebel guerilla tactics soldiers called the filipino justifying annexation way of war amigo warfare of the philippines as part amigo being the spanish word for friend because of the white mans burden posed a particularly the guerilla fighters posed as friendly peasants dur thorny dilemma for the 6 000 african american ing the day then fought for the rebel army at night.
soldiers fighting in their own segregated regiments the difficulties of supplying troops with food and to subdue the filipino rebels.
white soldiers conmedical care as they marched through the jungle stantly referred to filipinos as niggers the same in search of insurgents contributed to american derogatory term they used when speaking about soldiers miseries.
to uproot the guerillas the u s their african american comrades.
knowing that army adopted a mix of persuasive and coercive many african american civilians opposed the war tactics.
in many villages the army built roads imas an unholy war of conquest a term coined by proved sanitation vaccinated civilians and created methodist minister henry mcneal turner black schools.
tens of thousands of filipinos aided the soldiers nevertheless hoped that their honorable u s army during the rebellion by providing infor military record would advance civil rights and mation and supplies a sign of their gratitude for economic opportunities for african americans.
american engineered improvements in their daily filipino rebels posted signs on trees that chastised life and of their own religious class or ethnic disafrican americans for fighting against people agreements with the aguinaldo led independence who are struggling for recognition and freedom movement.
rebel soldiers dealt harshly with civil while your people in america are being lynched ians who refused to supply them with food or told and disfranchised by the same who are trying to the americans where to find insurgent hideouts.
compel us to believe that their government will benevolent policies won over only half of deal justly and fairly by us yet these filipino apthe archipelago however.
in provinces where peals to lay down their arms had little effect on these reforms failed to curtail guerilla attacks most african american troops who focused inu s.
troops lashed out with increasing brutality.
stead on avenging the lives of comrades killed by with an enemy like this to fight it is not surpris filipino rebels.
one exception was corporal david ing that the boys should soon adopt no quarter fagan a black soldier who had fought in cuba and every tree seemed to shoot at us view the image african american troops in the spanish american war what tactics did the u s army adopt to fight the filipino rebels.
chapter 21.
black migration immigrants had long provided american industry with inexpensive labor.
the war disrupted the flow of immigrants to the united states just when the demand for industrial goods exploded.
in 1914 1 2 million immigrants entered the country.
in 1917 only 110 618 arrived.
labor recruiting agents soon turned to white and black southerners to fill the void.
during the war over 500 000 african americans migrated from southern farms and cities to the north lured by high paying industrial jobs.
the african american painter jacob lawrence celebrated this mass exodus in a series of paintings he completed in the 1940s.
his first painting showed brightly dressed streams of families preparing to board trains through doors marked chicago new york and st.
louis 20 8.
many migrants exalted at their newfound freedom in the north.
i can quit any time i want one noted without forfeiting a years pay as in the sharecropping system.
another man realized that in chicago he was no longer afraid to rub up against a white person accidentally on the street or sit down next to one on a streetcar.
in the south he had constantly feared the consequences of an unintended breach of southern racial etiquette.
migrants also discovered however that despite the absence of overt segregation or intimidation racial prejudice existed in the north.
20 8 the first wave of the great migration 1916 1919 around the time of wwi many african americans from the south left home and traveled to cities in the north in search of a better life wrote artist jacob lawrence to explain this 1940 painting.
view the map atlas map african american migration how did workers and unions fare during the war.
chapter 18.
the nawsa also seized on wartime prejudices against german americans whose loyalty many americans increasingly questioned.
it is a risk a danger to a country like ours to send 1 000 000 men out of the country who are loyal and not replace those men by the loyal votes of the women they have left at home nawsa president carrie chapman catt proclaimed.
all these arguments eventually swayed wilson.
in september 1918 he became the first president to endorse national female suffrage convinced that womens supposedly pacifist nature could help secure his postwar goals for a lasting peace.
congress sent the nineteenth amendment which granted women the right to vote to the states on june 4 1919 seven months after the war ended.
final ratification came on august 26 1920 rallying the public to control the flow of information and shape public opinion about the war wilson formed the committee on public information cpi.
headed by george creel a progressive muckraking journalist the cpi disseminated propaganda posters press releases and films.
it translated its pamphlets into multiple languages to reach the nations huge immigrant population.
the agency also recruited socalled four minute men to speak before audiences in movie halls markets fairs and churches.
the cpi limited each speech to four minutes to fill the time that it took to change the reels for silent films in movie theatres.
creel estimated that 75 000 fourminute men gave nearly seven million impassioned speeches during the war on topics such as german submarine warfare and german espionage.
hollywood helped the propaganda effort by making movies like to hell with the kaiser which depicted the german leader as a depraved lunatic who receives a much deserved punch in the mouth from the american soldier who captures him.
the government also used war bond campaigns to win over hearts and minds.
rather than read the document the struggle for womens suffrage 20 9 suffragists picket the white house the radical wing of the suffragist movement criticized wilson who claimed that an allied victory would spread democracy for refusing to support female suffrage.
what competing arguments and strategies did moderate and radical female suffragists offer.
chapter 21.
why did the government choose to draft the wartime army.
chapter 20.
in return for this official protection the government demanded a no strike pledge from unions.
when the war ended in 1918 the government abruptly canceled its orders and withdrew from managing worker industrial relations.
the governments handsoff attitude emboldened many industrialists to reinstate low wages long hours and blacklists for union members.
to protect their war time gains unions orchestrated the greatest wave of strikes in american history in 1919 although they rallied millions of workers to the picket lines out matched unions lost this battle.
industrialists accused unions of following in the footsteps of the recent russian revolution and trying to spread communism in the united states.
these accusations won industrialists the support of local governments who again forcefully broke up many picket lines.
defeated steel coal and garment unions however did not give up organizing and continued to attract members.
in the early 1920s union ranks grew to five million the largest to date.
when faced with the dismal vision of unending labor strife progressives had crafted government regulation to rein in business and improve working conditions see chapter 21 a turbulent decade the twenties ensure that their nationality received the highest quota possible.
official quotas however do not reveal the exact numbers of immigrants who entered the country.
if denied entry under the quota system which remained intact from 1924 through 1965 determined immigrants exploited loopholes.
the 1924 law contained two key provisions that have remained staples of american immigration legislation the principle of family reunification which let resident immigrants bring in members of their immediate families and the desirability of certain skills.
the law for example established exemptions for trades facing worker shortages in the united states such as domestic service.
other savvy european immigrants simply entered the country illegally often by way of mexico or canada two nations that still enjoyed unrestricted immigration to the united states.
fundamentalism the cultural debates surrounding prohibition and immigration restrictions assumed a decidedly political edge in the 1920s.
christian fundamentalists added to the decades cultural turbulence when they initiated a campaign to stop the teaching of biologist charles darwins views on evolution.
religious conservatives felt that darwins theories contradicted the bibles depiction of god creating the world and humankind in seven days.
they instead subscribed to the tenets of fundamentalism an evangelical christian theology that viewed the bible as an authentic literal recounting of historical events and the absolute moral word of god.
by critiquing darwin fundamentalists offered a conservative alternative to modernism a liberal christian theology embraced in many urban areas that emphasized the ongoing revelation of divine truth.
offering competing religious visions fundamentalists accepted the bible as errorless while modernists reinterpreted the bible when confronted with new scientific knowledge such as fossil evidence of evolution.
believing that monkey men mean monkey morals the world christian fundamentals association lobbied for state laws that prohibited teaching evolution in public schools.
in 1925 tennessee made it a crime to teach any theory that denies the story of the divine creation as taught in the bible and to teach instead that man has descended from a lower order of animals passed why did fundamentalists object to teaching evolution in public schools.
mostly to make sweeping school reforms more palatable to fundamentalist voters the state made no effort to enforce the law and even adopted a biology textbook that included an extended discussion of darwins ideas.
the aclu viewed the law as a violation of the first amendments guarantee of free speech.
hoping to test its constitutionality the aclu offered to help any teacher in tennessee who wanted to challenge the law in court.
civic boosters in dayton tennessee responded to the offer.
a trial highlighting the clash between science and religion was bound to attract huge crowds they reasoned and by hosting this national extravaganza dayton expected to draw an influx of visitors with cash to spend.
john scopes a 24 year old science teacher and part time football coach agreed to step forward so officials in dayton could arrest him.
the infamous scopes trial was underway.
interest in scopes the aclu and dayton faded once william jennings bryan agreed to prosecute the case and clarence darrow arrived to defend scopes.
bryan was the former leader of the democratic party who had unsuccessfully run for president three times and resigned as secretary of state when president woodrow wilson abandoned complete neutrality during world war i the devout bryan blamed germanys embrace of evolutionary notions like survival of the fittest for causing the brutal global war.
darrow was an agnostic famous for defending both radical labor leaders such as the socialist eugene debs and wealthy murderers.
hundreds of journalists descended on the town to observe the courtroom confrontation between bryan and darrow.
their dispatches helped build publicity for the monkey trial a reference to evolutionists claim that humans had descended from apes.
urban based reporters billed the case as a conclusive struggle between modern america and the ignorant rural masses few of whom shared in the general prosperity of the 1920s whose alleged backward thinking threatened to impede the countrys progress.
in his widely read reports nationally syndicated columnist h l mencken regularly referred to fundamentalists as hillbillies and yokels.
fundamentalists fought back.
the carnival like atmosphere outside the courtroom soon included fundamentalist revival meetings and performances by trained chimpanzees that mocked evolutionists.
vendors did a brisk business selling view the closer look immigration quotas cultural unrest dueling newspaper headlines during the scopes trial they call us bigots when we refuse to throw away our bibles bryan says we say keep your bible but keep it where it belongs in the world of your conscience monkey dolls like the one held by lena ruffner 21 7 who announced her support of bryan by pinning a sign they cant make a monkey out of me to her dress.
both bryan and darrow argued that they were protecting american democratic institutions.
bryan maintained that the tennessee legislature had the right to pass any law that the majority wanted darrow contended the state had violated the constitution by establishing christianity as an official religion and limiting freedom of expression.
the mainstream press viewed the trial as a showdown between science and religion with science winning a decisive victory.
in their account the climatic moment came when darrow called bryan to the witness stand and trapped him into confessing he did not accept the entire bible as the literal truth.
we have the purpose of preventing bigots and ignoramuses from controlling the education of the united states darrow declared in court expressing modernists view of fundamentalism.
the national press labeled bryan a broken man when he died in his sleep five days after scopes was found guilty and fined.
the courtroom however had burst into applause when during his crossexamination bryan had thundered i am simply trying to protect the word of god against the greatest atheist or agnostic in the united states southern folk songs popularized this competing heroic image of bryan as someone who fought for what was righteous and the battle it was won then the lord called him to heaven for his work on earth was done after scopess conviction the aclu appealed to the tennessee supreme court which upheld the laws constitutionality and then overturned the verdict because the judge rather than the jury had imposed the fine.
scopess acquittal meant that the aclu had to find a new case to take before the u s supreme court.
after the ridicule heaped on dayton however no town or teacher was willing to help the aclu try again.
tennessee did not repeal the law until 1967 a year later the u s supreme court declared anti evolution laws unconstitutional.
although soon forgotten by mainstream america throughout the twentieth century fundamentalists created a thriving minority subculture of churches schools universities publishers radio ministries and missionary societies.
fundamentalists rejoined the cultural and political mainstream in the 1970s and are generating headlines again with their challenges to teaching evolution in public schools.
in one striking break from the past fundamentalists now use darrows line of reasoning to argue that keeping the biblical theory of creation out of high school biology classes violates the constitutional guarantee to freedom of expression.
21 7 young woman holds monkey doll during the scopes trial a supporter of prosecutor william jennings bryan wears a sign ridiculing the theory of evolution and displays the monkey doll she bought from a vender outside the courthouse.
what cultural and religious tensions were exposed during the scopes trial.
chapter 21 a turbulent decade the twenties the new woman women began the decade with a significant political victory when the nineteenth amendment gave them to right to vote in 1920 female reformers expected newly enfranchised women to care deeply about issues affecting their gender but the much anticipated womens vote never materialized.
throughout the twenties americans offered competing visions of womens proper place in american society.
former suffragists envisioned modern women playing an active role in politics.
popular culture however consistently defined the new woman as someone who kept herself thin pretty and lively for her husband.
women in the twenties when women got the right to vote nationwide an aging generation of feminists tried immediately to organize the female vote behind causes that particularly affected women.
black women had supported suffrage as a step toward politically empowering the african american community.
southern authorities however used poll taxes literacy tests and intimidation to stop black women from registering to vote.
the league of women voters created by the national american women suffrage association in 1920 drew up a list of issues that it expected to resonate among female voters including child labor protective legislation for female workers and cleaning up city politics.
this list did not include demanding that the nineteenth amendment be enforced for black and white women alike.
responding to studies that revealed high rates of infant and mother mortality in childbirth the league of women voters lobbied congress for the nations first major social welfare measure to help impoverished women and children.
the sheppardtowner act 1921 offered eight years of matching funds to states for classes that taught poor mothers about nutrition hygiene and prenatal care.
it also provided visiting nurses for low income pregnant women and new mothers.
by 1929 however it became clear that women did not vote as a bloc.
therefore despite the laws success congress did not renew the program.
rather than rallying to gender specific causes the best predictor of how a woman would vote was how her husband voted.
feminists also failed to amend the constitution by adding an equal rights amendment era which stated that equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of sex the radical what strategies did women develop to improve their lives in the twenties.
national womens party chaired by alice paul argued that such an amendment would eradicate in one fell swoop all the legal barriers that a dizzying array of archaic state legislation created for women.
these laws elsie hill noted denied a woman control of her children equal to the fathers they deny her if married the right to control her earnings they punish her for offenses for which men go unpunished such as adultery.
moderate progressive reformers who dominated the league of women voters like future first lady eleanor roosevelt worried that the era might endanger the protective legislation for women that they had so carefully crafted in recent years such as the maximum hour laws designed to shield mothers from overwork see chapter 21 21 14 looking into the black hole of ruin this 1927 political cartoon forecast disaster if the world powers failed to reach a second naval disarmament agreement.
in the cartoon the world is in disarray after a naval gun had showered it with gun powder.
a turbulent decade the twenties through the washington conference harding reshaped the political vision of his democratic predecessor woodrow wilson.
harding rejected wilsons idea of using an open ended commitment to the league of nations to ensure world peace.
he agreed with other republicans who felt membership in this world body would restrict americas ability to set its own foreign policy.
harding instead sought to prevent another war by convincing all major powers to disarm and agree to mediation when disputes arose.
harding knew that congresss pennypinching mood meant certain rejection of any administration proposal to maintain a large military or embark on a major shipbuilding campaign.
what better way to balance this domestic reality with the need to protect american shores from heavily armed naval competitors than by negotiating multinational disarmament treaties.
to contain japan in the pacific and britain which still controlled the worlds largest navy secretary of state charles evans hughes proposed scrapping 30 american 23 british and 17 japanese battleships.
one thrilled observer noted that hughes had single handedly sunk more british battleships than all the admirals of the world had destroyed in a cycle of centuries japans 1905 victory in the russo japanese war had signaled its emergence as the premier military power in east asia.
the japanese who unlike the british and americans had only one ocean to patrol accepted a naval tonnage ratio of 5 5 3 among the united states britain and japan.
this meant that for every five tons of naval shipping that america and britain maintained japan retained three.
besides arms limitation negotiations focused on settling potentially explosive issues in the pacific.
what benefits and drawbacks did the washington conference agreements offer the united states.
there american objectives included curtailing japanese expansion in east asia and preserving the open door in china.
the american delegation met these goals but at some cost.
japan accepted a smaller navy in return for a pledge that the others would refrain from improving their naval bases or fortifications in the western pacific.
experts warned that this concession would leave american pacific possessions vulnerable to a japanese attack.
hughes who doubted that congress would approve funds to improve naval defenses accepted the deal.
the resulting five power treaty which included smaller tonnage limits for france and italy set a ten year moratorium on battleship construction and limited the guns that ships could carry.
the treaty however did not set limits for submarines light cruisers aircraft or land forces.
in an accompanying four power treaty france the united states britain and japan agreed to respect one anothers pacific possessions and consult if any dispute arose.
the nine power treaty was the conferences final achievement.
in this agreement the above five nations and portugal the netherlands belgium and china all agreed to respect the open door in china a policy advocated by the united states since the turn of the century see chapter 22 a new deal for america the great depression 1929 1940 on monday october 20 1929 the downward spiral began.
stock prices plummeted three days later on black thursday when a record 12 9 million shares changed hands.
on black tuesday the following week october 29 1929 16 million shares were traded and losses totaled 14 billion.
that evening james rosenberg a wall street bankruptcy lawyer who was also an artist etched an expressionist portrait of the chaotic scenes he had witnessed.
rosenbergs oct 29 dies irae day of wrath 1929 22 1 captured the panic that swept wall street as investors raced to the new york stock exchange.
in the lithograph the nations financial institutions teeter on the verge of collapse frightened crowds gather in the streets and dark clouds hover over a sky filled with stockbrokers jumping to their deaths.
throughout the crisis rumors circulated about ruined investors committing suicide by leaping from the citys skyscrapers and ambulance sirens wailed continually as crews responded to false alarms.
22 1 oct 29 dies irae day of wrath 1929 to convey the panic that swept wall street after the stock market crashed james rosenberg employed apocalyptic biblical imagery traditionally used to depict gods wrath as the world comes to an end.
the photo shows investors racing to the new york stock exchange.
what factors led to the stock market crash in 1929.
the early days of the depression hoovers response to the depression when the stock market crashed no one knew that this was the beginning of a ten year ordeal.
the great depression lasted from 1929 to 1939 the most devastating and longest economic crisis in american history.
in the 1920s the federal government played a relatively minor role in the economy and conservative businessmen urged hoover to keep it that way.
do nothing the laissez faire capitalists told the president setting in motion a political debate over government intervention that would dominate the depression era.
rejecting the laissez faire suggestion hoover envisioned the government fostering a spirit of teamwork that encouraged americans to work together as the nation weathered the economic downturn.
in keeping with his ideas of service minded individualism he brought the leaders of banking industry and labor to the white house and urged them to do their bit to keep the economy afloat.
responding to hoovers plea industry agreed not to lay off workers or cut wages and labor leaders accepted a shorter workday to create more jobs.
hoover asked state governments to accelerate their road and public building projects to add jobs in their communities.
hoover also stepped up hiring for long planned federal construction projects including the hoover dam in the west and asked congress to extend the tariff on manufactured goods to agricultural imports.
congress complied in 1930 raising tariffs to their highest level ever.
when other nations retaliated with their own high tariffs american companies and farmers lost overseas markets.
as a result the world and the united states plunged deeper into economic depression.
in orchestrating this unprecedented federal response to an economic depression hoover stayed within limits acceptable to conservatives.
most fiscal conservatives wanted government built roads and a high protective tariff and preferred non governmental solutions to economic problems.
when it came to helping needy citizens directly hoover went no further than asking local governments and charities to assume their traditional role of distributing food and clothing to the poor.
this stance surprised hoovers progressive supporters given his previous triumph organizing massive international relief efforts to feed hungry europeans during and after world war i it was not a question of helping people hoover asserted.
it is solely a question of the best method by which hunger and cold shall be prevented he explained.
to hoover the american tradition of self help made relief the responsibility of local governments and charities.
when the crisis entered its second year u s steel announced a ten percent wage cut.
other companies followed suit and within ten days american business had slashed millions of workers wages and begun massive layoffs.
the nations deepening financial woes convinced hoover to lend federal money to businesses and states.
this decision was a dramatic break from past practice.
in previous financial panics and depressions private bankers had put up the money needed for recovery and presidents had cut federal spending to ensure a balanced budget.
in 1932 by proposing a direct economic role for the government in ending the depression herbert hoover the man who wanted to decrease how did hoover respond to the initial economic crisis.
chapter 22 a new deal for america the great depression 1929 1940 managing appearances fdr walking shunning his wheelchair candidate fdr holds onto his sons arm as the two greet supporters during his first presidential campaign in 1932 although fdr benefited from people knowing that he had overcome a misfortune he also believed that visual images of his handicap would convey the impression that he was weak and physically unfit for his responsibilities.
he made a personal and political decision to conceal his paralysis.
to hide his heavy leg braces fdr wore extra long pants and had the visible portion of the braces painted black to blend with his shoes.
he learned to stand upright by holding onto a cane with one hand and the arm of an aide usually his son with the other 22 6.
he would then use his hips to swing his legs forward in a semi arch to give the illusion of walking.
all of this required tremendous physical exertion.
james roosevelt later noted that he often had bruises on his arms from the force of his fathers grip.
father and son disguised their physical effort by smiling and joking as they walked together before audiences.
away from the crowds aides carried fdr up stairs or from the car to a wheelchair.
in public he often used his automobile as a prop to hide his disability and by holding a bar installed in the backseat of an open touring car he could pull himself up to address crowds.
at one stadium rally a ramp was constructed so that the presidents car could be driven onto the stage in the center of the field.
fdr gave his speech without leaving the car.
the press obeyed white house rules that prohibited taking photos of the president in a wheelchair or being carried.
as a result there are only two known photographs of fdr in a wheelchair.
this fdr running political cartoons never showed the presidents physical disabilities.
self censorship even extended to political cartoons which never once depicted the president as incapacitated.
instead these caricatures usually portrayed an energetic fdr running or jumping like this 1936 caricature from the kansas city star 22 7 in which a sprinting fdr replicates benjamin franklins kite flying experiment to bring electricity to the rural poor.
the temper of the poor passivity and anger hoover kept his distance from common people and paid the price.
fdr was a more astute politician.
but what was the temper of the people he needed there is something about the first anniversary of your layoff which makes you feel more hopeless a worker during the great depression how and why did fdr manage his political image.
a new president and a new deal to help.
two competing images of the poor soon emerged.
one emphasized their helplessness and suffering the other saw them as teetering on the brink of revolt.
countless government investigators detailed the plight of hardworking family men suddenly without jobs.
i find them all in the same shape fear fear driving them into a state of semi collapse cracking nerves and an overpowering terror of the future reported one social worker.
many americans chose to suffer silently making their own decisions about how to cope sometimes blaming themselves rather than the depression for their troubles.
this portrait by dorothea lange 22 8 conveys this quiet desperation of the poor.
in langes image an unemployed man grasps his empty tin cup and leans over the rail as if he is kneeling at a church altar praying for salvation.
the mans plight is moving but his passivity is also vaguely reassuring to those who feared angry demonstrations or social revolution.
as the bonus march revealed however not all americans were waiting patiently for conditions to improve.
federal investigator lorena hickok feared that a social revolution was brewing i still feel that vast numbers of unemployed in pennsylvania are right on the edge so to speak that it wouldnt take much to make communists out of them the communist party hoped that she was right.
unlike roosevelt and his conservative critics communists had no interest in saving capitalism.
they hoped that the crisis would provoke a social revolt that abolished private property.
the 1930s were the heyday of american communism as the party grew from 7 000 members in 1930 to 100 000 in 1939 across the country communists organized unemployed councils that blocked evictions from city apartments mounted hunger marches and reconnected gas and electricity lines for workers who could not pay their bills.
grocery store robberies were also common although newspapers rarely reported these crimes.
when the manager of a grocery store in detroit denied a group of men credit they ransacked his store.
witnessing the food riot the novelist john dos passos wondered why the manager did not call the police.
if more people heard about affairs like this there would be more trouble the manager replied.
while the urban poor stole food farmers demonstrated to demand higher prices for their crops.
across the midwest farmers disrupted food shipments by blocking highways with logs and pouring milk onto roads.
when banks seized land cattle or farm machinery from farmers who defaulted on their loans they needed help from the police to ensure that public sales of the confiscated property went smoothly.
at some farm auctions farmers devised an effective strategy to help their neighbors by offering only a penny for the property on sale.
nooses hung on barn doors at penny auctions warned prospective buyers that bidding on a farm familys possessions would not be wise.
if anyone in the farmyard might be so ignorant of what was going on as to put in a serious bid a suitably burly man would be likely to step up and put a hand on his shoulder with the words that bids a little high aint it one farmer recalled.
22 8 breadline san francisco the mans empty cup symbolized his pervasive hunger.
his unthreatening pose created sympathy for his plight while the militant poor provoked fears of social revolution.
what competing responses did the poor offer to the ongoing depression.
chapter review works progress administration share our wealth movement dust bowl crisis worsens public works program employs one fifth of the workforce from 1935 to 1943 senator huey longs proposal to redistribute wealth pushes fdr to the left drought soil erosion result in major ecological disaster fdr tries to reform supreme court wagner act cio founded new deal coalition forms offers government protection to unions organizes workers by industry rather than by trade fdr wins reelection proposals failure exposes limits of fdrs power social security payroll taxes begin establishes funding mechanism for federal pensions myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of a new deal for america.
questions for analysis 1 why would the sentiments expressed in this political cartoon lead to dissatisfaction with hoover.
view the image john baer we demand a new deal 1931 p 662 other resources from this chapter 20 and virulent anti semitism usa guam created fertile au st r a l i a japan canada ground for natokyo zism to flourarctic ish.
stripped of south ocean their german america citizenship china jews could not practice mediussr britain cine or law attend germany france public school after the india age of 14 marry non jews italy or enter public parks zoos and libraries.
promising to ren store germanys economic and miliia tary prowess and protect the presumed d o in c a f r i c a racial superiority of the german people e a n hitler rearmed the country and sought allies.
in formulating their response to the rise of allied powers fascism in europe non interventionists in conaxis powers gress sought to avoid repeating the mistakes that occupied countries had led to involvement in the bloodbath of world neutrals a at an pa n c e if ic fascism and appeasement c e la o n ti c principal areas of submarine warfare what does this map convey about the scope of world war ii.
the approaching war war i senator gerald p nye a republican from north dakota chaired a series of senate investigations in the mid 1930s into the role that american arms manufacturers had played in the nations decision to enter world war i although the investigations unearthed little hard evidence of a conspiracy they did reinforce the consensus that the united states had entered that war to continue profitable arms sales and to guarantee that the allies the powers who had fought germany repaid their war loans to private banks.
when these european countries defaulted on their loans during the depression public sentiment hardened against helping foreign nations.
to ensure that trading with belligerent nations did not drag the country into another war congress passed the neutrality acts from 1935 to 1939 which restricted arms sales loans and transport of goods with nations at war see u s countdown to war timeline 23 2.
these popular laws encapsulated the widespread non interventionist vision of avoiding involvement in overseas conflicts that did not directly threaten u s territory.
depending on the official policy pursued the atlantic and pacific oceans could serve as buffers protecting the nation or as pathways to war.
trying to ensure the former the 1935 neutrality act prohibited the sales of arms and ammunition to nations at war.
in 1936 congress barred all loans to warring nations.
the 1937 neutrality act allowed belligerent nations to purchase non war related goods if they paid cash for them and transported them on their own ships a policy known as cash and carry fdr challenged the non interventionist vision with his 1937 quarantine speech which urged peace loving countries to isolate aggressor nations and seek peace.
outraged non interventionists accused him of trying to turn the united states into the worlds policeman.
its a terrible thing to look over your shoulder when you are trying to lead and find no one there the president remarked to an aide before he publicly reaffirmed his support for the neutrality acts.
non interventionist sentiment peaked in 1938 when congress debated but did not approve a constitutional amendment that required a national referendum for any declaration of war except in response to an enemy invasion.
the united states was not alone in its desire to remain at peace.
eager to avoid war with germany britain and france recalled how a relatively minor incident the assassination of archduke franz ferdinand had become the catalyst for war in 1914 see chapter 23 world war ii fighting the good war 1939 1945 this seuss cartoon 23 4 shows a non interventionist wearing an america first hat in a bathtub that is jumping with predatory sea creatures adorned with swastikas the symbol of the nazi party.
his eyes closed tight the man ignores the danger saying with a satisfied smile the old family bath tub is plenty safe for me as he moved closer to the interventionist position fdr voiced similar concerns about the vulnerability of the american coastline.
non interventionists challenged this assertion.
water hazards 23 5 appeared in the chicago tribune a staunchly republican newspaper that criticized both the new deal and intervention.
the cartoon ridicules the notion that germany posed a danger to the united states arguing that since hitler the inept golfer had yet to land his forces the golf ball 22 miles across the english channel in britain the united states had nothing to fear.
the false alarms spread by interventionists the hysterical golf caddy hurt the nation by drawing uncle 23 4 dr seuss lampoons non interventionists in 1941 dr seuss lampooned non interventionists for closing their eyes to the threat that hitlers navy depicted here as swastika marked monsters posed to american shores.
23 5 water hazards 1941 this chicago tribune editorial cartoon accuses interventionists of unduly alarming the country about the possibility of a nazi attack.
what competing visions did these two cartoons offer on the threat that hitler posed to the united states.
sams attention away from addressing the nations domestic problems in this case playing his own golf game.
as non interventionists feared and interventionists hoped lend lease opened the door to further u s involvement in the european war.
securing american guns and ammunition solved only half the problem for britain.
because of the number of german submarines patrolling the atlantic secretary of war henry stimson warned sending arms to britain was like pouring water into a leaky bathtub.
when the american destroyer greer exchanged fire with a german submarine fdr used the incident to invoke his authority as commander in chief by ordering u s naval ships to escort all ships headed to britain as far as iceland which the united states also occupied and shoot on sight any german submarine or ship.
although it remained unclear whether the germans knew that the greer was an american ship fdr denounced the skirmish as a deliberate attack in american waters.
we have sought no shooting war with hitler.
we do not seek it now fdr declared in september 1941.
but when you see a rattlesnake poised to strike you do not wait until he has struck before you crush him.
these nazi submarines and raiders are the rattlesnakes of the atlantic three months before japans attack on pearl harbor the united states was fighting an undeclared naval war with germany.
the approaching war war with japan the catalyst for americas formal entry into the war did not come in the atlantic however but on the other side of the globe when japanese pilots attacked pearl harbor a large naval base in hawaii on december 7 1941 the attackers discovered a neat line of battleships reproduced in this miniature version of pearl harbor 23 6 that japanese filmmakers constructed for a wartime propaganda film that reminded japanese audiences of their nations great victory against the united states.
the attack on pearl harbor was the culmination of two decades of tension and mistrust between the two nations.
japans desire to establish itself as the major power in the pacific alarmed the united states which maintained an array of island possessions and a strong naval presence in the pacific to support its trade with china.
access to chinese markets had been a cornerstone of american foreign policy since the spanishamerican war.
for the japanese claiming east asia as their proper sphere of influence was no different from the united states declaring the western hemisphere off limits to foreign powers through the 1823 monroe doctrine and 1904 roosevelt corollary.
japan aimed to build the greater east asia co prosperity sphere creating satellite states throughout asia that would free japan from dependence on western controlled resources like oil tin and rubber.
in the 1920s the united states and japan mediated their differences with japan agreeing to reduce the size of its navy and renouncing war as an instrument of foreign policy see chapter 21.
the japanese armys 1931 invasion of chinese held manchuria land long disputed by china russia and japan however signaled the beginning of a direct confrontation between japan and the united states.
claiming that manchuria rightfully belonged to japan the japanese army assumed control of all raw materials and industry to support japans military endeavors.
in july 1937 japan attacked china unleashing a brutal war of conquest.
during the infamous rape of nanking a chinese city over 250 000 chinese perished including 20 000 women who were raped tortured and then executed.
soldiers impaled babies on bayonets and tossed them still alive into pots of boiling water a japanese soldier later admitted.
the japanese killed more than six million chinese over the next eight years.
american sympathy for chinese victims and concern over protecting american economic interests in asia coincided with rising tensions in europe.
by 1940 aiding britain had become fdrs foreign policy priority.
containing japan through escalating economic sanctions and warnings fdr reasoned was the best way to defuse the situation in the pacific 23 6 japanese model of pearl harbor this mock up of pearl harbor constructed for a japanese wartime film of the attack showed american battleships lined up in a row making them easy targets for aerial bombs.
how did the united states respond to increasing japanese aggression.
chapter 24 a divided world the early cold war 1945 1963 in 1947 truman briefly returned to fdrs notion of working through the un to resolve international disputes.
that year the un successfully pressured stalin into removing soviet troops from northern iran.
truman also stationed the american sixth fleet in the mediterranean to prevent the soviets from seizing turkish controlled shipping lanes through the dardanelles.
stalin accepted the setback in oilrich iran without fanfare but he continued to demand unrestricted naval access through the dardanelles passage the only way for soviet military and commercial vessels to travel from the black sea to the mediterranean.
in 1947 stalin sent troops to the turkish soviet border to force turkey to keep the passage open.
the sense of crisis in the eastern mediterranean soon deepened encompassing both turkey and greece.
throughout 1946 the british had supported the greek monarchy in its efforts to subdue greek communist rebels and had sent aid to turkey to help it stand firm against the soviet union.
in 1947 as part of a general decision to renounce its worldwide imperial role a financially strapped britain informed the united states that it could no longer give economic or military aid to greece and turkey.
fearing that the british withdrawal meant certain communist success in greece and turkey truman asked congress to grant american assistance to these countries.
under secretary of state dean acheson outlined the threat to america in a meeting with congressional leaders.
like apples in a barrel infected by one rotten one acheson explained the corruption of greece would carry the infection of communism to western europe africa and the middle east.
in preparing his speech before congress in 1947 truman pondered how to convince the public that events in far off greece and turkey necessitated an unprecedented peacetime interference in european affairs.
scare the hell out of the american people republican senator arthur vandenberg suggested.
truman followed this advice.
dividing the world into us and them he told americans that at the present moment in world history nearly every nation must choose between alternative ways of life.
the choice is too often not a free one the western side of the divide championed democracy and freedom.
on the other were communist states where terror and oppression a controlled press and radio fixed elections and the suppression of personal freedom were parts of daily life.
drawing a line in the sand to stop the spread of communism was the nations responsibility to the how did the truman administration convince the public to accept a new direction in u s foreign policy.
world and the only way to protect the american way of life at home.
while asking specifically to help greece and turkey in this speech truman set forth a more expansive view of americas global responsibilities asking the country to abandon its traditional non interventionist stance.
instead the president proposed the truman doctrine a foreign policy initiative that gave the united states an active role in stopping the global spread of communism by supporting free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures the administration almost immediately used these principles to justify helping western europe as well.
in the eastern mediterranean the united states wanted to prevent communist armies from taking over.
in war torn western europe the american government feared that hungry exhausted citizens might voluntarily turn to communism which promised bread for all.
free elections in western europe offered the grim possibility that communists might be voted into power.
embracing kennans vision secretary of state george c marshall the former army chief of staff who had designed the victorious american strategy in world war ii suggested offering massive financial aid to help european capitalistic economies recover.
the marshall plan 1948 1952 aimed to restore europeans faith in capitalism by sending 13 billion 119 billion in todays dollars overseas to rebuild europes ruined roads bridges factories and farms.
our policy is directed not against any country or doctrine but against hunger poverty desperation and chaos marshall claimed avoiding the dualistic us against them rhetoric of the truman doctrine.
based on the certainty that widespread economic suffering in the 1930s had caused desperate people to embrace fascism which then led to world war ii the marshall plan explicitly linked peace with prosperity.
all european nations including the soviet union were invited to submit proposals for aid.
stalin briefly entertained the idea of applying for american funds to rebuild his devastated nation but as marshall and truman expected he quickly abandoned this idea.
instead the soviets publicly denounced the plan as an american plot to colonize europe and refused to allow eastern european nations to participate.
besides cash the marshall plan offered european nations technical and management advice that helped spread american farming techniques labor policies and manufacturing practices.
the economic recovery of western europe under the marshall plan furthered the ideological watch the video president truman and the threat of communism origins of the cold war 24 3 american view of the marshall plan the marshall plan is portrayed as a lifeline offered by the united states to help a desperate western europe pull itself out of war inflicted misery and away from the influence of the soviet union seen in the distance.
divide between the united states and the soviet union.
these political cartoons 24 3 and 24 4 show the conflicting views of the united states and the soviet union.
the american cartoonist daniel r fitzpatrick 24 3 portrays the marshall plan as a lifeline to western europe pulling people out of war inflicted misery and away from the looming soviet menace represented by the distant towers of the kemlin in moscow a recognizable symbol of the soviet union to americans.
americans took pride in the wave of western european prosperity that resulted from the marshall plan making it one of the great economic success stories of the cold war.
the contrasting soviet view critiques capitalism as an exploitive class based system that enriched a few at the expense of many.
published in the soviet magazine krokodil the soviet cartoon 24 4 shows european leaders groveling at the feet of their american lord depicted as a paunchy uncle sam relaxing with his feet on their backs.
this cartoon implied that the marshall plan rather than fostering recovery enslaved western europe to the united states which grew richer by the day.
there was some truth to the soviet claim that the marshall plan which ran from 1948 to 1952 strengthened the american economy.
western european nations spent most of their funds in the united states on raw materials food machines and fuel creating a taste for american goods that continued even after the plan ended.
the berlin airlift and nato containment quickly evolved into more than a vision of american financial assistance for struggling governments and economies overseas.
by 1949 it also meant a firm military commitment to defend western european nations that allied themselves with america.
almost overnight the united states shed its traditional reluctance to intervene militarily in european affairs as americans became convinced that only they could stop stalin from controlling europe.
in 1948 stalin supported a coup by czech communists that overthrew the only democratic government in eastern europe.
the quick demise of democracy in czechoslovakia caused the west to fear that germany with its wrecked economy and nonexistent military might be the next target for a soviet inspired communist revolution.
with the country still divided into four occupied zones american british french and soviet the german economy was in shambles.
keeping germany weak to punish it for world war ii initially a shared american and soviet objective made little strategic sense as the soviet menace grew.
by 1948 the united states saw strengthening germany as a way to halt the soviet expansionist drive across europe.
with this goal 24 4 soviet view of the marshall plan in this soviet cartoon european leaders grovel at the feet of their american capitalist master who has used the marshall plan to conquer europe.
what conflicting views of the marshall plan do these two cartoons present.
chapter 24 a divided world the early cold war 1945 1963 national security council report 68 or nsc 68.
not mincing words nsc 68 declared that the issues that face us are momentous involving the fulfillment or destruction not only of this republic but of civilization itself secretary of state acheson later admitted that nsc 68s cataclysmic vision of a soviet enemy animated by a new fanatic faith and bent on worldwide domination was meant to convince the president to use all means short of war to halt the apparent soviet drive for world conquest.
nsc 68 crystallized the piecemeal developments of the last four years into one clear vision the united states must build up the political economic and military strength of the free world to frustrate the kremlin design of a world dominated by its will this message was transmitted to the public through political speeches films and novels.
perhaps no writer better encapsulated the publics fears of worldwide communist domination than george orwell in his classic novel 1984 which hit bookstores in 1949 orwell envisioned a future where totalitarianism has triumphed and the peoples loyalty to a stalin like dictator big brother who watches over everyone and censors their behavior is ensured by a cycle of endless wars and torture.
as the main character winston smith undergoes another round of torture his tormentor tells him imagine a boot stamping on a human face forever this image neatly expressed the american publics view of communism in the cold war.
the korean war at the end of world war ii the united states and the soviet union had agreed to divide the former japanese colony of korea a peninsula along the north asian pacific coast into two zones of occupation.
the country was split along the 38th parallel with the ussr occupying the north and the united states the south.
in 1945 partitioning the country seemed like a good way to deprive japan of korean resources and prevent the soviet union from completely taking over the peninsula.
when the soviet union organized a communist government under kim il sung in north korea and the united states selected syngman rhee to head a capitalist government in the south the previously unified nation appeared permanently divided.
by 1949 however the united states had begun to reevaluate its military commitment in south korea.
the occupation was expensive and why did the united states decide to fight in korea.
pentagon officials doubted the strategic importance of the peninsula.
the state department agreed believing that economic aid and political reforms could strengthen south korea enough to discourage a north korean attack.
in january 1950 secretary of state acheson openly questioned the importance of south korea to the overall defense of american interests in east asia.
in a speech before the national press club acheson outlined a defensive perimeter in the pacific that the united states would defend against communist incursions.
it included japan okinawa taiwan and the philippines but not south korea.
accordingly truman began withdrawing american soldiers from south korea.
to deter north korea from attacking the united states left a stockpile of conventional weapons and promised continued financial aid.
yet when north korea launched a surprise invasion of south korea in june 1950 truman immediately reversed course.
the speed and success of the north korean attack alarmed him.
within two days north korean troops had entered seoul the capital of south korea 24 8 and by the end of one week north korea had pushed the bulk of the south korean army and its american advisors into the toe of the korean peninsula around pusan.
viewing this overpowering offensive as confirmation of nsc 68 truman believed the ussr was behind the attack.
he was partly right.
kim il sung had secured reluctant support from stalin and mao zedong for the invasion by promising an easy victory.
if the united states intervened in korea stalin saw advantages to diverting american attention away from europe.
by june 1950 many americans felt that the west was losing the cold war.
china had fallen to communism and the soviets had exploded an atomic bomb.
at home sensational spy trials fueled continued doubts about trumans leadership.
in this political climate doing nothing was hardly an option for him.
trumans intimate understanding of world war i he had served as an artillery captain in france and world war ii encouraged him to break with the precedent set by these recent conflicts.
in each of these wars americans had debated the merits of fighting for more than two years before declaring war.
i remembered how each time the democracies failed to act it had encouraged the aggressors to keep going ahead truman noted.
determined to respond quickly this time he committed american troops to combat within days.
although truman fighting communism cold and hot war soviet unio n ussr north korea south korea 24 8 the korean war the advantage on the battlefield seesawed during the wars first year before becoming a stalemate.
north korean forces united states united nations forces chinese forces capitals s e a chongjin h i n a china attacks nov 26 1950 hyesanjin o f j a p a n lu r c ya chosin reservoir chosan gr.
un advance toward china fall 1950 tokyo north korea panmunjom seoul inchon landing sept 15 1950 un counteroffensive sept 18 1950 amistice line july 27 1953 south korea inchon farthest advance of chinese troops jan 1951.
ng r na wonsan.
kangnung original boundary at 38th parallel japan farthest advance of north koreans july sept 1950 n a k to pyongyang n r taedon hungnam pusan u s forces arrive from japan summer 1950 yellow s ea pacific ocean consulted congress he never asked for a declaration of war against north korea.
instead he decided to work through the un which authorized the use of force to restore the original 38th parallel boundary between north and south korea.
sixteen nations sent troops to korea to serve in the un police force but the united states provided the bulk of troops and commanded military operations.
when polled three quarters of americans approved of trumans decision to send military aid to south korea.
americans for the time being anyway subscribed to his vision that the future of civilization depends on what we do the situation on the battlefield however was grim with south korean soldiers holding on precariously around pusan.
to reverse the situation general douglas macarthur commander in chief of the united nations forces devised a dramatic and risky strategy.
rather than simply confronting the view the map interactive map the korean war 1950 1953 north koreans head on he staged an amphibious landing at inchon a port near seoul.
this attack on the north koreans rear would cut their supply lines and force them to fight on two fronts.
the tides at inchon however were the second highest in the world varying 29 feet between high and low tides.
within minutes the receding tide could mire a boat in mud.
inchon macarthur reasoned was the right place to attack precisely because it was so uninviting and would take the enemy by surprise.
as he predicted the north koreans had stationed only 6 500 troops there and the un force of 40 000 encountered little resistance in taking the city.
this operation turned macarthur already famous for his feats in world war ii into a national hero.
following the inchon invasion un forces quickly drove north korean troops out of south korea.
after this victory truman pondered giving the war a new purpose.
instead of simply restoring the what accounted for americas initial successes on the battlefield.
chapter 24 a divided world the early cold war 1945 1963 competing visions naming names in hollywood the following opinions one from former first lady eleanor roosevelt who wrote a syndicated magazine column my day and the other from film director elia kazan offer opposing views on aiding the huac investigations.
consider how roosevelt and kazan defined the threat to american democracy in this period.
what risks were involved in following the different suggestions each made.
could their two views be reconciled.
in a 1947 my day column eleanor roosevelt expressed concerns that huac was creating a police state atmosphere that would squash artistic creativity and freedom of expression.
i have waited a while before saying anything about the unamerican activities committees current investigation of the hollywood film industry.
i would not be very much surprised if some writers or actors or stagehands or what not were found to have communist leanings but i was surprised to find that at the start of the inquiry some of the big producers were so chicken hearted about speaking up for the freedom of their industry.
one thing is sure none of the arts flourishes on censorship and repression.
and by this time it should be evident that the american public is capable of doing its own censoring.
the film industry is a great industry with infinite possibilities for good and bad.
its primary purpose is to entertain people.
on the side it can do many other things.
it can popularize certain ideals it can make education palatable.
however in the long run the judge who decides whether what it does is good or bad is the man or woman who attends the movies.
in a democratic country i do not think the public will tolerate a removal of its right to decide what it thinks of the ideas and performances of those who make the movie industry work.
what is going on in the un american activities committee worries me primarily because little people have become frightened and we find ourselves living in the atmosphere of a police state where people close doors before they state what they think or look over their shoulders apprehensively before they express an opinion.
if you curtail what the other fellow says and does you curtail what you yourself may say and do.
in our country we must trust the people to hear and see both the good and the bad and to choose the good.
the unamerican activities committee seems to me to be better for a police state than for the usa.
many people in hollywood never forgave elia kazan for cooperating with huac.
in his 1988 autobiography kazan refused to apologize.
instead he asserted his right to protect his career and the need to defend the country.
i believed it was the duty of the government to investigate the communist movement in our country.
i couldnt behave as if my old comrades didnt exist and didnt have an active political program.
there was no way i could go along with their crap that the cp communist party was nothing but another political party like the republicans and the democrats.
i knew very well what it was a thoroughly organized worldwide conspiracy.
this conviction separated me from many of my old friends did i really want to change the social system i was living under.
apparently that was what id stood for at one time.
but what s t everything i had of value id gained under that system why had i taken so long to even consider telling the country thats what it amounted to everything i knew.
was it because of the moral injunction against informing which was respected only depending on which side you were on.
if the situation were reversed wouldnt the comrades protect themselves without hesitation and by any means.
including naming me.
i began to measure the weight and the worth of what i was giving up my career in films which i was surrendering for a cause i didnt believe in.
it seemed insane.
what was i if not a filmmaker.
if you expect an apology now because i would later name names to the house committee youve misjudged my character.
the people who owe you an explanation no apology expected are those who year after year held the soviets blameless for all their crimes.
hearings before the house committee on un american activities during the second red scare how do roosevelt and kazan differ on the best way to protect the right to freedom of expression.
view the closer look competing visions naming names in hollywood spies in our midst had a list of 205 known communists who worked in the state department.
the paper turned out to be just a prop.
when pressed for the names of the people on his list mccarthy stalled and announced that he would only show their names to truman which he never did.
in each subsequent speech the number cited by mccarthy dropped until he finally settled on 57.
when a great democracy is destroyed it will not be from enemies from without but rather because of enemies from within senator joseph r mccarthy wheeling west virginia 1950 as a republican attacking a democratic administration mccarthys accusations had a partisan ring.
taking advantage of the media spotlight he issued new charges against state department officials ruining the careers of many who could not mount an effective defense against his bullying.
reveling in the press attention that every new allegation brought mccarthy sought bigger targets even attacking secretary of defense george c marshall who had authored the marshall plan while secretary of state for having joined a conspiracy so immense and an infamy so black as to dwarf any previous such venture in the history of man in 1954 a year after the rosenbergs were executed the career of joseph mccarthy as an anti communist crusader ended when the senator began investigating the army for subversion.
national television broadcast the hearings and americans watched aghast for 36 days as mccarthy intimidated witnesses ignored facts and made ludicrous charges.
the climactic moment in the hearing came when the armys attorney joseph welch rebuked mccarthy telling him you have done enough.
have you no sense of decency sir at long last approval ratings for mccarthy plummeted from 50 percent to 35 percent in gallup polls.
the public unraveling of support for mccarthy mirrored growing concerns among his fellow watch the video on video lecture mccarthyism and the politics of fear republicans in congress.
eisenhower and former huac member richard nixon were now in the white house.
attacking a republican controlled administration yielded fewer political benefits and fellow republicans privately urged eisenhower to rein in mccarthy.
leery of having his own anticommunist credentials challenged eisenhower refused to confront mccarthy directly.
instead the president tried to take the high road.
i will not get down in the gutter with that guy eisenhower vowed reasoning that if he gave mccarthy enough rope he would eventually hang himself.
this hands off approach allowed mccarthy to run wild until 1954 when as eisenhower predicted he went too far.
eventually it was the mainstream press not the president who denounced mccarthy.
after the army mccarthy hearings the esteemed journalist edward r murrow exposed mccarthys slander and lies in a television documentary.
mccarthy murrow pointedly told his audience didnt create this situation of fear he merely exploited it however when the senate censured mccarthy on december 2 1954 for violating senate rules the legislators chose to depict mccarthy as solely responsible for the excesses of anti communism.
a disgraced mccarthy died from liver failure caused by alcoholism three years later at age 49.
no one man can terrorize a whole nation unless we are all his accomplices journalist edward r murrow during a 1954 television expos on mccarthy as murrow suggested the end of mccarthys career as a red baiter did not stop the governments anti communist crusade.
republicans and democrats alike took their cue from mccarthy and freely attacked any suspected radical working in local or state governments public schools or universities.
the smith act remained in place as did loyalty oaths hollywood blacklists and police surveillance of suspected radicals.
by the 1950s using the charge of communism to discredit political opponents or liberal activists such as martin luther king jr was commonplace in american politics.
is the term mccarthyism a useful or misleading way to characterize the second red scare.
chapter 24 a divided world the early cold war 1945 1963 averting nuclear war the worldwide ideological political and military struggle between the united states and the soviet union fueled americans fear of communism both at home and throughout the world.
the vision of fighting a nuclear war continued to haunt americans even after the ceasefire in korea.
technological advances in long range ballistic missiles and satellites provoked a new threat in the cold war standoff between the united states and the soviet union.
a missile fitted with a nuclear warhead could now reach the united states within half an hour from the soviet union.
armed uprisings in eastern europe renewed soviet demands that the west abandon berlin and the cuban missile crisis created a climactic moment when the world teetered on the edge of all out nuclear war.
sputnik 24 14 sputnik for americans this small satellite symbolized soviet technological superiority over the united states fueling the arms race between the two nations.
on october 4 1957 the soviet union sent the worlds first satellite nicknamed sputnik fellow traveler into outer space.
the size of a basketball and weighing just 183 pounds sputnik 24 14 nonetheless became a symbol of soviet technological superiority a satellite that could orbit the earth in 98 minutes.
today satellites serve a host of peaceful functions transmitting television images and telephone calls around the globe.
in 1957 however americans focused primarily on the new strategic advantage that satellite technology gave the soviets.
the soviets could easily fit a missile that sent sputnik into orbit with a nuclear warhead and launch it at the united states.
to help americans picture another danger life magazine traced the hypothetical path of sputnik over a 24 hour period 24 15 warning the orbit weaves a web as whole world watches several orbits each day marked in red as a reminder of the communist control of sputnik passed directly over the united states bringing the soviets ever closer to americas doorstep as they gradually ensnared the world.
fearing that the united states was losing the space race the government created the national aeronautics and space administration nasa to launch americas own investigation of space and the defense department scrambled to develop american satellite technology.
predicting how the soviet unions volatile new leader might use this why did the nuclear arms race escalate in the late 1950s.
technological breakthrough kept americans on edge.
in the power struggle that followed stalins death from a brain hemorrhage in march 1953 nikita khrushchev emerged as the new soviet premier.
a poorly educated peasant who rose through the ranks to become a stalin protg khrushchev reveled in rhetorical excess.
he proclaimed that the ussr was producing missiles like sausages and enjoyed keeping his american visitors offbalance.
during a visit by minnesota senator hubert 24 15 life magazine illustrated the sputnik threat by showing how its orbits gave the soviets control of space including areas over the united states.
view the image sputnik i averting nuclear war humphrey to moscow khrushchev stopped his threatening tirade long enough to ask humphrey where he was from.
thats so i dont forget to order them to spare the city when the rockets fly he said good naturedly.
eager to catch up with the soviet union in missile technology and cut the defense budget conventional military forces cost more than building nuclear weapons eisenhower oversaw a tremendous increase in american nuclear weaponry which grew from 800 to nearly 8 000 warheads between 1953 and 1960 this build up was part of a strategic vision called the new look in 1954 eisenhowers tough talking secretary of state john foster dulles announced that the united states would focus on developing massive retaliatory power to deter soviet aggression.
the national security council agreed with dulles that the country would go bankrupt trying to develop adequate defenses against soviet nuclear weapons and policing the world with ground troops.
dulles maintained that a strong arsenal of intercontinental missiles icbms armed with nuclear warheads would allow the united states to retaliate instantly by means and at places of our choosing when the soviets stepped out of line.
eisenhower liked the new look because it offered a way to counter the soviet manpower advantage while maintaining a small peacetime army.
the appeal of massive retaliation was simple it provided more bang for the buck some commentators noted.
getting accurate data on the soviet arsenal became critical once the united states embraced the doctrine of massive retaliation.
the year before the soviets launched sputnik the americans began using a new u 2 spy plane to photograph soviet military installations.
soviet radar could detect the u 2 but the plane flew at altitudes out of range for soviet fighter pilots or antiaircraft missiles.
for four years the united states used u 2 missions to collect intelligence about soviet long range missiles before turning to spy satellites.
the photographs were reassuring.
at the end of 1959 the united states learned the soviet union had only six icbm sites able to launch a missile carrying a nuclear warhead.
because it took 20 hours to fuel each missile which could travel through space to reach targets 5 000 to 6 000 miles away in half an hour the united states would have ample time to respond if the soviet union launched a first strike with six missiles.
despite khrushchevs claims that the soviets possessed a huge nuclear arsenal american had far more nuclear warheads and icbms.
innovation usa ussr nuclearpowered submarine launched first trial of icbm icbm operational submarinelaunched icbm operational 24 16 nuclear arms race 1950s the united states and soviet union tried to best each other by developing increasingly sophisticated nuclear weapons.
having made much of the claim that the soviet union possessed more icbms than the united states in his successful 1960 presidential campaign against richard nixon president john f kennedy waited a few months before revealing the truth in 1961 calling khrushchevs bluff kennedy announced that the united states had a second strike capability which is at least as extensive as what the soviets can deliver by striking first.
therefore we are confident that the soviets will not provoke a major nuclear conflict the gap only kept growing in americas favor.
continuing the policy of massive retaliation kennedy oversaw an increase in the american icbm stockpile from 63 to 424 from 1961 to 1963 the attention given to the missile gap during the 1960 presidential campaign revealed the constant pressure that americans felt to retain the upper hand in the ever evolving nuclear arms race.
the chart 24 16 lists the key developments in early cold war nuclear weaponry illustrating the intense competition between the united states and soviet union to develop nuclear weapons including nuclear powered submarines that could stay submerged for two months and fire nuclear fitted missiles.
the berlin wall americans weighed kennedys reassuring words about the missile gap against recent events that again demonstrated the heavy hand of soviet authority in eastern europe.
in 1956 khrushchev denounced stalins crimes against the soviet people how did the new soviet premier khrushchev compare to stalin.
chapter 25 in a land of plenty contentment and discord 1945 1960 securing the new deal legacy once prosperity returned after world war ii republicans tried to undo the new deal arguing that these depression era programs hampered the free market and deprived industrialists of the freedom to run their companies as they saw fit.
moderate democrats like president harry truman focused on preserving past reforms.
when labor unions launched unpopular postwar strikes republicans joined with conservative southern democrats to roll back new deal legislation that had benefited the labor movement.
the victory over labor however did not provide enough momentum for conservatives to achieve their ultimate goal dismantling the entire new deal.
25 1 striking steel workers 1946 picketing steel workers carried signs with slogans meant to win sympathy from ordinary americans but widespread strikes caused a public backlash against labor unions.
the labor movement curtailed in 1945 the labor movement enjoyed unparalleled strength.
government support for union organizing during the new deal and world war ii combined with a wave of successful sit down what arguments do these signs make for labors demands.
strikes in the 1930s had made labor a powerful force in american society.
this was the high point of the labor movement in american history.
over 14 million workers belonged to unions nearly 35 percent of the industrial workforce.
labor flexed its muscle in 1946 when the lifting of wartime price controls sent prices skyrocketing.
securing the new deal legacy nearly 4 6 million workers participated in 5 000 strikes nationwide in 1945 1946 demanding not just higher wages and benefits but also the right to participate in management decisions regarding investments product lines production methods and plant locations.
the signs held by striking steelworkers in this photo 25 1 outside a bethlehem steel plant were intended to mobilize public support.
the slogans demanded fairness to returning veterans gave assurances that higher wages would not lead to higher prices and proposed a living wage for workers who made such a valuable commodity.
black and white steelworkers manned this picket line together reflecting the success of the congress of industrial organizations cio in mending racial divisions that had previously weakened the labor movement see chapter 24.
the time has come to walk out of the shadow of states rights and into the sunlight of human rights minneapolis mayor hubert humphrey urging democrats to adopt a strong civil rights stance in the 1948 presidential election for much of his second term truman focused on managing foreign affairs and fending off assaults on his administration from senator joseph mccarthy see chapter 24.
truman wary of undermining bipartisan support for his cold war policies and the korean war did not push hard for controversial fair deal initiatives such as repealing the taft hartley act price and wage controls or universal health care.
only a fraction of trumans how did foreign affairs influence domestic politics in the postwar era.
fair deal proposals became law but his program foreshadowed the more successful and extensive liberal agendas of presidents john f kennedy and lyndon b johnson both democrats.
by the end of the truman administration most americans could not imagine a society without social security or a minimum wage expectations that shaped the political vision of the nations next president.
in 1952 and again in 1956 the republican candidate dwight eisenhower won in landslide elections both times defeating democrat adlai e stevenson of illinois.
the virtually unknown stevenson faced the daunting challenge of overcoming southern anger at trumans civil rights reforms which stevenson supported and americas affection for eisenhower a world war ii hero.
a gifted orator stevenson stuck to traditional stump speeches while eisenhower became the first presidential candidate to use televised political ads.
he honed his folksy image in short ads that aired during the commercial breaks of popular nighttime tv programs.
america voted overwhelmingly for the man they knew and liked with eisenhower defeating stevenson by 422 to 89 electoral votes.
in 1956 running on a slogan of peace and prosperity that noted his success in ending the korean war eisenhower polled even higher numbers receiving 457 electoral votes to stevensons 73 republican critics like senator robert taft of ohio attacked the fair deal as creeping socialism because these expensive programs required high taxes and in republicans view gave the government too much power.
the 1953 editorial cartoon who said creeping socialism 25 2 reflected the conservatives fear that eisenhower would have trouble taming new deal and fair deal programs.
the congressman in the cartoon a symbol of runaway big government holds a briefcase labeled govt.
in business housing power transport and his running head start makes it impossible for eisenhower to catch up.
the cartoon actually misrepresented eisenhowers intentions.
the president liked to say that he was conservative when it comes to money and liberal when it comes to human beings to appeal to the moderates in each party eisenhower announced that he had no intention of dismantling popular new deal programs.
should any political party attempt to abolish social security and eliminate labor laws and farm programs securing the new deal legacy 25 2 who said creeping socialism 1953 during the 1952 presidential election conservative republicans criticized the new deal and fair deal as creeping socialism this caricature portrays the newly elected republican president dwight eisenhower struggling to catch a sprinting congressman who clutches programs enacted during previous democratic administrations.
you would not hear of that party again in our political history eisenhower concluded to the dismay of republican conservatives.
his victory of the moderates as commentators termed it underscored that new deal reforms were here to stay.
eisenhower did curb the fair deal by vetoing new public housing and public works projects and never offered any new social welfare measures.
fiscally conservative eisenhower believed that balancing the budget and limiting government expenditures created a favorable business environment that promoted jobs and prosperity.
he also fostered strong ties between government and the defense industry as the pentagon amassed a huge nuclear arsenal.
in the presidents view a nuclear shield protected the nation more cheaply and effectively than conventional arms or troops.
but eisenhower expressed misgivings about the domestic costs of a large defense budget as early as 1953 every gun made every warship that is launched every rocket fired signifies in the final sense a theft from those who hunger and are not fed those who are cold and are not clothed nine years later as he prepared to vacate the white house eisenhower suggested that he had gone too far in promoting the convergence of military and industrial interests.
in a well remembered speech he urged americans to keep an eye on the military industrial complex his term for the close ties between the defense industry and the pentagon that might unduly influence government policy.
we must never let the weight of this combination endanger our liberties or democratic processes eisenhower warned.
i have always assumed that what was good for the united states was good for general motors and vice versa secretary of defense charles e wilson when asked about a possible conflict of interest between his government position and his former job as the head of general motors 1953 read the document dwight d eisenhower farewell address 1961 why was eisenhowers victory of the moderates significant.
chapter 22.
the big moment came when it was decided to paint.
just to paint.
the gesture on the canvas was a gesture of liberation from value political aesthetic moral wrote art critic harold rosenberg in 1952 jackson pollock dripped paint on the canvas to create paintings bursting with energy 25 8.
german photographer hans namuth captured pollocks rhythmic dance as he obscured painted figures with splats of paint.
mark rothko painted fields of color to reflect feelings rather than objects and refused to title or explain his paintings so that viewers could interpret his work freely.
each created signature styles that epitomized the rebellious nature of abstract expression.
young artists idolized these painters for refusing to represent reality or use their art to send a message.
more tradition bound artists denounced their work as trivial.
like james dean in films and elvis presley in music the painters pollock and rothko embodied the rebellious streak of fifties youth culture.
freedom now the civil rights movement freedom now the civil rights movement the civil rights movement entered a pivotal phase in the 1950s.
key supreme court rulings new leadership and innovative strategies emboldened thousands of black and white people to demand the end of racial segregation in the south.
the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp successfully challenged the constitutionality of segregated public schools.
martin luther king jr emerged as a major leader alongside a generation of activist black and white college students who employed new nonviolent strategies to compel white americans to confront the harsh realities of jim crow.
supreme court decisions pressured the federal government to intervene on behalf of african americans.
meanwhile television and news magazines transmitted shocking images of racial violence that made it impossible for the nation to ignore the demands of civil rights activists.
separate and unequal challenging segregated schools black and white southern children as this photo of a street scene in a small southern town suggests 25 9 grew up in separate worlds.
they lived in different parts of town went to segregated schools drank from separate water fountains ate in different restaurants waited for buses in different waiting rooms sat in separate sections of movie theatres and often shopped in different stores.
for many black children segregation meant daily humiliation and unanswered questions.
i guess if you are from a small georgia town as i am one black college student recalled you can say that your first encounter with prejudice was the day you were born.
my parents never got to see their infant twins alive because the only incubator in the hospital was on the white side after world war ii ethnic and racial minorities successfully challenged the legality of segregated schools.
in 1947 the supreme court ruled that educating children of mexican ancestry in separate california schools was illegal because state law only authorized segregated schools for children of asian decent.
after this ruling california repealed this discriminatory law.
ending legalized racial segregation nationwide came next.
in 1954 the supreme court overturned the 1896 plessy v ferguson separate but equal ruling that had allowed the south to maintain read the document brown v board of education of topeka kansas 1954 tastes the same to me mom leo lillard after secretly sampling water from white and colored fountains as a boy in nashville segregated schools from elementary school to graduate school.
in plessy v ferguson the court had concluded that separate facilities schools waiting rooms railroad cars for whites and blacks were constitutional as long as they offered each race similar amenities.
see choices and consequences chapter 24.
his leadership during the cuban missile crisis in 1962 however redeemed his reputation as a cold war warrior.
kennedy did not intend to let the conflict in vietnam bring his administration down.
faced with a worsening political and military situation in vietnam kennedy received conflicting recommendations from his advisors.
one group envisioned escalating the american commitment by sending in combat troops.
another wanted to seek a diplomatic resolution to the conflict.
faced with these divided opinions kennedy chose a middle path.
instead of infantry troops he sent more financial aid and increased the number of american military advisors in south vietnam from one thousand to sixteen thousand.
officially these advisors helped train the south vietnamese army.
in actuality many advisors were green berets the armys special force troops who organized south vietnamese attacks on vietcong supply lines flew planes when south vietnamese pilots were unavailable and picked up casualties in helicopters after skirmishes.
when word of these activities leaked out kennedy publicly denied that americans were participating in active combat operations in vietnam.
supporting the diem regime while applying pressure for reform appears to be the only practicable alternative at this time the joint chiefs convinced kennedy cautioning that any reversal of u s policy could have disastrous effects throughout southeast asia.
as south vietnamese anger against his rule intensified diem privately voiced his own mounting frustration with the growing american presence in south vietnam.
all these soldiers he fumed referring to the green berets and military advisors.
i never asked them to come here to rid south vietnam of americans diem and his police chief brother nhu decided to seek a negotiated settlement with north vietnam in 1963 upset with diems overture to north vietnam what conflicting recommendations did kennedy receive from his advisors about vietnam.
the turning point for the kennedy administration came in june when a buddhist monk set himself on fire in a busy street in saigon the capital of south vietnam.
the catholic diem had long discriminated against buddhists.
thousands of north vietnamese catholics fled to the south when the communists took over in 1954 and diem rewarded them with land and governmental positions.
in may 1963 nhu refused to let the buddhists fly a multicolored flag honoring buddha on his birthday.
widespread street protests ensued which nhu suppressed with soldiers who used water hoses tear gas and on one occasion bullets killing a woman and eight children.
on june 10 1963 a buddhist monk invited associated press photographer malcolm browne to witness something important the next morning.
browne arrived at the designated street crossing and watched monks take a canister of gasoline out of the white car shown in this picture 26 3 and place a brown mat in the middle of the street.
moments later a buddhist monk thich quang duc sat down on the mat in the lotus position.
after another monk poured gasoline over him duc struck a match.
flames instantaneously engulfed his body.
his eyes were closed but his features were twisted in apparent pain browne recalled.
as browne snapped this memorable photo a monk shouted into a microphone in vietnamese and english a buddhist priest burns himself to death.
a buddhist priest becomes a martyr monks seen in the background lined the streets to prevent anyone from trying to save duc.
immediately proclaimed a buddhist saint ducs ashes were distributed to pagodas towering buddhist temples throughout south vietnam.
duc carefully staged his suicide to gain maximum exposure for the buddhists political protest using the western press to help rally opposition to diem within south vietnam and the united states.
the burning monk image shocked but also bewildered americans.
the american government and press had continually praised diem as a valiant cold war ally but this photo suggested strong opposition to his rule at home.
students buddhist priests and soldiers in south vietnam responded to the suicide as a call to action.
street protests erupted the military began planning a coup and six other monks set themselves on fire in front of western journalists.
with a framed copy of brownes burning monk image on his desk kennedy secretly agreed to support a military coup to overthrow the diem regime.
the long road to war his presidential reelection bid kennedy was visiting dallas to shore up his fading popularity among texans angered by his support for the civil rights movement see chapter 27.
this was the first trip that jackie kennedy had taken with her husband since the death of their two day old son patrick three months photographer malcolm browne before.
kennedy decided to ride in an on photographing thich quang ducs open air convertible rejecting the sugself immolation in 1963 gestion from his secret service guards that he sit within a bulletproof clear glass bubble for the ride past the crowds.
an amateur movie by abraham zapruder a russian immigrant the military coup supported by president kennedy and kennedy supporter gave the nation its most enled to the murder of diem and nhu but americans during images of this killing film stills that provoked had little time to reflect on these events.
three weeks countless controversies over who killed the president.
later on november 22 1963 lee harvey oswald in its investigation of the assassination the warren shot and killed president kennedy in dallas texas commission cited the zapruder film as evidence that as kennedy waved to onlookers from an open oswald acted alone claiming that the film footage convertible with his wife by his side.
in the midst of showed bullets entering the presidents body from i must say that during the monk episode i had no impulse to try to go in and save him.
i knew for one thing that he intended it this way 26 3 burning monk thich quang duc wanted the western press to photograph his 1963 suicide to publicize the buddhist protest against the corrupt diem regime.
the kennedy assassination what insights does the story behind this 1963 photo offer into the vietnam war.
chapter 26 a nation divided the vietnam war 1945 1975 choices and consequences making vietnam americas war in early 1965 johnson initiated a regular bombing campaign against north vietnam and sent 82 000 ground troops to south vietnam.
the theater commander general william westmoreland soon requested 150 000 more.
in deciding how to respond to westmorelands request the presidents advisors gave johnson the following choices in the summer of 1965 choices avoid a protracted war with little chance for a military or political victory over the communists and seek a negotiated settlement in vietnam.
continue at the present level of military aid to south vietnam and push for political reforms there to create a more democratic anticommunist government.
send the requested troops expand the bombing campaign and work for political reforms in south vietnam.
decision johnson considered a negotiated settlement as tantamount to losing vietnam to communism an outcome he viewed as a threat to both southeast asia and his presidency.
certain that south vietnam would lose the war without additional u s aid he publicly agreed to send fifty thousand troops immediately.
he privately guaranteed westmoreland an additional fifty thousand and promised to send more as needed.
he also approved heavy bombing of vietcong strongholds in south vietnam and tried to institute political reforms in south vietnam to erode support for the vietcong.
consequences the united states was no longer simply aiding south vietnam in its struggle against communism but now took the lead in fighting the vietcong and the north vietnamese.
by 1967 there were nearly 500 000 american troops in vietnam.
during the war the united states dropped more bombs there than it had in world war ii.
johnsons dilemma.
he is shown here with defense secretary robert mcnamara.
continuing controversies should the united states have fought a major war in vietnam.
detractors claim that johnson committed the united states to an unwinnable war by trying to use the military to solve a political problem in south vietnam.
he underestimated the will of the vietcong and exaggerated the importance of south vietnam to containing communism in the rest of southeast asia.
he failed to build strong domestic support for a long war leading to unrest at home over the draft why was johnsons decision to escalate u s troop levels in 1965 important.
and rising casualties.
johnsons supporters argue that he honored a commitment to south vietnam made by his predecessors.
this reassured american allies worldwide that they could count on the united states.
retreat would only have invited further communist aggression in southeast asia and europe.
losing vietnam would have weakened johnson politically putting his controversial domestic reform and civil rights legislative agenda in jeopardy.
fighting in vietnam fighting in vietnam david halberstam reporting for the new york times in 1962 summed up the military dilemma in vietnam perfectly it is often impossible to separate the cruel and dedicated foe you want to kill from the simple and illiterate peasant you want to woo america and north vietnam embraced competing strategic visions in fighting the war.
while the american military preferred fighting against uniformed soldiers on a clearly defined battlefield the communists embraced guerilla warfare where troops blended into the civilian population or stayed hidden in underground tunnels.
the american military tried to defeat vietnamese guerillas by bombing enemy bases and destroying their village refuges.
these tactics created another set of competing visions about the war the soldiers view of an unending conflict versus the image of imminent victory that the government championed at home.
the bombing campaign the american military relied heavily on bombing to defeat the vietcong and north vietnamese.
the american bombing campaign was the largest air war in world history with american planes dropping nearly five million tons of bombs in eight years.
the americans hoped to pressure north vietnam into ending the war.
the north vietnamese instead learned to live with bombs.
the sighting of american planes over the north vietnamese capital city of hanoi sent inhabitants scurrying into bombproof underground shelters.
the government built thirty thousand miles of tunnels which moved the nations transportation and communication infrastructure underground.
the sustained bombing campaign bred anti american feelings among the civilian population that made it easier for the north vietnamese government to mobilize the country to foil the war of aggression of the u s imperialists navy captain james stockdale led the first american air strike against north vietnamese oil tanks in the wake of the gulf of tonkin incident.
a year later during another air raid he was shot down over a small coastal village in north vietnam where angry villagers beat him and broke his knee.
stockdale spent the next seven and a half years in a prisoner of war pow camp.
his jailers brutally tortured him when he taught fellow pows a walltapping code so they could communicate with one another during their years in solitary confinement.
american planes also targeted the ho chi minh trail a 600 mile north vietnamese supply route that ran along the western border of vietnam through the mountainous rain forest of neighboring laos and cambodia.
nearly five thousand communist soldiers and workers completed the arduous three month journey each month bringing troops munitions and food to the vietcong.
north vietnamese propaganda glorified the difficult journey with images that emphasized the toughness and determination of its people.
this photo 26 6 shows a north vietnamese camera crew filming teenage volunteers from the north as they push bicycles which the north vietnamese called steel horses through the woods to carry rice and guns to communist troops in the south.
improvements turned the dirt paths into an open road by the 1970s.
surface to air missiles and antiaircraft guns helped protect trucks from bombing.
26 6 hardships along the ho chi minh trail north vietnamese propaganda relentlessly publicized the arduous journey along the ho chi minh trail to highlight how communist ingenuity had stymied the worlds greatest military power.
here a communist movie crew films teenage volunteers transporting bags of rice and guns strapped to their bicycle handlebars in 1970 what messages did north vietnamese propaganda send.
chapter 27.
the night of his announcement however johnson was referring to the domestic debate over the war in vietnam.
although many working and middle class people opposed the war overcoming existing cultural and class divisions in american society to create a unified antiwar movement proved difficult.
the organized antiwar movement tended to attract mostly white middle class college educated americans or individuals already engaged in crusades of social justice.
many working class women and african americans with grade school educations and lowpaying jobs opposed the war but had little interest in marching alongside middle class college students in street demonstrations.
hey hey lbj how many kids did you kill today a popular chant during antiwar demonstrations uniting around one universal vision also posed difficulties for the antiwar movement.
all peace activists wanted to end the war in vietnam but they offered different arguments for doing so.
some made a primarily moral argument.
they claimed that a war involving napalm search and destroy what differing visions did peace activists offer on the war.
missions and forced relocation into strategic hamlets hurt the vietnamese more than living under communist rule did.
others focused on the futility of fighting an unwinnable civil war.
another group accepted that the nation needed to stop communist china from expanding its influence.
they argued that working with ho chi minh could accomplish this goal more effectively than fighting a war in vietnam.
these critics noted that while ho accepted chinese aid to fight the united states he was leery of chinese ambitions to control vietnam.
america had worked successfully in europe with the independently minded communist leader josip broz tito in yugoslavia to contain soviet ambitions in the balkans.
why could it not do the same in vietnam.
other activists saw a chance to open the nations eyes to injustice at home as well as overseas.
student leaders from the nations top universities founded the students for a democratic society sds at port huron michigan in 1962 a leader in the new left movement sds combined staunch opposition to the war with a scathing critique of the inequities of capitalism see chapter review links defeating communism in vietnam to protecting u s interests in southeast asia kennedy supports overthrow of diem president kennedy assassinated hainan island gulf of tonkin incident results in gulf of tonkin resolution 1964 after alleged north vietnamese attack on u s destroyers congress gives johnson permission for military action in vietnam johnson resolves to stay the course in vietnam review questions 1 how important were early decisions 1945 1954 in setting the course of u s involvement in the vietnam war.
2 how did the cold war influence presidential decision making about vietnam from 1945 to 1975.
4 how did competing images of the war create turmoil at home.
5 what do the debates surrounding the my lai massacre and kent state shootings reveal about americans competing visions of the war.
3 what military challenges did american troops face while fighting in vietnam.
key terms domino theory the fear that a communist vietnam would open the door to a complete communist takeover of southeast asia.
geneva accords 1954 called for a temporary partition of vietnam along the seventeenth parallel with the vietminh in the north and the french in the south and a general election in two years to reunify the country under one government.
southeast asian treaty organization seato 1954 alliance among the united states britain france australia new zealand thailand the philippines and pakistan who pledged to meet common danger in southeast asia together.
gulf of tonkin resolution 1964 gave johnson permission to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the united states and to prevent further aggression in vietnam.
ho chi minh trail a 600 mile north vietnamese supply route that ran along the western border of vietnam through neighboring laos and cambodia.
tet offensive 1968 a massive coordinated communist assault against more than 100 cities and towns in south vietnam.
my lai a vietnamese village where american soldiers massacred 500 civilians in 1968 vietnamization a nixon administration policy that turned the bulk of the ground fighting over to the south vietnamese army.
dtente relaxing cold war tensions by using diplomatic economic and cultural contacts to improve u s relations with china and the soviet union.
watergate scandal 1972 a botched republican engineered break in of the democratic national committee headquarters in washington d c that forced nixon to resign in 1974 chapter 26 he took up the slain presibaker v carr gave federal courts right to intervene if states dents liberal agenda.
let us continue created voting districts of unequal size.
johnson proclaimed echoing kennedys earlier entreaty let us begin unlike engel v vitale outlawed official school prayer in kennedy johnson excelled at forging public schools.
the deals needed to move legislation through congress and under his stewgideon v wainwright gave accused felons the right to free legal counsel.
ardship liberalism gained tremendous momentum.
over the next few months griswold v connecticut established right to privacy johnson used the nations grief to pooverturning state laws banning use of contraception.
litical advantage by cajoling congress into enacting key pieces of kennedys miranda v arizona required that police inform suspect legislative initiatives including civil of right to remain silent and have a lawyer present during rights legislation a tax cut and federally police questioning.
funded public housing.
johnson also announced his own war on poverty loving v virginia prohibited state laws banning creating an office of economic opinterracial marriages.
portunity that formed the jobs corps to teach inner city youth vocational skills and created volunteers in service to america vista a domestic peace corps that sent privileged young adults to work on attorney present during questioning and to not community projects in impoverished urban and answer questions that might incriminate them in rural areas.
despite these successes johnson knew that for the court also championed freedom of speech millions of americans i was still illegitimate.
ruling against red scare era laws that required a pretender to the throne because he had not been communist party members to register with the elected president.
johnson saw the 1964 election government and striking down official school as an opportunity to validate his presidency.
his prayer.
for years children across america had campaign however got off to a rocky start.
lbj begun their school days by reciting the pledge of expected to lose southern votes for having openly allegiance to which congress added the words supported federal civil rights legislation.
segrega under god in 1954 to contrast american religitionist alabama governor george wallaces strong osity with the godless communism embraced by showing in a few northern democratic primaries the soviet union.
most schoolchildren then sang was unwelcome evidence that the presidents civil a patriotic song like america and some conrights record might cost him votes in northern cluded this opening ritual with a short reading white working class ethnic neighborhoods and some from the bible.
the courts ruling against official middle class suburbs.
school prayer in engel v vitale 1962 is explored racial controversy also rocked the democratic in choices and consequences is school prayer partys presidential nominating convention in constitutional.
the decision ignited a firestorm of atlantic city when two separate delegations from controversy among conservative protestants and mississippi appeared.
disenfranchised blacks catholics.
president kennedy however endorsed the decision.
having encountered anti catholic big could not vote in mississippis official democratic otry during his 1960 presidential campaign he wel primary so the mississippi freedom democratic comed the chance to make religion a strictly private party mfdp had held a shadow primary to elect their own delegates.
this delegation challenged the matter as he geared up for his reelection campaign.
all white democratic partys claim to represent the chart major decisions of the warren court the state.
27 2 summarizes key court decisions.
brown v board of education outlawed racial segregation in public schools.
how did the warren court advance the liberal reform agenda.
read the document fannie lou hammer voting rights in mississippi 1964 the liberal moment choices and consequences is school prayer constitutional.
in 1962 parents in new york state challenged the constitutionality of the short nondenominational prayer that the state board of regents had adopted in 1951 for use in the public schools.
the question was whether government directed prayer violated the first amendment clause that congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof the fourteenth amendment made this clause applicable to state law.
choices the prayer was constitutional because students were not required to recite it.
an official prayer regardless of its content violated the first amendment.
school prayer simply recognized the importance of religion in american society without establishing an official religion.
decision in engel v vitale 1962 the supreme court ruled 6 to 1 that state directed school prayer was unconstitutional.
justice hugo black wrote the majority opinion stating that the first amendment prohibited official prayers for any group of american people to recite as part of a religious program carried on by government consequences the warren court received more mail opposing this case than any other.
in 1963 the court also banned reciting the lords prayer and bible reading in public school ruling that to remain neutral the government could not support the tenets of one or all religions outrage over school prayer rulings helped forge a new political coalition between southern fundamentalist protestants and northern catholics whose grassroots activism against liberalism contributed to the conservative rights resurgence in the late 1960s.
subsequent court decisions in the 1980s and 1990s prohibited moments of silence for private prayer minister led prayers at high school graduations and student led prayers at high school football games.
first graders praying continuing controversies does school prayer violate the first amendment.
those who answer yes believe that the founding fathers included the establishment clause in the constitution because the union of government and religion often leads to persecution of those not adhering to mainstream religious views.
freedom of religion requires a completely secular government that neither advances nor inhibits religious beliefs.
many conservatives argue that the courts decisions violated their first amendment right to exercise free speech and destroyed the spiritual heritage of the nation that stretched back to the pilgrims.
why did so many americans object to the supreme courts ruling against school prayer.
chapter 29.
by detailing the destructive impact of pesticides rachel carsons best selling book silent spring 1962 helped create a politically favorable climate for the environmental regulation that johnson proposed.
silent spring vividly detailed the destructive impact of pesticides on native birds provoking alarm over the possibility of a future silent spring when no bird songs would be heard.
johnson noted that americans had always been proud of america the beautiful but polluted air disappearing forests and filthy rivers had tarnished this image.
the air in some cities was so bad that motorists had to use their headlights after noon.
the pronouncement that lake erie was dead and the sight of oil slicks on the cuyahoga river in cleveland burning for eight days after a man tossed a lit cigar into the water underscored the environmental deterioration.
these ecological catastrophes helped spawn an exploding grassroots environmental movement that included greenpeace a radical direct action group and a resurgent sierra club a long standing conservation society.
responding to environmental activism and growing middle class concerns congress enacted bipartisan environmental measures that required pollution controls on cars and established national standards for acceptable air and water pollution.
johnson also created federally protected wilderness areas to safeguard endangered domestic species at risk of extinction such as the whooping crane.
the great society chart 27 4 contains a list of johnsons most significant legislation.
read the document rachael carson silent spring 1962 nonviolence triumphant the civil rights movement 1960 1965 nonviolence triumphant the civil rights movement 1960 1965 kennedys and johnsons strong civil rights agendas came in response to carefully planned grassroots protests against segregation and disenfranchisement in alabama and mississippi.
these highly visible demonstrations imperiled many civil rights workers and their leaders hoped to win support from white liberals and moderates nationally by showing them the face of southern segregationists resistance.
putting increased pressure on the federal government to act the civil rights movement ended legalized segregation and disenfranchisement by 1965 march on washington 1963 civil rights act 1964 voting rights act 1965 iowa nebraska washington d c ohio illinois indiana maryland west virginia virginia kansas delaware 27 5 civil rights milestones 1961 1965 the civil rights movement spread across the deep south in the early 1960s pushing to end legalized segregation and disenfranchisement.
kentucky missouri north carolina arkansas oklahoma police use fire hoses and dogs against protesters 1963 tennessee freedom riders attacked 1961 anniston south carolina rights milestones 1961 1965 27 5 atlantic philadelphia selma 3 civil rights workers murdered depicts where pivduring freedom summer 1964 montgomery ocean jackson alabama otal demonstrations louisiana texas mississippi occurred.
freedom summer 1964 voter registration projects selma to montgomery the immediate and freedom schools march 1965 florida issue centered on the enforcement of recent gulf of mexico supreme court rulings 1961 freedom rides that desegregated bus tercore congress of racial equality route from washington dc to birmingham al minals serving interstate sncc student nonviolent coordinating committee travelers.
faced with kennedys from birmingham al to jackson ms reluctance to act the interracial congress of racial equality core organized the freedom rides interstate bus journeys by black and white activists who entered segregated bus waiting rooms together throughout the south.
we felt we could count on the racists of the south to create a crisis so that the federal government would be compelled to enforce the law the african inspired by kennedys pronouncement during his inaugural address that the torch has been passed to american core leader james farmer recalled.
the freedom rides began when 13 whites and a new generation of americans civil rights leadblacks including farmer and john lewis a veteran ers expected the new president to aggressively seek of the 1960 nashville sit ins boarded an interstate an end to jim crow.
kennedy however adopted a bus on may 4 1961 in washington d c headed cautious stance and like his predecessors remained for the deep south.
expecting the worst several silent on civil rights.
the movement would have to riders left sealed letters for their families to open compel the new president to act.
the map of civil birmingham georgia kennedy and the freedom riders what was the purpose of the freedom rides.
chapter 27 27 6 freedom riders attacked in anniston alabama traumatized civil rights activists sit on the ground after a mob firebombed the bus the freedom riders were riding to protest the segregation of interstate bus facilities.
a decade of discord the challenge of the 1960s if they were killed.
after a smooth ride through the upper south in atlanta the freedom riders decided to take two separate buses into the heart of the rigidly segregated deep south.
as the first bus carrying freedom riders entered the depot in anniston alabama a mob pelted the bus with stones and slashed its tires.
the driver drove away without stopping pursued by 50 cars carrying vigilantes.
when a flat tire obliged him to stop along a deserted country road a firebomb forced the freedom riders off the bus and into the waiting gauntlet of sticks and crowbars.
state troopers arrived in time to save the lives of the traumatized freedom riders two of whom sit stunned on the ground in this photo 27 6 of the bus burning.
meanwhile the second bus arrived in birmingham where ku klux klansmen beat white freedom rider james peck a 47 year old labor and peace activist when he entered a white only waiting room with a black colleague.
when you go somewhere looking for trouble you usually find it the governor of alabama remarked unsympathetically.
a photo of klan members beating peck accompanied the front page story in the new york times that informed president kennedy about the organized attacks on the freedom riders.
still dealing with the fallout from the bay of pigs invasion that had ended in disaster four weeks earlier and preparing for a summit with soviet leader nikita khrushchev see chapter 27 27 13 black panther leader huey newton 1967 this staged photo showed newton dressed in guerrillastyle clothing surrounded by symbols of african warrior culture to convey the black panthers militant nationalistic ideology.
a decade of discord the challenge of the 1960s king rushed to watts intent on teaching residents to employ nonviolent means to express their grievances.
instead it was king who came away with a valuable lesson.
when he toured the smoldering ruins a crowd of black youths shouted we won how can you say you won when 34 negroes are dead your community is destroyed and whites are using the riot as an excuse for inaction king asked.
their reply taught him the extent of despair among northern blacks we won because we made them pay attention to us the watts riots convinced king to move aggressively to end economic inequality nationwide now that battles against legalized segregation and disenfranchisement were won.
but the sclcs 1966 chicago campaign dramatically demonstrated the limits of moderate northern whites support for racial equality.
when protesters marched through all white neighborhoods to protest racial discrimination in renting and selling houses white crowds pelted them with bottles and rocks which some marchers threw back.
i have never seen even in mississippi and alabama mobs as hostile and hate filled as ive seen in chicago king noted with dismay.
after kings death in 1968 president johnson successfully lobbied congress to pass the fair housing act that prohibited discrimination in selling renting or financing housing as a memorial to the slain leader.
black power and the black panthers the black power slogan emerged during james merediths 1966 march against fear in mississippi.
meredith had faced down hostile crowds in 1962 when he became the first black student to graduate from the university of mississippi.
four years later he decided to march 220 miles by himself from memphis tennessee to jackson mississippi hoping that his courage would inspire blacks to register to vote.
on the second day of his march a did the tactics used by the black panthers to publicize their militant vision help or hurt them.
sniper waiting in the bushes wounded meredith.
when activists flocked to continue his march sncc leader stokely carmichael told participants we been saying freedom for six years and we aint got nothing.
what we gonna start saying now is black power black power however soon became a slippery term that people employed in different ways.
competing visions defining black power explores how black leaders with different ideologies embraced competing definitions of black power.
in 1966 black power militants came to the forefront of traditionally nonviolent civil rights organizations like sncc which expelled whites to foster black community leadership.
that same year bobby seale and huey newton founded the black panther party for self defense in oakland california.
the black panthers were a militant civil rights group dedicated to armed self defense racial pride and inner city renewal.
to project an image of strength that would appeal to inner city youth the black panthers wore commando style attire including black leather jackets black pants black berets and dark sunglasses items already fashionable among young black men.
the 1967 photo 27 13 that became the emblem of the black panther movement depicted newton sitting in a throne like wicker chair surrounded by a zebra rug and warrior shields symbols of a racial identity rooted in african culture.
wearing western military style clothing and holding a rifle in his right hand and a spear in his left newton stared into the camera with the steely resolve of a revolutionary.
the paramilitary group initiated community projects including free breakfasts for school children and health clinics but the the fractured left competing visions defining black power the image of a raised clenched black fist became the most enduring symbol of black power but it only represented one view of the slogans meaning.
in the following excerpts civil rights leaders debate the meaning and implications of black power.
malcolm x never used the term directly but his separatist message laid the groundwork for black power nationalism later in the decade.
in contrast martin luther king jr advocated using nonviolent methods to empower the black community.
political scientist charles hamilton notes the various interpretations given to the black power slogan and embraces one that emphasizes pride in being black.
is there any agreement among these competing definitions.
how does this debate compare to the one between marcus garvey and w e b dubois in the 1920s see competing visions chapter 28 righting a nation adrift america in the 1970s and 1980s human rights violations influenced him less.
ford rumsfeld and poured money into the american refused to cut off u s aid to pinochet and supmissile program.
ported the military junta that seized power in argentina in 1976 ford also tried to build on nixons foreign policy successes by retaining henry kissinger as secretary of state and national security advisor.
ford initially accepted kissingers view that dtente the policy of using diplomatic economic and cultural contacts as the 1976 presidential contest approached ford to improve u s relations with china and the soviet faced a strong challenge in the republican primaunion would promote global stability by lowering ries from 65 year old ronald reagan a former the risk of nuclear war.
consequently ford abided film actor who had just finished his second term by the terms of the 1972 strategic arms limitation as governor of california.
reagans father had kept treaty or salt i the first treaty between the soviet the family afloat during the depression by workunion and the united states that limited the deploy ing for the works project administration but ment of intercontinental and submarine launched some key adult experiences gradually transformed ballistic missiles.
this son of the new deal into a staunch conservanixon had also signed tive.
during the second the 1972 anti ballistic misred scare reagan became sile abm treaty in which concerned about commuthe united states and the nisms influence in holly soviet union agreed to wood and he objected to a bumper sticker that reflected refrain from creating napaying nearly 70 percent widespread voter apathy in the tional missile defense sysof his film earnings in 1976 presidential election tems.
this treaty embraced taxes.
in 1962 he joined the long standing logic of the republican party mutually assured destrucenthusiastically supported tion mad the belief that the guarantee of a barry goldwater in 1964 and became governor of devastating nuclear counterattack would deter california in 1966 in a close vote ford prevailed the united states and soviet union from ever at the republican convention but reagan vowed employing their nuclear arsenals.
by pledging to to rise and fight again remain defenseless against a nuclear attack each fords democratic opponent was former georside hoped to dampen fears that it would ever gia governor jimmy carter a surprise choice launch a first strike against the other.
ford also whom few americans knew when he declared his joined with the soviet union and 31 other nacandidacy.
carters political ambitions even surtions to sign the 1975 helsinki accords which prised his own mother.
when he told her that he accepted the current east west balance of power was running for president she replied president in europe.
of what carters baptist faith and the image he fords moderate course invited pounding criticultivated of an uncorrupted washington outsider cism from the left and the right ultimately spelling who could restore honor to the white house atthe demise of dtente.
conservative critics led by tracted conservative democrats who had voted california governor ronald reagan lambasted for nixon.
i will never lie to you carter assured ford for giving away eastern europe to the soviet voters.
liberal critics shared conservatives concerns neither candidate generated much enthusiasm.
about soviet treatment of dissidents.
bipartisan the made up campaign slogans in this politiobjections also arose over letting the soviets maincal cartoon 28 4 gerald r ford a perfectly tain a larger arsenal of long range and submarineadequate guy for the seventies and oh.
why launched nuclear missiles than that of the united not.
ford in 76 captured the general apastates.
over time ford began to share these concerns thy to fords campaign.
an equally lackluster that the soviet union was untrustworthy.
certain campaigner carter benefited from the nations that the soviets were continuing to build long range ongoing economic woes anger over watergate intercontinental ballistic missiles ford heeded the and fords misstep in pardoning nixon.
carter advice of his hawkish defense secretary donald managed to temporarily reassemble the new deal the leadership crisis continues carter in the white house dont vote it only encourages them what competing visions arose over nixons efforts to reshape u s soviet relations.
watch the video gerald ford presidential campaign ad 1976 a crisis of presidential leadership coalition of white southerners urban blacks and union members to carry the election by 297 to 240 electoral votes.
less than 55 percent of the electorate even bothered to vote however a historic low and disappointing follow up to the 1960s when countless civil rights activists had put their lives on the line to secure this right.
on his inauguration day carter chose to walk from his swearing in on the capitol steps to the white house with his wife and family rather than ride in a limousine the type of populist gesture that he frequently made as president.
ford had pardoned nixon in an attempt to heal wounds quickly.
carter tried to remove another source of festering discord by pardoning 10 000 vietnam war draft resisters many of whom had fled to canada a move that enraged conservatives but earned him the gratitude of liberal democrats.
seeking to solidify liberal democratic support carter moved quickly to build on the liberal vision of democrats john f kennedy and lyndon b johnson by creating the department of education and working with congress to establish a superfund to clean up the nations most polluted areas.
he also appointed the most women and minorities to federal office of any previous president.
carters outsider status and his tendency toward self righteousness however hampered his presidency.
a hard worker who rose early and went to bed late he pored over every memorandum even personally handling requests to use the white house tennis court during his first six months in office.
the fiscally conservative carter had strong philosophical differences with liberal democrats who emphasized the advantages of deficit spending over balancing the federal budget.
carter believed that too much government regulation was hampering the business recovery while liberal democrats felt that regulation was necessary to protect the public.
the president eventually prevailed convincing congress to deregulate the trucking communication and airline industries.
identifying rising oil costs as the main cause of the nations economic woes carter urged americans to consume less oil in a 1977 television address that recalled franklin d roosevelts famous fireside chats.
as a fire crackled behind him carter dressed in a cardigan sweater called the energy crisis the moral equivalent of war which was the title of a famous essay by nineteenth century philosopher william james.
to discourage consumption carter proposed ending the price controls that kept oil and gas prices low and imposing higher federal taxes on gasoline.
to prevent price gouging he also wanted oil and gas companies to pay higher taxes on their profits.
carter tried to craft a vision that would appeal to both laissez faire adherents who liked the idea of lifting price controls so the market determined the price of oil and liberals who believed in government regulation to rein in corporate profits and protect the environment.
the resulting energy law in 1978 compromised between these conflicting visions.
it lifted price controls raised the sales taxes on gas guzzling cars and offered tax incentives for using alternative energy sources such as coal and solar heating.
the law did not however include a windfall profits tax on oil and gas company profits.
the country soon felt the effects of lifting price controls without also raising taxes on oil 28 4 do you get the feeling this campaign lacks a little something.
like carter ford failed to generate much enthusiasm among the electorate in the 1976 presidential election.
why did the 1976 presidential election fail to engage the country.
chapter 28 righting a nation adrift america in the 1970s and 1980s and gas company profits.
in 1979 opec raised prices four times in five months and revolution in iran curtailed its oil exports.
images of motorists waiting for hours in line to buy gas last seen during the 1973 oil embargo again dominated the news.
the crisis reached its zenith on june 13 1979 when over half of the nations service stations ran out of gas.
meanwhile exxon an american company that imported oil from overseas announced first quarter earnings of 1 9 billion in 1980 a record profit by an american corporation.
carter renewed his call for a windfall profit tax on oil and gas companies hoping to use this revenue to fund public transportation develop alternative energy sources and help the poor pay for heating.
to stimulate interest in energy conservation carter took to the airwaves to deliver an address soon dubbed the malaise speech america he lamented was enmeshed in a moral and spiritual crisis.
the nation had gone from one that celebrated hard work strong families close knit communities and our faith in god to one that worshiped self indulgence and consumption carters call for americans to seize control again of our national destiny aroused only resentment over his sermonizing.
28 5 hey man like i dont care what its costing me this political caricature blamed americans oil addiction for the nations energy problems.
what different opinions surfaced about the root of americas energy problems.
these two political cartoons both drawn in 1980 encapsulated competing notions of where blame for the energy crisis lay.
bob taylor drawing for the dallas times herald focused on the nations insatiable appetite for oil 28 5.
he portrayed uncle sam as a drug addict willing to pay any price for his next fix of oil.
like i dont care what its costing.
i need it a disheveled and stony eyed uncle sam says as he prepares to inject a barrel of oil into his vein.
by contrast john milt morriss profitsharing plan indicted opec and american oil companies for price gouging viewing the consumer as a victim of their conspiracy to empty his pockets 28 6.
a sign posted outside one gas station presented a third view by proclaiming higher prices more sass bad president out of gas putting the blame squarely on carters shoulders.
new paths in foreign affairs carter had more success in foreign affairs than in domestic matters although not without encountering opposition to his wilsonian inspired vision of america championing democracy worldwide.
constant meddling in the domestic affairs 28 6 profit sharing plan expressing more sympathy for the average consumer this caricature accused oil producing nations and oil companies of creating artificial shortages to gouge consumers.
watch the video jimmy carter crisis of confidence 1979 a crisis of presidential leadership of neighboring nations he noted had earned the united states the reputation as an imperial exploiter throughout latin america.
liberal democrats rejoiced when carter resolved to make human rights and the spreading of democracy the centerpieces of his foreign policy.
the presidents first major achievement was consistent with his desire to forge a new path in american diplomatic relations.
making amends for past american wrongdoing see chapter 19 carter negotiated a treaty that returned the panama canal to panama in 2000 the united states had controlled the canal zone since 1903 but by the 1970s americas bigger submarines and ships did not fit through the canal reducing its importance to national security and the economy.
three previous presidents had recognized these facts and opened negotiations but carter sealed the deal and won senate ratification for the agreement in 1978 giving up control of the panama canal failed to dramatically improve relations between the united states and latin america.
overtures to normalize relations with the communist cuban dictator fidel castro went nowhere.
carter also faced a severe test in nicaragua where civil war pitted the anti communist dictator anastasio somoza against the cuban supported sandinista rebels.
when the sandinistas prevailed carter offered them economic aid in the vain hope that he could dissuade them from creating a cubanlike authoritarian communist state.
turning to asia carter continued along the path forged by nixon and established diplomatic relations with the peoples republic of china in 1979 this decision angered conservatives who viewed taiwan where the nationalist government had fled after the communist takeover of the mainland in 1949 as the rightful government of china.
to the communists and those others who are hostile to our country reagan fumed president carter and his supporters in the congress seem like santa claus.
they have given the panama canal away abandoned taiwan to the red chinese and theyre negotiating a salt ii treaty with the soviets that could very well make this nation number two ignoring these criticisms carter signed the salt ii pact in june 1979 which capped missiles and bombers on each side.
but as reagans comments revealed american disaffection with dtente ran deep.
in the 1970s soviet backed regimes took control of angola somalia ethiopia an inordinate fear of communism has led us to embrace any dictator who joined in our fear president jimmy carter making human rights a guiding principle in u s foreign policy and afghanistan confirming skeptics fears that dtente had strengthened the enemy.
additional signs of moscows aggressive intentions came in 1977 when the soviets began aiming new highly accurate intermediate range missiles ss 20s at western europe.
carter responded by securing natos authorization to install pershing ii missiles in western europe which could reach moscow in ten minutes.
strained soviet american relations took another hit when the soviet union invaded afghanistan in december 1979 to prop up its faltering marxist government.
the soviets were eager to keep a friendly regime in power along their border but the united states feared their ambitions might stretch into the oil rich middle east.
calling the invasion the most serious threat to peace since the second world war carter announced the carter doctrine a declaration that the united states would use armed forces to stop any outside power from making inroads into the persian gulf region.
he withdrew the salt ii treaty from the senate increased defense spending cut off shipments of grain and technology to the soviet union and announced that the united states would boycott the summer olympics in moscow.
the carter administration also sent aid to muslim fundamentalist rebels battling the soviets in afghanistan whose ranks included the saudi born islamic militant osama bin laden.
a wealthy recent college graduate dedicated to establishing an islamic state in afghanistan bin laden would later found al qaeda an islamic fundamentalist terrorist organization.
the cold war had long held the attention of american presidents.
the united states was just learning however to take conflicts in the middle east as seriously.
carter hoped to lessen tension by negotiating an end to hostilities between israel and egypt.
in 1978 he invited egyptian president anwar el sadat and israeli prime minister menachem begin to camp david a presidential mountain retreat in maryland.
thirteen days of tense did carters dealings with the soviet union continue or undo initiatives undertaken by nixon and ford.
chapter 28 righting a nation adrift america in the 1970s and 1980s in the twenty first century the pro life movement took advantage of new ultrasound portraits of fetuses in the womb that showed beating hearts to underscore their argument that life began at conception.
unable to overturn the roe decision directly pro life activists secured a ban on federal funding for abortions.
some states also required parental notification when minors sought abortions.
gay rights aids memorial quilt the panels of the aids memorial quilt portrayed the diseases victims as sons brothers and lovers with strong ties to their families and communities to challenge stereotypes of homosexuals as diseased pariahs.
the rights revolution also encompassed the gay and lesbian subcultures that existed in the shadows of mainstream society until the 1960s.
except for a few men and women who joined fledgling gay rights groups after world war ii most gay men and lesbians before the 1960s chose to live in the closet hiding their same sex preferences from the world.
unlike blacks women and other minority groups gay americans did not have a long history of organizing to defend their rights.
heterosexual americans uniformly disparaged gays as deviant and morally reprehensible.
the american psychiatric association categorized homosexuality as a mental disorder a position it did not jettison until 1973 taking the psychological stereotyping a step further time magazine viewed homosexuality as a pernicious sickness if you were gay and you how similar were the gay rights and civil rights movements.
accepted those societal norms then you were at war with yourself stated one college student as he recalled his own struggle to come to terms with his homosexuality.
exposure as a homosexual or lesbian could mean losing everything job spouse friends and social position.
in the 1960s the civil rights movement and the hippie counterculture assault on sexual taboos inspired some gay people to come out of the closet and challenge the ways that american society ostracized them.
the true awakening of the gay rights movement came during the stonewall riot on june 28 1969 when patrons frequenting the stonewall inn a greenwich village male gay bar fought back during a new york city police raid.
this open defiance electrified the gay community and the next morning a huge crowd gathered outside the stonewall inn chanting gay power a modification of the black power slogan that black militants embraced see chapter 22 when aid to the wealthy failed to create more jobs for the poor.
28 15 president reagan shot 1981 the last photo shows secret service agent jerry parr shoving reagan into his presidential limousine as a bullet hits him but no one realized that reagan had been shot until he reached the hospital.
why was reagan so popular.
democrats in congress were determined to fight reagans proposals.
then a nearly tragic turn of events gave reagan an unexpected advantage.
on march 30 1981 a deranged 25 year old named john hinckley seeking to impress teenage film actress jodie foster shot reagan his press secretary james brady and two others outside a washington hotel.
after hearing a firecracker like pop news photographer ron edmonds took three quick photos 28 15 the first shows the president flinching as he hears shots the second shows him turning to locate the source of the shooting in the third secret service agent jerry parr pushes reagan into the presidential limousine as a bullet ricocheted off the car door and hit reagan under his left armpit.
parrs quick thinking is credited with saving reagans life if parr had not pushed the president down then the bullet would have likely hit him in the head.
in the hospital with a bullet lodged near his heart reagan maintained his trademark cheerfulness telling his distraught wife honey i forgot to duck americans rallied to his side and when reagan returned to work a month later he presented his 70 percent approval ratings as evidence that the nation supported his budget proposal.
it passed easily with bipartisan support from conservative democrats.
the top tax rate dropped from 70 percent to 50 percent lowered again to 28 percent in 1986 reagans image as a resolute leader got another boost when he fired 11 000 striking air traffic controllers in august 1981 enforcing a ban on strikes by federal employees working in critical industries.
liberal critics lamented that the presidents act sent a chilling message to organized labor whose membership rolls and willingness to strike declined throughout the decade.
in 1984 reagan easily won his reelection bid against democrat walter mondale.
mondale energized the democratic party when he selected new york congresswoman geraldine ferraro as his running mate the nations first female vice presidential candidate but he made a key error by stating that he would raise taxes to close the deficit.
mondale expected americans to reward him for his candor about the worrisome federal debt but the nation was in no mood to fret.
reagan scored well with television campaign ads that centered on the theme morning again in america they featured scenes of small town america where contented citizens celebrated marriages schoolchildren pledged allegiance to the flag and friends laughed together.
america is prouder stronger better.
why would we want to return to where we were less than four short years ago the voiceover asked.
many americans agreed and reagan won every vote in the electoral college except those watch the video ronald reagan on the wisdom of tax cuts the rise of the right from mondales home state of minnesota and the district of columbia with a landslide total of 525 to 13 reagan remained relentlessly pro business throughout his presidency.
driven to free private industry from government regulations that in his view restricted its growth reagan convinced congress to deregulate the savings and loan industry.
once freed from strict government oversight these banks lost huge amounts of depositors money in speculative investments.
in 1989 president george h w bush reagans successor convinced congress to bail them out at great cost to taxpayers rather than accept wide scale bank failures that would certainly have sent the economy into a deep recession.
as the budget battles and savings and loan debacle revealed reagans fiscal policies remained controversial.
during his time in office the federal debt nearly tripled from 994 billion in 1981 to 2 6 trillion in 1988 as the hoped for tax revenue failed to materialize and the military build up continued unabated.
after a serious recession in 1981 1983 the economy began to improve as inflation lessened and business activity picked up.
the return of prosperity muted the impact of liberal criticism and helped republicans argue that people at all class levels were doing better financially under reagans stewardship.
democrats and republicans offered competing visions on the economy throughout the 1980s.
democrats lamented the increased concentration of income in the hands of the top fifth of the population.
what i want to see above all is that this remains a country where someone can always get rich reagan stated in 1983 chief executive officers ceos of leading corporations had no reason for complaint.
their average salaries adjusted for inflation rose from 3 million to 12 million a year during reagans eight years in office while outlays for subsidized housing dropped from 30 billion to 7 billion.
in 1980 the average ceo made 40 times more than the average factory worker.
by 1989 ceos earned 93 times more.
to democrats reagans economic policies helped the rich get richer while the poor got poorer.
republicans countered that consumption was a better measurement of americans overall financial health than income distribution.
in the 1980s americans went on a buying spree that rivaled the postwar boom of the 1950s purchasing nearly 88 million cars 63 million vcrs and 62 million microwave ovens.
items previously available only to the wealthy such as refrigerators and telephones were found in nearly every american household by 1990 while the poorest americans were not living as well as the richest their read the document ronald reagan speech at the brandenberg gate 1987 material circumstances were much improved when compared with those of previous generations.
reagan spoke eloquently about cutting taxes and slashing welfare.
he was decidedly less passionate about education housing health care and the environment often letting subordinates make key decisions in these areas.
his hands off management style differed vastly from carters micromanagement.
reagan rarely worked more than eight hours a day enjoyed many vacations to his california ranch and usually took an afternoon nap.
its true that hard work never killed anyone but i figure why take the chance he joked.
reagans detractors viewed his detachment as senility and charged that he was just a figurehead.
supporters sometimes agreed that reagan put his trust in the wrong hands.
over 100 members of his administration were indicted or forced to resign amid corruption charges stemming in part from reagans lax oversight of his subordinates who often acted without consulting him.
foreign policy triumphs and scandals reagan did more than reject the liberal economic vision he also overturned the foreign policy initiatives set in place by his republican predecessors.
he changed the rules of the cold war by abandoning mad the doctrine embraced by american and soviet policymakers since the 1950s as the basis for u s defense against the soviet union.
remaining defenseless against enemy nuclear weapons was an essential component of mad.
the ability to shoot down incoming missiles the doctrine asserted might encourage the enemy who no longer feared its own destruction to attack.
reagan offered a competing view.
let me share with you a vision of the future which offers hope he declared in 1983 announcing the strategic defense initiative sdi.
challenging the view that vulnerability made america more secure reagan proposed building a missile shield that used lasers from space satellites to destroy incoming missiles.
publicly he argued that his plan was compatible with the 1972 abm treaty which critics disputed since he intended to share the technology with the soviets.
privately he expected the soviet union to go bankrupt trying to match the united states in building its own missile defenses.
despite the billions spent on research the sdi project failed.
sdi nonetheless hurt the soviet union.
a rapidly changing slate of elderly soviet leaders responded to reagans challenge much as he expected.
the new leaders increased military how did democrats and republicans differ on the state of the economy in the 1980s.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 a moment rich with promise on his inauguration day in 1989 george h w bush announced that he had become president at a moment rich with promise the fall of communism throughout eastern europe and the soviet union within the next two years seemed to confirm this judgment.
however the end of the cold war did not mean peace the united states immediately fought two short wars in panama and the persian gulf.
conflict also arose at home as a huge federal deficit and simmering racial tensions that occasionally exploded into violence left some feeling that americas promise lay unfulfilled.
the election of 1988 the son of a former connecticut senator george h w bush served as a congressman ambassador central intelligence agency cia director and vice president before becoming the republican candidate for president in 1988 in this sense the decorated world war ii pilot and former oilman was the ultimate insider a man familiar with the corridors of power in washington and the exclusive private clubs where financial deals were negotiated.
a moderate republican with a patrician style bush never projected the same charisma or the passion for conservative causes that had drawn voters to ronald reagan the man he hoped to follow as president.
bushs campaign had to overcome these obstacles when he faced massachusetts democratic governor michael dukakis in the presidential contest.
when dukakis proposed increased spending on health care education and housing the bush team ridiculed the democrat as a big spending liberal and began calling him the governor of taxachusetts in his stump speeches bush also tapped into white peoples fears of so called black criminality by frequently mentioning willie horton an african american prisoner who had taken advantage of a weekend furlough program in massachusetts and gone on a crime rampage that included raping a white woman.
adding to his woes dukakis made critical missteps including one ill advised photo op during which he donned an oversized helmet and military jumpsuit to ride a tank 29 1.
most americans felt that the photo made dukakis look ridiculous not presidential.
by election day bush had defined dukakis as someone who would raise taxes and let criminals out of jail and was a failed photo op seeking to appear like a commander in chief 1988 democratic presidential candidate michael dukakis was instead ridiculed for riding around in a tank in a suit and tie.
how did george h w bush prevail in the 1988 presidential election.
read the document george h w bush inaugural address 1989 moment rich with promise unprepared to be commander in chief.
he defeated dukakis 426 to 111 in the electoral college capturing 53 percent of the popular vote.
popular revolts against communism when bush became the 41st president of the united states in 1989 the former director of the cia remained suspicious about soviet premier mikhail gorbachevs true motives for instituting internal reforms and reaching out to the united states see chapter 27.
read the document william julius wilson the urban underclass moment rich with promise c ussr as pi turkmenistan an kabul s georgia black sea a fgh an ista n ea azerbaijan armenia afghanistan us airstrikes against al qaeda bases 1988 us invades 2001 turkey istanbul tehran ankara pa k i s ta n mosul i r a n iran syria iraq iran war 1980 88 baghdad pakistan osama bin laden s alleged hideout 2003 2011 u s special forces kill osama bin laden may 2 2011 cyprus jerusalem karachi iraq mediterranean lebanon beirut damascus sea basra amman pe rs kuwait israel jordan kuwait iraq invades 1990 bahrain ian g ulf strait of hormuz qatar united arab emirates egypt riyadh saudi arabia oman arabian sea saudi arabia un staging ground for persian gulf war 1991 r e d s e a others including the jury consisting of ten whites one latino and one asian american that acquitted the officers offered a competing vision.
they saw overworked police doing their job to protect law and order in a dangerous neighborhood.
the not guilty verdict set off four days of rioting in los angeles during which latinos also took to the streets to air their frustration with failing schools and entrenched poverty.
television networks continuously aired footage of black youths assaulting a white truck driver but paid little attention to the asian american owned stores that blacks and latinos ransacked as payback for allegedly having refused to serve or hire young men of color.
yemen arab republic yemen bush did not propose any new initiatives to address gender racial or ethnic inequities his real interest lay in foreign affairs.
as he contemplated the new role that the united states should assume in a post cold war world bush moved to address a festering problem close to home.
his administration felt particularly uneasy about returning the panama canal in 2000 see chapter 26 americans held strong competing visions on what they felt the photos represented.
some saw rogue soldiers acting on their own others blamed the president for authorizing brutal interrogating techniques on suspected terrorists.
another group sidestepped the moral question and instead debated whether torture produced valuable information or simply encouraged suspects to say what interrogators 29 16 baghdad falls april 10 2003 wanted to hear.
initial news reports spoke of jubilant crowds cheering as u s marines helped them pull down a statue of saddam hussein but later reports suggested that the army had staged the incident.
what accomplishments and setbacks did the united states experience in the iraq war.
new threats in the post cold war world the election of 2008 in 2004 bush won reelection against democratic challenger massachusetts senator john kerry a vietnam war veteran whose record both as a decorated officer and peace activist came under republican attack during the campaign.
despite the growing unpopularity of the war in iraq the fresh memories of 9 11 bolstered bushs argument that only he could adequately protect the nation against terrorism.
in a close election bush won the popular vote by only 3 percent and captured the electoral college 286 to 252 by 2008 however the presidents approval rates had sunk to historic lows only truman and nixon had polled lower.
these lows reflected the nations unease with its seemingly permanent presence in iraq and recoil at the white houses initial failure to react when hurricane katrina devastated new orleans predominantly black neighborhoods in 2005 in the 2008 presidential contest democratic and republican candidates both repudiated the bush administration and ran campaigns that promised change.
the election soon assumed historic dimensions when hillary rodham clinton the former first lady and now a senator from new york announced her candidacy.
clinton had a long record of public service dedicated to healthcare issues but her initial support for the war in iraq angered antiwar democrats.
firstterm illinois senator barack obama the 47 year old son of a white woman from kansas and an african father astutely campaigned on his own consistent opposition to the war.
when the crowded democratic field narrowed to clinton and obama the 2008 election was guaranteed to make history.
for the first time either a woman or an african american would head the national democratic ticket.
at the end of a bruising primary battle obama prevailed to become the democratic nominee.
in the general election obama faced republican john mccain a former navy pilot whom the communist vietnamese had held captive for six years during the vietnam war.
the 72 year old senator from arizona had a reputation as a maverick for occasionally breaking ranks with fellow republicans.
hoping to make some history of his own and perhaps woo clinton supporters mccain selected alaska governor sarah palin as his running mate only the second time that a woman had received this honor.
obama pledged to end the war in iraq quickly and roll back the bush era tax cuts for the wealthy while mccain supported both.
debate over the iraq war watch the video video lecture the historical significance of the 2008 election faded when a cascade of bank and insurance company failures sent the stock market into a tailspin.
in the midst of the crisis economists offered the following explanation for the downturn that future investigations may or may not confirm.
during the last five years as housing prices rose dramatically and congress deregulated the banking and financial industries banks had made numerous risky loans that let people purchase homes they could not afford and wall street brokers had invested heavily in mortgage backed securities.
when housing prices started declining in summer 2007 the dominos began to fall.
bank foreclosures on people who could not pay their mortgages increased and even more ominously the declining value of mortgage backed securities threatened to bankrupt leading wall street firms wiping out many americans retirement investments.
to stabilize the mortgage market the government took over two leading lenders freddie mac and fannie mae.
treasury secretary henry paulson refused to intervene when lehman brothers a major investment firm went bankrupt in september 2008 this bankruptcy shocked the financial sector.
credit markets froze as banks stopped lending and investors began moving money from stocks and bonds to u s treasury notes.
by mid september the bush administration decided that an infusion of 700 billion was needed to unfreeze the credit markets and stop the stock markets freefall.
enraged house republicans revolted.
in their view the government bail out used taxpayer money to reward bad behavior.
many democrats accepted the competing view that the government would recoup this money when the economy and value of these investments improved.
congress eventually authorized the funds which paulson used to infuse capital directly into banks rather than buying low valued assets.
what happened to this money became a major political question still unanswered.
obama was a captivating orator who drew thousands to his rallies.
even hillary clinton campaigned for him.
obama drew enthusiastic support from whites and blacks young and old hispanic and asian.
i t is that american spirit that american promise that pushes us forward even when the path is uncertain barack obama accepting the 2008 presidential democratic nomination what factors led to the economic downturn in 2008.

chapter 1 for the other elements of the french presence in north america the agricultural estates or seigneuries along the st lawrence river the development of trade and military centers at quebec and montreal and the creation of an alliance with the algonquins and others that enabled the french to compete with the more numerous british in the contest for control of north america.
that alliance also brought the french into conflict with the iroquois the algonquins ancient enemies who assumed the central role in the english fur trade.
an early result of these tensions was a 1609 attack led by samuel de champlain the founder of quebec on a band of mohawks apparently at the instigation of his henry hudson algonquin trading partners.
the dutch too were establishing a presence in north america.
the netherlands had won its independence from spain in the early seventeenth century and had become one of the leading trading nations of the world.
its merchant fleet was larger than englands and its traders were active not only in europe but also in africa asia and increasingly america.
in 1609 an english explorer in the employ of the dutch henry hudson sailed up the river that was to be named for him in what is now new york state.
because the river was so wide he be lieved for a time that he had found the long sought water route through the continent to the pacific.
he was wrong of course but his explorations led to a dutch claim on territory in america and to the establishment of a permanent dutch presence in the new world.
for more than a decade after hudsons voyage the dutch maintained an active trade in furs in and around present day new york.
in 1624 the dutch west india company established a series of permanent trading posts on the hudson delaware and connecticut rivers.
the company actively en new couraged settlement of the region not just amsterdam rom huand itself but also from such other parts of northern europe as germany sweden and finland.
it transported whole families to the new world and granted vast feudal estates to landlords known as patroons on condition that they bring still more immigrants to america.
the result was the colony of new netherland and its principal town new amsterdam on manhattan island.
its population diverse as it was remained relatively small the colony was only loosely united with chronically weak leadership.
the first english settlements the first enduring english settlement in the new world was established at jamestown in virginia in 1607 but for nearly thirty years before that english merchants and adventurers had been engaged in a series of failed efforts to create colonies in america.
through much of the sixteenth century the english had mixed feelings about the new world.
they knew of its existence and they were intrigued by its possibilities.
under the leadership of elizabeth i they were developing a powerful sense of nationalism that encouraged dreams of expansion.
at the same time however england was leery of spain which remained the dominant force in america and it seemed the dominant naval power in europe.
but much changed in the 1570s and 1580s.
english sea dogs such as sir francis drake staged successful raids on spanish merchant ships and built confidence in england s ability to challenge spanish sea power.
more important was the attempted invasion of england in 1588 philip ii the trmada h powerful spanish king had recently united his nation with portugal.
he was now determined to end englands challenges to spanish commercial supremacy and to bring the english back into the catholic church.
he assembled one of the largest military fleets in the history of warfare known to history as the spanish armada to carry his troops across the english channel and into england itself.
philips bold venture turned into a fiasco when the smaller english fleet dispersed the armada and in a single stroke ended spains domination of the atlantic.
the english now felt much freer to establish themselves in the new world.
the pioneers of english colonization were sir humphrey gilbert and his half brother sir walter raleigh both friends of queen elizabeth and both veterans of the earlier colonial efforts in ireland.
in 1578 gilbert obtained from elizabeth a patent granting him the exclusive right for six years to inhabit and possess at his choice all remote and heathen lands not in the actual possession of any christian prince after numerous setbacks gilbert led an expedition to newfoundland in 1583 and took pos expedition to session of 11 in the queens name he newfoundland proceeded southward along the coast looking for a good place to build a military outpost that might eventually grow into a profitable colony.
but a storm sank his ship and he was lost at sea.
roanoke raleigh was undeterred by gilberts misfortune.
the next year he secured from elizabeth a six year grant similar to gilberts and sent a small group of men on an expedition to explore the north american coast.
they returned with two captive indians and glowing reports of what they had seen.
they were particularly enthusiastic about an island the natives called roanoke and about the area of the mainland just beyond it in what is now north carolina.
raleigh asked the queen for permission to name the entire region virginia in honor of elizabeth the virgin queen but while elizabeth granted the permission she did not offer the financial assistance raleigh had hoped his flattery would produce.
so he turned to private investors to finance another expedition.
in 1585 raleigh recruited his cousin sir richard grenville the first roanoke colony to ieaa a group ol men most of them from the english plant tions in ireland to roanoke to establish a colony.
grenvil deposited the settlers on the island r mained long enough to antagonize tl natives by razing an indian village retaliation for a minor theft ar the collision of cultures 31 roanoke a drawing by one of the english colonists in the ill fated roanoke expedition of 1585 became the basis for this engraving by theodor de bry published in england in 1590 a small european ship carrying settlers approaches the island of roanoke at left.
the wreckage of several larger vessels farther out to sea and the presence of indian settlements on the mainland and on roanoke itself suggest some of the perils the settlers encountered.
the gallery collection corbis returned to england.
the following spring sir francis drake unexpectedly arrived in roanoke.
with supplies and reinforcements from england long overdue the beleaguered colonists boarded drakes ships and left.
raleigh tried again in 1587 sending an expedition carrying ninety one men seventeen women two of them pregnant and nine children the nucleus he hoped of a viable plantation the settlers landed on roanoke and attempted to take up where the first group of colonists had left off.
shortly after arriving one of the women the daughter of the commander of the expedition john white gave birth to a daughter virginia dare the first american born child of english parents.
white returned to england after several weeks leaving his daughter and granddaughter behind in search of supplies and additional settlers he hoped to return in a few months.
but the hostilities with spain intervened and white did not return to the island for three years.
when he did in 1590 he found the island deserted with no clue to the settlers fate other than the cryptic inscription croatoan carved on a post.
some historians have argued that the colonists were slaughtered by the indians in retaliation for grenvilles hostilities.
others have contended that they left their settlement and joined native society ultimately becoming entirely assimilated.
but no conclusive solution to the mystery of the lost colony has ever been found.
the roanoke mystery marked the end of sir walter raleighs involvement in english colonization of the new world.
in 1603 when james i succeeded elizabeth to the throne raleigh was accused of plotting against the king stripped of his monopoly and imprisoned for more than a decade.
finally after being released for one last ill fated maritime expedition he was executed by the king in 1618 no later colonizer would receive grants of land in the new world as vast or undefined as those raleigh and gilbert had acquired.
but despite the discouraging example of these early experiences the colonizing impulse remained alive.
in the first years of the seventeenth century a group of london merchants to whom raleigh had assigned his charter rights decided to renew the attempt at colonization in virginia.
a rival group of merchants from plymouth and other west 32 chapter 2 leaders of the scrooby group obtained permission from the virginia company to settle in british america.
from the king they received informal assurances that he would not molest them provided they carried themselves peaceably this was a historic concession by the crown for it opened british america to settlement not only by the scrooby group but by other dissenting protestants as well.
several english merchants agreed to advance the necessary funds in exchange for a share in the profits of the settlement at the end of seven years.
the migrating puritans knew they were pilgrims even before they left holland their leader and historian william bradford later wrote.
in september 1620 they left the port of plymouth on the english coast in the mayflower with thirty five saints puritan separatists and sixty seven strangers people who were not full members of the puritan church aboard.
by the time they sighted land in november it was too late in the year to go on.
their original destination was probably the mouth of the hudson river in what is now new york.
but they found themselves instead on cape cod.
after exploring the region for a while they chose a site for their settlement just north of the cape an area captain john smith had named plymouth after the english port from which the puritans had sailed during an exploratory journey some years before.
plymouth lay outside the london company s territory and the settlers realized they had no legal basis for settling there.
as a jhe result forty one male passengers signed a mayflower document the mayflower compact which compact established a civil government and proclaimed their allegiance to the king.
then on december 21 1620 the immigrants called pilgrims stepped ashore at plymouth rock.
they settled on cleared land that had once been an indian village until three years earlier a mysterious epidemic known as the plague and probably brought by earlier european explorers had swept through the region and substantially depopulated it.
the pilgrims first winter was a difficult one half the colonists perished from malnutrition disease and exposure.
still the colony survived.
bradford became the governor at plymouth an office he would hold for more than twenty years.
despite the death of his wife and many other losses he managed his plantation for many years.
like the spanish and portuguese colonists in the southern regions of the americas the pilgrims and other future english colonists brought more to the new world than people and ideas.
they also made profound changes in the natural landscape of new england.
a smallpox epidemic caused by english carriers almost eliminated the indian population in the areas around plymouth in the early 1630s.
the english demand for furs animal skins and meat greatly depleted the number of wild animals in the areas around plymouth one reason colonists worked so hard to develop stocks of domestic animals such as horses cattle sheep and hogs.
the pilgrims and later english settlers also introduced new crops wheat barley oats and others while incorporating many native foods among them corn potatoes and peas into their own diets and eventually exporting them back to england and the rest of europe.
gradually colonial society imposed a european pattern onto the american landscape as the settlers fenced in pastures meadows orchards and fields for cultivation.
the pilgrims experience with the indians was for a time very different from the experiences of the early english settlers farther south.
that was in part because the remaining natives in the region their numbers thinned by disease were significantly weaker than their southern neighbors and realized they had to get along with the europeans.
in the end the survival and growth of the colony depended crucially on the assistance they received from natives.
important indian friends squanto and samoset among others showed them how to gather seafood cultivate corn and hunt local animals.
relations squanto a pawtuxet who earlier in his life with the indians had been captured by an english explorer and taken to europe spoke english and was particularly helpful to the settlers in forming an alliance with the local wampanoags under chief massasoit.
after the first harvest in 1621 the settlers marked the alliance by inviting the indians to join them in an october festival the first thanksgiving.
but the good relationship between the settlers and the local indians did not last.
thirteen years after the pilgrims arrival a devastating smallpox epidemic a result of contact with english settlers wiped out much of the indian population around plymouth.
the pilgrims could not hope to create rich farms on the sandy marshy soil and their early fishing efforts produced no profits.
in 1622 the military officer miles standish one of the leaders of the colony established a semi military regime to impose discipline on the settlers.
eventually the pilgrims began to grow enough corn and other crops to provide them with a modest trading surplus.
they also developed a small fur trade with the abenaki indians of maine.
from time to time new colonists arrived from england and in a decade the population reached 300 the people of plymouth plantation as they called their settlement chose william bradford again and again to be their william governor.
as early as 1621 he persuaded bradford the council for new england the successor to the old plymouth company which had charter rights to the territory to give them legal permission to live there.
he ended the communal labor plan standish had helped create distributed land among the families and thus as he explained it made all hands very industrious he and a group of fellow undertakers took over the colonys debt to its original financiers in england and with earnings from the fur trade finally paid it off even though the financiers had repeatedly cheated them and had failed to send them promised supplies.
the pilgrims were always a poor community.
as late as the 1640s they had only one plow among them.
but they clung to the belief that god had put them in the new world to live a truly christian community and they were content to live t etr lives in what they considered godly ways.
transplantations and borderlands 43 at times they spoke of serving as a model for other christians.
governor bradford wrote in retrospect as one small candle may light a thousand so the light here kindled hath shone to many yea in some sort to our whole nation but the pilgrims were less committed to grand designs less concerned about how they were viewed by others than were the puritans who settled the larger and more ambitious english colonies to their north.
the puritan experiment massachusetts bay company turbulent events in england in the 1620s combined with the example of the plymouth colony created strong interest in colonization among other groups of puritans.
king james i had been creating serious tensions for years between himself and parliament through his effort to claim the divine right of kings and by his harsh repressive policies toward the puritans.
the situation worsened after his death in 1625 when he was succeeded by his son charles i by favoring roman catholicism and trying to destroy religious nonconformity charles i started the nation down the road that in the 1640s would lead to civil war.
the puritans were particular targets of charless policies.
some were imprisoned for their beliefs and many began to consider the climate of england intolerable.
the kings disbanding of parliament in 1629 it was not to be recalled until 1640 ensured that there would be no political solution to the puritans problems.
in the midst of this political and social turmoil a group of puritan merchants began organizing a new enterprise designed to take advantage of opportunities in america.
at first their interest was largely an economic one.
they obtained a grant of land in new england for most of the area now comprising massachusetts and new hampshire they acquired a charter from charles i who was evidently unaware that they were puritans allowing them to create the massachusetts bay company and to establish a colony in the new world and they bought equipment and supplies from a defunct fishing and trading company that had attempted and failed to establish a profitable enterprise in north america earlier.
in 1629 they were ready to dispatch a substantial group of settlers to new england.
among the members of the massachusetts bay company however were a number of puritans who saw the enterprise as something more than a business venture.
they began to consider emigrating themselves and creating a haven for puritans in new england.
members of this faction met secretly in cambridge in the summer of 1629 and agreed to buy out the other investors and move en masse to america.
as governor the new owners of the company chose john winthrop an affluent university educated gentleman with a deep piety and a forceful character.
winthrop winthrop had been instrumental in orga nizing the migration and he commanded the expedition that sailed for new england in 1630 seventeen ships and 1 000 people who were unlike the earlier migrants to virginia mostly family groups.
it was the largest single migration of its kind in the seventeenth century.
winthrop carried with him the charter of the massachusetts bay company which meant that the colonists would be responsible to no company officials in england only to themselves.
the massachusetts migration quickly produced several different new settlements.
the port of boston at the mouth of the charles river became the companys headquarters and the colonys capital.
but in the course of the next decade colonists moved into a number of other new towns in eastern massachusetts charlestown newtown later renamed cambridge roxbury dorchester watertown ipswich concord sudbury and others.
the massachusetts bay company soon transformed itself into a colonial government.
according to the original company charter the eight stockholders or freemen were to meet as a general court to choose officers and adopt rules for the corporation.
but eventually the definition of freemen changed to include all male citizens not just the stockholders.
john winthrop dominated colonial politics just as he had dominated the original corporation but after 1634 he and most other officers of the colony had to face election each year.
colonial currency this seal was created in 1690 by the massachusetts bay company to validate the paper bills of credit with which colonists conducted many financial transactions.
paper money met considerable resistance at first.
many people doubted its value and would not accept it preferring instead the spanish silver coins that were in wide circulation.
gradually however a shortage of silver required increasing reliance on this and other paper devices.
the seal shows an indian saying come over and help us which represents the english belief in the superiority of white european society.
bettmann corbis 44 chapter 2 making molasses in barbados african slaves who constituted the vast majority of the population of the flourishing sugar producing island of barbados work here in a sugar mill grinding sugarcane and then boiling it to produce refined sugar molasses and after a later distillation process not pictured here rum.
giraudon bridgeman art library around the borders of english settlement the caribbean and along the northern southern and western borders of the coastal colonies.
the caribbean islands throughout the first half of the seventeenth century the most important destination for english immigrants was not the main land but rather the islands of the caribbean the english.
caribbean anc t ie northern way station of bermuda.
more than half the english migrants to the new world in those years settled on these islands.
the island societies had close ties to english north america from the beginning and influenced the development of the mainland colonies in several ways.
but they were also surrounded by and sometimes imperiled by outposts of the spanish empire.
before the arrival of europeans most of the caribbean islands had substantial native populations the arawaks the caribs and imperial r e cibney but beginning with christopher conflict columbus s first visit in 1492 and accelerating after the spanish established their first colony on hispaniola in 1496 the native population was all but wiped out by european epidemics.
indians were never a significant factor in european settlement of the caribbean.
indeed by the time significant european settlement of the islands began many were almost entirely deserted.
the spanish empire claimed title to all the islands in the caribbean but there was substantial spanish settlement only on the largest of them cuba hispaniola and puerto rico.
english french and dutch traders began settling on some of the smaller islands early in the sixteenth century although these weak colonies were always vulnerable to spanish attack.
after spain and the netherlands went to war in 1621 distracting the spanish navy and leaving the english in the caribbean relatively unmolested the pace of english colonization increased.
by midcentury there were several substantial english settlements on the islands the most important of them on antigua st kitts jamaica and barbados.
even so through the seventeenth century the english settlements in the caribbean were the targets of almost constant attacks and invasions by the spanish the portuguese the french the dutch and the remaining indians of the region.
the world of the caribbean was a violent and turbulent place.
the caribbean colonies built their economies on raising crops for export.
in the early years english settlers experimented unsuccessfully with tobacco and cotton.
but they soon discovered that the most lucrative crop was sugar for which there was a substantial and growing market in europe.
sugarcane could also be distilled into rum for which there was a booming market abroad.
within a decade of the introduction of sugar cultivation to the west indies planters were devoting almost all of their land to sugarcane.
in their appetite for more transplantations and borderlands 55 spanis j s gulf of mexico atlantic ocean havana sancti virgin islands tortuga a x domingue 47v iis jomin o st croix s paniola.
puert0 domingo rico st eustatius b anguilla antigua sf x nevis dominka martinique jamaica caribbean sea umds4 v q curasao arbfl i bonflire new spain the seventeenth century caribbean at the same time that european powers were expanding their colonial presence on the mainland of the american continents they were also establishing colonies in the islands of the caribbean.
in some cases these islands were even more important to the atlantic economy than many of the mainland possessions particularly the large heavily populated sugar growing islands among them jamaica and barbados in which the majority of the population consisted of african slaves.
what role did the caribbean islands play in the spread of slavery in north america.
1essr l bar antilles st.
vincent qgrenada caracas territorial and political changes in the caribbean 1600 1700 english held areas dutch settlements french settlements spanish settlements land for sugarcane they cut down forests and destroyed the natural habitats of many animals which greatly reduced the amount of land available for growing food.
because sugar was a labor intensive crop and because the remnant of the native population was too small to provide a sugar and workforce english planters soon found it slavery necessary to import laborers.
as in the chesapeake they began by bringing indentured servants from england.
but the arduous work discouraged white laborers many found it impossible to adapt to the harsh tropical climate so different from that of england.
by midcentury therefore the english planters in the caribbean like the spanish colonists who preceded them were relying more and more on an enslaved african workforce which soon substantially outnumbered them.
on barbados and other islands where a flourishing sugar economy developed the english planters were a tough aggressive and ambitious breed.
some of them grew enormously wealthy and since their livelihoods depended on their workforces they expanded and solidified the system of african slavery there remarkably quickly.
by the late seventeenth century there were four times as many african slaves as there were white settlers.
by then the west indies had ceased to be an attractive destination for ordinary english immigrants most now went to the colonies on the north american mainland instead.
masters and slaves in the caribbean a small mostly wealthy white population and a large african population held in bondage made for a potentially explosive combination.
as in other english colonies in the new world in which africans came to outnumber europeans whites in the caribbean grew fearful of slave revolts.
they had good slave revolts reason fr rhere were at least seven major slave revolts in the islands more than the english colonies of north america experienced in their entire history as slave societies.
as a result white planters monitored 56 chapter 4 internal rebellions the conflicts with britain were not the only uprisings emerging in the turbulent years of the 1760s.
in addition to the stamp act crisis and other challenges to london there were internal rebellions that had their roots in the class system in new york and new england.
in the hudson valley in new york great estates had grown up whose owners had rented their land to small farmers.
the revolutionary fervor of the time led many of these tenants to demand ownership of the land they worked.
to emphasize their determination they stopped paying rents.
the challenge to landownership soon failed.
but other challenges to landownership continued in other colonies.
in vermont which still was governed by new york insurgent farmers challenged landowners many of them the same owners whom tenants had challenged on the hudson by taking up arms and demanding ownership of the land they torys day of judgment a mob of american patriots hoists a loyalist neighbor up a flagpole in this woodcut which is obviously sympathetic to the victim.
the crowd is shown as fat rowdy and drunken.
public humiliations of tories were not infrequent during the war.
more common however was seizure of their property.
library of congress worked.
ethan allen later a hero of the revolutionary war and himself a land speculator took up the cause of the green mountain farmers and accused the landowners of trying to enslave a free people allen eventually succeeded in making vermont into a separate state which broke up some of the large estates.
the townshend program the reaction in england to the rockingham governments policy of appeasement was less enthusiastic than it was in america.
english landlords a powerful political force angrily protested that the government had sacrificed the landed gentlemen to the interests of traders and colonists they feared that backing down from taxing the colonies would lead the government to increase taxes on them.
the king finally bowed to their pressure and dismissed the rockingham ministry.
to replace it he called upon the aging but still powerful william pitt to form a government.
pitt had been a strong critic of the stamp act and had a reputation in america as a friend of the colonists.
once in office however pitt now lord chatham was so hobbled by gout and at times so incapacitated by mental illness that the actual leadership of his administration fell to the chancellor of the exchequer charles townshend a brilliant flamboyant and at times reckless politician known to his contemporaries variously as the weathercock and champagne charlie among townshends first challenges was dealing with the continuing american grievances against parliament now mutiny act most notably the mutiny or quartering act of 1765 which required the colonists to provide quarters and supplies for the british troops in america.
the british considered this a reasonable requirement.
the troops were stationed in north america to protect the colonists from indian or french attack and to defend the frontiers lodging the troops in coastal cities was simply a way to reduce the costs to england of supplying them.
to the colonists however the law was another assault on their liberties.
they did not so much object to quartering the troops or providing them with supplies they had been doing that voluntarily ever since the last years of the french and indian war.
they resented that these contributions were now mandatory and they considered it another form of taxation without consent.
the massachusetts assembly refused to vote the mandated supplies to the troops.
the new york assembly soon did likewise posing an even greater challenge to imperial authority since the army headquarters were in new york city.
to enforce the law and to try again to raise revenues in the colonies townshend steered two inflammatory measures through parliament in 1767 the first disbanded the internal and new yor assembly until the colo external nists agreed to obey the mutiny act.
taxes by singling out new york townshend thought he would avoid grenvilles the empire in transition 115 mistake of arousing all the colonies at once.
the second levied new taxes known as the townshend duties on various goods imported to the colonies from england lead paint paper and tea.
the colonists could not logically object to taxation of this kind townshend reasoned because it met standards they themselves had accepted.
benjamin franklin as a colonial agent in london trying to prevent the passage of the stamp act had long ago argued for the distinction between internal and external taxes and had denounced the stamp duties as internal taxation.
townshend himself had considered the distinction laughable but he was nevertheless imposing duties on what he believed were clearly external transactions.
yet townshends efforts to satisfy colonial grievances were to no avail.
he might call them external taxes but they were no more acceptable to colonial merchants than the stamp act.
their purpose americans believed was the same as that of the stamp act to raise revenue from the colonists without their consent.
and the suspension of the new york assembly far from isolating new york aroused the resentment of all the colonies.
they considered this assault on the rights of one provincial government a precedent for the annihilation of the rights of all of them.
the massachusetts assembly took the lead in opposing the new measures by circulating a letter to all the colonial governments urging them to stand up against every tax external or internal imposed by parliament.
at first the circular evoked little response in some of the legislatures and ran into strong opposition in pennsylvanias.
then lord hillsborough secretary of state for the colonies issued a circular letter of his own from london in which he warned that assemblies endorsing the massachusetts letter would be dissolved.
massachusetts defiantly reaffirmed its support for the circular.
the vote in the assembly was 92 to 17 and for a time ninety two became a patriotic rallying cry throughout british america.
the other colonies including pennsylvania promptly rallied to the support of massachusetts.
in addition to his other unpopular measures townshend tried to strengthen enforcement of commercial regulations in the colonies by among other things establishing a new board of customs commissioners in america.
townshend hoped the new board would stop the rampant corruption in the colonial customs houses and to some extent his hopes were fulfilled.
the new commissioners ended smuggling in boston their headquarters although smugglers continued to carry on a busy trade in other colonial seaports.
the boston merchants accustomed to loose enforcement of the navigation acts and doubly aggrieved now that the new commission was diverting the lucrative smuggling trade were colonial indignant and took the lead in organiz boycotts ing another boycott.
in 1768 the mer chants of philadelphia and new york joined them in a nonimportation agreement and later some southern merchants and planters also agreed to cooperate.
colonists boycotted british goods subject to the townshend duties and throughout the colonies american homespun and other domestic products became fashionable overnight while english luxuries fell from favor.
late in 1767 charles townshend suddenly died before the consequences of his ill conceived program had become fully apparent.
the question of dealing with colonial resistance to the townshend duties fell therefore to the new prime minister lord north.
hoping to break the nonimportation agreement and divide the colonists lord north secured the repeal of all the townshend duties except the tax on tea in march 1770 the boston massacre competition for scarce employment the withdrawal of the townshend duties never had a chance to pacify colonial opinion.
before news of the repeal reached america an event in massachusetts raised colonial resentment to a new level of intensity.
the colonists harassment of the new customs commissioners in boston had grown so intense that the british government had placed four regiments of regular troops inside the city.
the presence of the redcoats was a constant affront to the colonists sense of their independence and a constant reminder of what they considered british oppression.
in addition british soldiers poorly paid and poorly treated by the army wanted jobs in their off duty hours and they competed with local workers in an already tight market.
clashes between them were frequent.
on the night of march 5 1770 a few days after a particularly intense skirmish between workers at a ship rigging factory and british soldiers who were trying to find work there a crowd of dockworkers liberty boys and others began pelting the sentries at the customs house with rocks and snowballs.
hastily captain thomas preston of the british regiment lined up several of his men in front of the building to protect it.
there was some scuffling one of the soldiers was knocked down and in the midst of it all apparently several british soldiers fired into the crowd killing five people among them a mulatto sailor crispus attucks.
this murky incident almost certainly the result of panic and confusion was quickly transformed by local resistance leaders into the boston massacre a graphic symbol of british oppression and brutality.
the victims became popular martyrs the event became the subject of many lurid and inaccurate accounts.
a famous engraving by paul revere widely reproduced and circulated falsely portrayed the massacre as a carefully organized calculated assault on a peaceful crowd.
a jury of massachusetts colonists found two british soldiers guilty of manslaughter and acquitted six others.
colonial pamphlets and newspapers however convinced many americans that all of the soldiers were guilty of official murder.
year after year resistance leaders marked the anniversary of the massacre with demonstrations and speeches.
the leading figure in fomenting public outrage over the boston massacre was samuel adams the most effective radical in the colonies.
adams a distant cousin of john adams 116 chapter 4 the battles of lexington and concord 1775 this map shows the fabled series of events that led to the first battle of the american revolution.
on the night of april 18 1775 paul revere and william dawes rode out from boston to warn the outlying towns of the approach of british troops.
revere was captured just west of lexington but dawes escaped and returned to boston.
the next morning british forces moved out of boston toward lexington where they met armed american minutemen on the lexington common and exchanged fire.
the british dispersed the americans in lexington.
but they next moved on to concord where they encountered more armed minutemen clashed again and were driven back toward boston.
all along their line of march they were harassed by riflemen.
what impact did the battles of lexington and concord and the later battle of bunker hill also shown on this map have on colonial sentiment toward the british.
paul revere s ride night of april 18 1775 william dawes s ride april 18 1775 troop movements g american forces i british forces battles and entrenchments american victory british victory american entrenchment road adjourned they agreed to meet again the next spring thus indicating that they considered the continental congress a continuing organization.
through their representatives in philadelphia the colonies had in effect reaffirmed their autonomous status within the empire and declared something close to economic war to maintain that position.
the more optimistic of the americans hoped that this economic warfare alone would win a quick and bloodless victory but the more pessimistic had their doubts.
t expect no redress but on the contrary increased resentment and double vengeance john adams wrote to patrick henry we must fight and henry replied by god i am of your opinion during the winter the parliament in london debated proposals for conciliating the colonists.
lord chatham william pitt the former prime minister urged the withdrawal of troops from america.
edmund burke called for the repeal of the coercive acts.
but their efforts the conciliatory propositions were in vain.
lord north finally won approval early in 1775 for a series of measures known as the conciliatory propositions but they were far less conciliatory than the approaches burke or chatham had urged.
parliament now proposed that the colonies instead of being taxed directly by parliament would tax themselves at parliaments demand.
with this offer lord north hoped to divide the american moderates who he believed represented the views of the majority from the extremist minority.
but his offer was too little and too late.
it did not reach america until after the first shots of war had been fired.
lexington and concord for months the farmers and townspeople of massachusetts had been gathering arms and ammunition and training as minutemen preparing to fight on a minutes notice.
the continental congress had approved preparations for a defensive war and the citizen soldiers awaited an aggressive move by the british regulars in boston.
the empire in transition.
125 the retreat jhm i uvrd te t r ifin i f rr smu.
7fiz jhj i iritis jfyirtfc fy ihf js a r hrunan.
fld t i jkjeevttrs.
l muaar ts.
j e tt jt j arrt a jtiw rxafid jsumt fyia y m the british retreat from concord 1775 this american cartoon satirizes the retreat of british forces from concord after the battle there on april 19 1775 patriot forces are lined up on the left and the retreating british forces portrayed with dog heads perhaps because many of the soldiers were wild irish straggle off at right some fleeing in panic others gloating over the booty they have plundered from the burning homes above.
in its crude and exaggerated way the cartoon depicts the success of patriot forces at the old north bridge in concord in repulsing a british contingent under the command of lord percy.
as the redcoats retreated to lexington and then to boston they continued to encounter fire from colonial forces not arrayed in battle lines as shown here but hidden along the road.
one british soldier described the nightmarish withdrawal we were fired on from houses and behind trees the country was full of hills woods stone walls which the rebels did not fail to take advantage of.
anne s k brown military collection brown university library in boston general thomas gage commanding the british garrison knew of the military preparations in the countryside general thomas but considered his army too small to do gage anything until reinforcements arrived.
he resisted the advice of less cautious officers who assured him that the americans would never dare actually to fight that they would back down quickly before any show of british force.
major john pitcairn for example insisted that a single small action such as the burning of a few towns would set everything to rights general gage still hesitated when he received orders from england to arrest the rebel leaders sam adams and john hancock known to be in the vicinity of lexington.
but when gage heard that the minutemen had stored a large supply of gunpowder in concord eighteen miles from boston he finally decided to act.
on the night of april 18 1775 he sent a detachment of about 1 000 soldiers out from boston on the road to lexington and concord.
he intended to surprise the colonials and seize the illegal supplies without bloodshed.
but patriots in boston were watching the british movements closely and during the night two horsemen william dawes and paul revere rode out to warn the villages and farms.
when the british troops arrived in lexington the next day several dozen minutemen awaited them on the town common.
shots were fired and minutemen fell eight of them were killed and ten more wounded.
advancing to concord the british discovered that the americans had hastily removed most of the powder supply but the british burned what was left of it.
all along the road from concord back to boston farmers hiding behind trees rocks and stone fences harassed the british with continual gunfire.
by the end of the day the british had lost almost three times as many men as the americans.
the first shots the shots heard round the world as americans later called them had been fired.
but who had fired them.
according to one of the minutemen at lexington major pitcairn had shouted to the colonists on his arrival disperse ye rebels when the americans ignored the command he had given the order to fire.
british officers and soldiers told a different story.
they claimed that the minutemen had fired first that only after seeing the flash of american guns had the british begun to shoot.
whatever the truth the rebels succeeded in circulating their account well ahead of the british version adorning it with lurid tales of british atrocities.
the effect was to rally to the rebel cause thousands of colonists north and south who previously had had little enthusiasm for 126 chapter 5 calls for womens rights of women and for other feminist reforms.
yale students in the 1780s debated the question whether women ought to be admitted into the magistracy and government of empires and republics and there was for a time wide discussion of the future role of women in a new re public that had broken with so many other traditions already.
but few concrete reforms became either law or common social practice.
in colonial society under the doctrines of english common law an unmarried woman had some legal rights to own property to enter contracts and others but a married woman had virtually no rights.
she could own no property and earn no independent wages everything she owned and everything she earned belonged to her husband.
she had no legal authority over her children the father was in the eyes of the law the autocrat of the family.
because a married woman had no property rights she could not engage in any legal transactions buying or selling suing or being sued writing wills.
she could not vote.
nor could she obtain a divorce in most states that too was a right reserved mostly for men although in much of the south men could not obtain divorces either.
these restrictions were what abigail adams who herself enjoyed a successful marriage was describing when she appealed to her husband not to put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands the revolution did little to change any of these legal customs.
in some states it did become easier for women to obtain divorces.
and in new jersey women obtained the right to vote although that right was repealed in 1807.
otherwise there were few advances and some setbacks including widows loss of the right to regain their dowries from their husbands estates.
that change left many widows without any means of support and was one of the reasons for the increased agitation for female education such women needed a way to support themselves.
the revolution in other words far from challenging the patriarchal structure of american society actually confirmed and strengthened it.
few american women challenged the belief that they occupied a special sphere distinct from that of men.
most accepted that their place remained in the family.
nevertheless the revolutionary experience did contribute to a subtle but important alteration of womens roles.
in the past they had often been little better than servants in their husbands homes.
but the revolution encouraged people of both genders to reevaluate the contribution of women to the family and the society.
one reason for this was a reevaluation of american life during and after the revolutionary struggle.
as the republic the british infantry the worlds greatest military power raised its armies in almost haphazard fashion command of a british.
received a cash reward for every man they enlisted.
with that incentive they were hardly picky and the foot soldiers of the british army were mo t e psitined gen emen who enlisting through a combination of liquor and cash.
even so the rough and ready quality of the british infantrv made them need u v men wh d be persuaded r tricked in during the american revolution.
as with the colonial armies the brihsh troops attrected women seen f s drawi 9 w a british encampment themselves wore highly ornamental uniforms that were in many ways very impractical to keed himself nmnerlv j.
p ollowers doing chores to help the soldiers.
the soldiers military collection brown university library p p msel 9rmed and a lrad could take a soldier up to three hours a day.
brown the american revolution 149 searched for a cultural identity for itself it began to place additional value on the role of women as mothers.
the new nation a strengthened was many americans liked to believe patriarchal producing a new kind of citizen steeped structure in the principles of liberty.
mothers had a particularly important task therefore in instructing their children in the virtues the republican citizenry was expected now to possess.
wives were still far from equal partners in marriage but their ideas interests and do mestic roles received increased respect from many men.
the war economy inevitably the revolution produced important changes in the structure of the american economy.
after more than a century of dependence on the british imperial system american trade suddenly found itself on its own.
no longer did it have the protection of the great british navy on the contrary english ships now attempted to drive american vessels from the seas.
no longer did american merchants have access to the markets of the empire those markets were now hostile ports lnclud ing of course the most important source of american trade england itself.
yet while the revolution disrupted traditional economic patterns in the long run it strengthened the american economy.
well before the war was over american ships had learned to evade the british navy with light fast easily maneuverable vessels.
indeed the yankees began to prey on british commerce with hundreds of privateers.
for many shipowners privateering proved to be more profitable than ordinary peacetime trade.
more important in the long run the end of imperial restrictions on american shipping opened up enormous new areas of trade to the nation.
enterprising merchants in new england and elsewhere began to develop new commerce in the caribbean and in south america.
by the mid 1780s american merchants were developing an important new pattern of trade with asia and by the end of that decade yankee ships were regularly sailing from the eastern seaboard around cape horn to the pacific coast of north america there exchanging manufactured goods for hides and furs and then proceeding across the pacific to barter for goods in china.
there was also a substantial increase in trade among the american states.
when english imports to america were cut off first by the prewar boycott then by the war itself there were desperate new patterns efforts throughout the states to stimulate of trade domestic manufacturing of certain necessities.
no great industrial expansion resulted but there were several signs of the economic growth that was to come in the next century.
americans began to make their own cloth homespun which became both patriotic and fashionable to replace now unobtainable british fabrics.
it would be some time before a large domestic textile industry would emerge but the nation was never again to rely exclusively on foreign sources for its cloth.
there was of course pressure to build factories for the manufacture of guns and ammunition.
and there was a growing general awareness that america need not forever be dependent on other nations for manufactured goods.
the war stopped well short of revolutionizing the american economy not until the nineteenth century would that begin to occur.
but it did serve to release a wide range of entrepreneurial energies that despite the temporary dislocations encouraged growth and diversification.
banner of the society of pewterers members of the american society of pewterers carried this patriotic banner when they marched in a new york city parade in july 1788 its inscription celebrates the adoption of the new federal constitution and predicts a future of prosperity and freedom in columbias land.
the banner also suggests the growing importance of american manufacturing which had received an important boost during the revolution when british imports became unavailable.
collection of the new york historical society usa the bridgeman art library international 150 chapter 6 from the beginning the preeminent figures among the republicans were thomas jefferson and james madison.
indeed the two men were such intimate collaborators with such similar political philosophies that it is sometimes difficult to distinguish the contributions of one from those of the other.
but jefferson the more charismatic personality of the two gradually emerged as the most prominent spokesman for the republicans.
jefferson considered himself a farmer.
he was in fact a substantial planter but he had spent little time in recent years at his estate in virginia.
he believed in an agrarian republic most of whose citizens would be sturdy independent farmer citizens tilling their own soil.
jefferson did not scorn commercial activity he assumed farmers would market their crops in the national and even international markets.
nor did he oppose industry he believed the united states should develop some manufacturing capacity.
but he was suspicious of large cities feared urban mobs as sores upon the body politic and opposed the development of an advanced industrial economy because it would he feared increase the number of propertyless workers packed in cities.
in short jefferson envisioned a decentralized society dominated by small property owners engaged largely in agrarian activities.
the difference between the federalist and republican social philosophies was visible in among other things reactions to the french revolution.
as that revolution dlfffrfncfs over the grew increasingly radical in the 1790s french with ts attacks on organized religion the revolution overthrow of the monarchy and eventually the execution of the king and queen the federalists expressed horror.
but the republicans generally applauded the democratic antiaristocratic spirit they believed the french revolution embodied.
some even imitated the french radicals the jacobins by cutting their hair short wearing pantaloons and addressing one another as citizen and citizeness although both parties had supporters in all parts of the country and among all classes there were regional and economic differences.
the federalists were most numerous in the commercial centers of the northeast and in such southern seaports as charleston the republicans were most numerous in the rural areas of the south and the west.
as the 1792 presidential election the nation s second approached both jefferson and hamilton urged washington to run for another term.
the president reluctantly agreed.
but while most americans considered washington above the partisan battle he was actually much more in sympathy with the federalists than with the republicans.
and during his presidency hamilton remained the dominant figure in government.
establishing national sovereignty the federalists consolidated their position and for a time attracted wide public support for the new national govern ment by dealing effectively with two problems the old confederation had been unable fully to resolve.
they helped stabilize the nations western lands and they strengthened america s international position.
securing the frontier despite the northwest ordinance the confederation congress had largely failed to tie the outlying western areas of the country firmly to the government.
farmers in western massachusetts had risen in revolt settlers in vermont kentucky and tennessee had toyed with the idea of separating from the union.
the new government under the constitution inherited these problems.
in 1794 farmers in western pennsylvania raised a major challenge to federal authority when they refused to pay a whiskey excise tax and began terrorizing the tax collectors much as colonists had done at the time of the stamp act.
but the federal government did not leave settlement of the so called whiskey rebellion to pennsylvania as the confederation whiskey congress had left shayss rebellion to rebellion massachusetts.
at hamiltons urging washington called out the militias of three states raised an army of nearly 15 000 a larger force than he had commanded against the british during most of the revolution and personally led the troops into pennsylvania.
as the militiamen approached pittsburgh the center of the resistance the rebellion quickly collapsed.
the federal government won the allegiance of the whiskey rebels by intimidating them.
it won the loyalties of other frontier people by accepting their territories as new states in the union.
the last of the original thirteen colonies joined the union once the bill of rights had been appended to the constitution north carolina in 1789 and rhode island in 1790 then vermont which had had its own state government since the revolution became the fourteenth state in 1791 after new york and new hampshire finally agreed to give up their claims to it.
next came kentucky in 1792 when virginia gave up its claim to that region.
after north carolina finally ceded its western lands to the union tennessee became first a territory and in 1796 a state.
native americans and the new nation the new government faced a greater challenge also inherited from the confederation in the more distant areas of the northwest and the southwest where indians occasionally in alliance with the british and spanish fought to retain tribal lands that the u s government claimed for itself.
the ordinances of 1784 1787 had produced a series of border conflicts with indian tribes resisting white settlement in what they considered their lands.
although the united states eventually defeated virtually every indian challenge if often at great cost it was clear that the larger question of who was to control the lands of the west the united states or the indian nations remained unanswered.
these clashes revealed another issue the constitution had done little to resolve the place of the indian nations within the constitution and the new republic 173 the new federal structure.
the constitution barely mentioned native americans.
article i excluded indians not taxed from indians being counted in the population totals and the that determined the number of seats constitution states would receive in the house of representatives and it gave congress the power to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several states and with the indian tribes article vi bound the new government to respect treaties negotiated by the confederation most of which had been with the tribes.
but none of this did much to clarify the precise legal standing of indians or indian nations within the united states.
on the one hand the constitution seemed to recognize the existence of the tribes as legal entities.
on the other hand it made clear that they were not foreign nations in the same sense that european countries were nor were their members citizens of the united states.
the tribes received no direct representation in the new government.
above all the constitution did not address the major issue that would govern relations between whites and indians land.
indian nations lived within the boundaries of the united states yet they claimed and the white government at times agreed that they had some measure of sovereignty within their own lands.
but neither the constitution nor common law offered any clear guide to the rights of a nation within a nation or to the precise nature of tribal sovereignty which ultimately depended on control of land.
thus the relationship between the tribes and the united states remained to be determined by a series of treaties agreements and judicial decisions in a process that has continued for more than 200 years.
maintaining neutrality not until 1791 eight years after the end of the revolution did great britain send a minister to the united states and then only because madison and the republicans were threatening to place special trade restrictions on british ships.
that was one of many symbols of the difficulty the new government had in establishing its legitimacy in the eyes of the british.
another crisis in anglo american relations emerged in 1793 when the new french government created by the revolution of 1789 went to war with great britain and its allies.
both the president and congress took steps to establish american neutrality in that conflict.
but the neutrality quickly encountered severe tests.
the first challenge to american neutrality came from revolutionary france and its first diplomatic representative to america the brash and youthful edmond genet.
instead of landing at philadelphia and presenting himself immediately to the president genet disembarked at charleston.
there he made plans to use american ports to outfit french warships citizen genet encouraged american shipowners to serve as french privateers and commissioned the aging george rogers clark to lead a military expedition against spanish lands to the south.
spain was at the time an ally of great britain and an enemy of france.
in all of this genet was brazenly ignoring washingtons policies and flagrantly violating the neutrality act.
his conduct infuriated washington who provided citizen genet as he was known with an icy reception in philadelphia and the federalists it also embarrassed all but the most ardent admirers of the french revolution among the republicans.
washington eventually demanded that the french government recall him but by then genets party was out of power in france.
the president granted him political asylum in the united states and he settled with his american wife on a long island farm.
the neutrality policy had survived its first serious test.
a second and even greater challenge came from great britain.
early in 1794 the royal navy began seizing hundreds of american ships engaged in trade in the french west indies a comment on the whiskey rebellion although thomas jefferson and other republicans claimed to welcome occasional popular uprisings the federalists were horrified by such insurgencies as shays s rebellion in massachusetts and later the whiskey rebellion in pennsylvania.
this federalist cartoon portrays the rebels as demons who pursue and eventually hang an unfortunate exciseman tax collector who has confiscated two kegs of rum.
philadelphia history museum at the atwater kent the bridgeman art library 174 chapter in the nations public history.
it also brought to a close at least temporarily savage political conflicts that had seemed to threaten the nations future.
key terms people places events alexander hamilton 161 alien and sedition acts 176 antifederalists 167 bill of rights 168 checks and balances 166 citizen genet affair 173 federalists 167 federal structure 166 great compromise 164 james madison 164 jays treaty 174 john adams 175 new jersey plan 162 pinckneys treaty 174 quasi war 176 republicans 169 revolution of 1800 177 separation of powers 166 sovereignty 165 the federalist papers 167 virginia and kentucky resolutions 177 virginia plan 162 whiskey rebellion 172 xyz affair 176 the constitution and the new republic 179 recall and reflect significant events 1 how did the constitution of 1787 attempt to resolve the weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
2 what role did the federalist papers play in the battle over ratification of the constitution.
3 what were the main tenets of alexander hamiltons financial program.
4 what diplomatic crises did the united states face in the first decade of its existence and how did the new government respond to these crises.
5 what was the revolution of 1800 and in what way was it a revolution.
1786 annapolis conference meets 1787 1788 states ratify constitution 1791 hamilton issues report on manufactures first bank of the united states chartered 1787 constitution adopted september 17 constitutional convention in philadelphia meets 1789 washington becomes first president bill of rights adopted by congress judiciary act of 1789 passed french revolution begins 1792 washington reelected without opposition 1793 citizen genet affair challenges american neutrality 1795 pinckney s treaty signed 1794 whiskey rebellion quelled in pennsylvania jay s treaty signed 1796 john adams elected president 1798 xyz affair precipitates state of quasi war with france alien and sedition acts passed virginia and kentucky resolutions passed 1801 jefferson becomes president after congress confirms election judiciary act of 1801 passed 1800 jefferson and burr tie vote in electoral college 7 the jeffersonian era the burning of washington this dramatic engraving somewhat exaggerates the extent of the blazes in looking ahead washington when the british occupied the city in august 1814 but the invaders did set fire to the capitol the white house and other.
u c public buildings in retaliation for the american burning and looting 1 how successful was jefferson s effort to create a republican society of the canadian capital at york the grange collection.
new yrok i dominated by sturdy independent farmers.
2 how did the napoleonic wars affect the united states.
3 what events and issues led to the war of 1812.
the jeffersonian vision setting the stage.
upiri thomas jefferson and his followers assumed control of the national government in 1801 as the champions of a distinctive vision of america a vision sharply different from that of andrew hamilton and other federalists.
they envisioned a society of sturdy independent farmers happily free from the workshops industrial towns and city mobs of europe.
they promoted a cultural outlook that emphasized localism and republican simplicity.
and they proposed a federal government of sharply limited power with most authority remaining at the state level.
almost nothing worked out as they planned.
for during their years in power the young republic was developing in ways that made much of their vision obsolete.
the american economy became steadily more diversified and complex.
growing cities surging commerce and expanding industrialism made the ideal of a simple agrarian society impossible to maintain.
american cultural life far from reflecting localism and simplicity reflected a vigorous and ambitious nationalism.
the republicans did manage to translate some of their political ideals into reality.
jefferson dismantled much of the bureaucratic power structure the federalists had erected in the 1790s and he helped ensure for a time that in many respects the federal government would remain a relatively unimportant force in american life.
yet he also frequently encountered situations that required him to exercise strong national authority as for example when he arranged the greatest single increase in the size of the united states in its history.
the republicans did not always like these nationalizing and modernizing trends but for the most part they adjusted to them and in doing so became agents of the transformation of american life they had once resisted.
the rise of cultural nationalism in many respects american cultural life in the early nineteenth century seemed to reflect the republican vision of the nation s future.
opportunities for education increased the nation s literary and artistic life began to free itself from european influences and american religion began to confront and adjust to the spread of enlightenment rationalism.
in other respects however the new culture was posing a serious challenge to republican ideals.
patterns of education central to the republican vision of america was the concept of a virtuous and enlightened citizenry.
jefferson himself called emphatically for a national crusade against ignorance republicans believed therefore in the establishment of a nationwide system of public importance of sch00js to create the educated electorate they believed a republic required.
acitizenrys a11 white male citizens the nation s prospective voters should they argued receive free education.
some states endorsed the principle of public education for all in the early years of the republic but none actually created a working system of free schools.
a massachusetts law of 1789 reaffirmed the colonial laws by which each town was obligated to support a school but there was little enforcement.
in virginia the state legislature ignored jeffersons call for universal elementary education and for advanced education for the gifted.
as late as 1815 not a single state had a comprehensive public school system.
instead schooling became primarily the responsibility of private institutions most of which were open only to those who could afford to pay for them.
in the south and in the mid atlantic states religious groups ran most of the schools.
in new england and elsewhere private private academies were usually secular many of them modeled on schools schooling founcjecj by the phillips family at andover massachusetts in 1778 and at exeter new hampshire three years later.
by 1815 there were thirty such private secondary schools in massachusetts thirty seven in new york and several dozen more scattered throughout 181 182 chapter 7 pawtucket bridge and falls one reason for the growth of the textile industry in new england in the early nineteenth century was that there were many sources of water power in the region to run the machinery in the factories.
that was certainly the case with slaters mill one of the first american textile factories.
it was located in pawtucket rhode island alongside a powerful waterfall demonstrating the critical importance of water power to early american industry.
bettmann corbis foreign trade larger than those of any country except england.
in proportion to its population the united states had more ships and international commerce than any other country.
between 1789 and 1810 the total tonnage of american vessels engaged in overseas traffic rose from less than 125 000 to nearly 1 million.
american ships had carried only 30 percent of the countrys exports in 1789 they were carrying over 90 percent in 1810 the figures for american ships carrying imports increased even more dramatically from 17 5 percent to 90 percent in the same period.
another solution to the problem of limited markets was to develop new markets at home by improving transportation between the states and into the interior of the continent.
in river transportation a new era began with the development of the steamboat.
a number of inventors began experimenting with steam powered craft in the late eighteenth century john fitch exhibited a forty five foot vessel with paddles operated by steam to some of the delegates at the constitutional convention in 1787 but the real breakthrough was oliver evanss development of a high pressure engine lighter and more efficient than james watts which made steam more feasible for powering boats and eventually locomotives as well as mill machinery.
the inventor robert fulton and the promoter robert r livingston were principally responsible for perfecting the steamboat and bringing it to the attention of the nation.
their clermont equipped with paddle wheels and an english built engine sailed up the hudson in the summer of 1807 demonstrating the practicability of steam navigation even though it took the ship thirty hours to go 150 miles.
in 1811 a partner of livingstons nicholas j roosevelt a remote ancestor of theodore roosevelt introduced the steamboat to the west by sending the new orleans from pittsburgh down the ohio and mississippi.
the next year this vessel began a profitable career of service between new orleans and natchez.
robert fultons steamboat meanwhile what was to become known as the turnpike the turnpike era had begun.
in 1792 a corporation era constructed a toll road running the sixty miles from philadelphia to lancaster pennsylvania with a hard packed surface of crushed rock.
this venture proved so successful that several other companies laid out similar turnpikes so named from the kind of tollgate frequently used from other cities to neighboring towns.
since the turnpikes had to produce profits for the companies that the jeffersonian era 191 american stage waggon this image of a stagecoach by j stoner shows how roads were beginning to link the disparate regions of early nineteenth century america.
corbisj built them construction costs had to be low enough and the prospective traffic heavy enough to ensure an early and ample return.
as a result these roads radiating from eastern cities ran comparatively short distances and through densely settled areas.
no private operators were willing to build similar highways over the mountains and into the less populated interior.
state governments and the federal government eventually had to finance them.
the rising cities despite all the changes and all the advances america in the early nineteenth century remained an overwhelmingly rura and agrarian nation.
only 3 percent of the non indian popu a tion lived in towns of more than 8 000 at the time of t e sec ond census in 1800 ten percent lived west of the appa ac ian mountains far from what urban centers there were.
muc the country remained a wilderness.
even the nations argest cities could not begin to compare either in size or in cultural sophistication with such european capitals as london and paris.
yet here too there were signs of change.
the leading american cities might not yet have become world capitals but they were large and complex enough to rival the important secondary cities of europe.
philadelphia with 70 000 residents and new york with 60 000 were becoming major centers of commerce and learning.
the cities were aiso developing a distinctively urban culture.
so too were the next largest cities of the new nation baltimore 26 000 in 1800 boston 24 000 and charleston 20 000.
people living in towns and cities lived differently than the vast majority of americans who continued to work as farmers.
among other things urban life produced urban life affluenccj and affluent people sought amenities that would not have entered the imaginings of any but 1.
america in the world the global industrial revolution i tentative stirrings of industrial activity in the united states in the early nineteenth cen i tury were part of a vast movement that over the course of the century transformed much of the globe.
historians differ over precisely when the industrial revolution began but it is clear that by the end of the eighteenth century it was well under way in many parts of the world.
by the beginning of the twentieth century industrialization had transformed the societies of britain most of continental europe japan and the united states.
for americans the industrial revolution was largely a result of the rapid changes in great britain the nation with which they had the closest relations.
britain was the first nation to develop significant industrial capacity.
the factory system took root in england in the late eighteenth century revolutionizing the manufacture of cotton thread and cloth.
one invention followed another in quick succession.
improvements in weaving drove improvements in spinning and these changes created a demand for new devices for carding combing and straightening the fibers for the spinner.
water the english canal age industrialization in england contributed as it did in america to the building of new transportation facilities to serve the growing commercial markets of the new economy.
among the most popular such facilities were canals among them the regents canal in london pictured here in the 1820s.
guildhall library corporation of london uk the bridgeman art library wind and animal power continued to be important in the textile industry but more important was the emergence of steam power which proliferated after the appearance of james watt s advanced steam engine patented in 1769.
england s textile industry quickly became the most profitable in the world and it helped encourage comparable advances in other fields of manufacturing as well.
despite the efforts of the british government to prevent the export of english industrial technology knowledge of the new machines reached other nations quickly usually through the emigration of people who had learned the technology in british factories.
america benefited the most from english technology because it received more immigrants from great britain than from any other country.
but english technology spread quickly to the nations of continental europe as well.
in japan the sudden intrusion of american and european traders helped cause the so called meiji reforms of the 1880s and 1890s which launched a period of rapid industrialization there.
industrialization changed not just the world s economies but also its societies.
first in england and then in europe america and japan social systems underwent wrenching changes.
hundreds of thousands and eventually millions of men and women moved from rural areas into cities to work in factories where they experienced both the benefits and the costs of industrialization many of those who moved from farm to factory experienced some improvement in nutrition and other material circumstances even in their health.
but there were psychological costs to being suddenly uprooted from one way of life and thrust into another fundamentally different one.
little in most workers prior experience had prepared them for the nature of industrial labor the routinized rigidly scheduled work of the urban factory contrasted sharply with the varying seasonal work pattern of the rural economy.
industrial workers experienced too a fundamental change in their relationship the wealthiest farmers.
they sought increasing elegance and refinement in their homes their grounds and their dress.
they also looked for diversions music theater dancing and for many people one of the most popular entertainments of all horse racing.
see patterns of popular culture pp.
much remained to be done before this small and still half formed nation would become a complex modern society.
it was still possible in the early nineteenth century to believe that those changes might not ever occur.
but forces were already at work that in time would lastingly transform the united states.
jefferson the president privately thomas jefferson may well have considered his victory over john adams in 1800 to be what he later termed it.
a revolution as real as that of 1776 publicly however 192 the jeffersonian era.
193 with their employers.
unlike rural landlords and local aristocrats factory owners and managers the new class of industrial capitalists many of them accumulating unprecedented wealth were usually remote and inaccessible.
they dealt with their workers impersonally and the result was a growing schism between the two classes each lacking access to or understanding of the other.
working men and women throughout the globe began thinking of themselves as a distinct class with common goals and interests.
their efforts simultaneously to adjust to their new way of life and to resist its most damaging aspects sometimes created great social turbulence.
battles between workers and employers became a characteristic feature of industrial life throughout the world.
life in industrial nations changed at every level.
populations in industrial countries grew rapidly and people began to live longer.
at the same time industrial cities began to produce great increases in pollution crime and until modern sanitation systems emerged infectious disease.
around the industrial world middle classes expanded and came to dominate the economy although not always the culture or the politics of their nations.
not since the agricultural revolution thousands of years earlier when many humans had turned from hunting to farming for sustenance had there been an economic change of a magnitude comparable to that of the industrial revolution.
centuries of traditions social patterns and cultural and religious assumptions were challenged and often shattered.
the social and economic consequences of industrialism were complex and profound and they continue today to shape the nature of global society.
understand analyze and evaluate 1 why did the british government attempt to prevent the export of britains industrial technology.
2 was the industrial revolution truly a global revolution.
why or why not.
3 some observers have compared the information technology developments of the late twentieth century to those of the industrial revolution.
are the changes that have resulted from the high tech developments of the late twentieth century as profound as those resulting from the industrial revolution.
in what way might the high tech advances be considered a revolution.
what have been the social and economic consequences of these advances.
ie was restrained and conciliatory as he assumed office attempting to minimize the differences between the two parties md to calm the passions that the bitter campaign had aroused.
we are all republicans we are all federalists he said in his naugural address.
and during his eight years in office he did nuch to prove those words correct.
there was no complete epudiation of federalist policies no true revolution.
indeed it times jefferson seemed to outdo the federalists at their own work most notably in overseeing a remarkable expansion of he territory of the united states.
the federal city and the people s president the newly founded national capital was the city of washington.
the french architect pierre lenfant had designed the capital the n n a rand sca e with broad avenues radi capital city atlng out from the uncompleted capitol building set on one of the area s highest hills.
washington was many americans believed to become the paris of the united states.
in reality however throughout jeffersons presidency and indeed through most of the nineteenth century washington remained little more than a provincial village.
although the population increased steadily from the 3 200 counted in the 1800 census it never rivaled that of new york philadelphia or the other major cities of the nation.
the city remained a raw inhospitable community with few public buildings of any consequence.
members of congress viewed washington not as a home but as a place to visit briefly during sessions of the legislature and leave as quickly as possible.
most lived in a cluster of simple boardinghouses in the vicinity of the capitol.
it was not unusual for a member of congress to resign his seat in the midst of a session to return home if he had an opportunity to accept the more prestigious post of member of his state legislature.
jefferson set out as president to act in a spirit of democratic simplicity in keeping with the frontierlike character of the unfinished federal city.
he was a wealthy and aristocratic planter by background the owner of more than 100 slaves and a man of rare cultivation and sophistication but he conveyed to the public an image of plain almost crude disdain for pretension.
he walked like an ordinary citizen to and from his inauguration at the capitol.
in the presidential mansion which had not yet acquired the name white house he disregarded the courtly etiquette of his predecessors in part no doubt because as a widower he had no first lady to take charge of social affairs.
at state dinners he let his guests scramble pell mell for places at the table.
he did not always bother to dress up once prompting the fastidious british ambassador to complain of being received by the president in coat and pantaloons that were indicative of utter slovenliness and indifference to appearances yet jefferson managed nevertheless to impress most of those who knew him.
he was a brilliant conversationalist a gifted writer and one of the nations most intelligent and creative men with perhaps a wider range of interests and accomplishments than any public figure in american history.
in addition to politics and diplomacy he was an active architect educator inventor scientific farmer and philosopher scientist.
jefferson was above all a shrewd and practical politician.
on the one hand he went to great lengths to eliminate the aura of majesty surrounding the presi 7 politician dency that he believed his predecessors had created.
at the same time however jefferson worked hard to exert influence as the leader of his 194 chapter 7 and it promised to return three of the captured sailors one of the original four had been hanged.
but the british refused to renounce impressment.
peaceable coercion in an effort to prevent future incidents that might bring the nation again to the brink of war congress enacted a drastic measure known as the embargo it became one of the most controversial political issues of its time.
the embargo prohib the embargo ited american ships horn leaving the united states for any foreign port anywhere in the world.
the law was widely evaded but it was effective enough to create a serious depression through most of the nation.
hardest hit were the merchants and shipowners of the northeast most of them federalists.
the election of 1808 came in the midst of the embargo 1807 induced depression.
james madison jeffersons secretary of state non intercourse act and political ally won the presidency.
but the embargo was clearly a growing political liability and jefferson decided to back down.
a few days before leaving office he approved a bill ending his experiment with what he called peaceable coercion to replace the embargo congress passed the non intercourse act just before madison took office.
the new law reopened trade with all nations but great britain and france.
a year later in 1810 congress allowed the non intercourse act to expire and replaced it with macons bill no.
2 which conditionally reopened free commercial relations with britain and france.
napoleon announced that france would no longer interfere with american shipping and madison announced that an embargo against great britain alone would automatically go into effect early in 1811 unless britain renounced its restrictions on american shipping.
the british government repealed its blockade of europe.
but the reneal came too late to orevent war.
struggling with the embargo this cartoon lampoons the u s embargo against britain in 1807 a decision that crest d k a common nickname for a snapping turtle is embargo spelled backward.
it shows a struggling merchant wrestling with esu ts o th t t pep e be ng drawn mto the wars between britain and france.
but the embargo which continued until 1812 not onlv hurt the a 9 w3s an e fort t0 prevenl hc united states from granger collection new york 1812 n nl hur the ame ca economy but also helped draw the nation into the war of 1812 is the the jeffersonian era 205 the indian problem and the british the 1807 war crisis following the chesapeake leopard incident revived the conflict between indians and white americans.
two important and very different leaders emerged to oppose one another in the conflict william henry harrison and tecumseh.
the virginia born harrison already a veteran indian fighter at age twenty six became a congressional delegate from the northwest territory in 1799 he was a committed advocate of william henry harrison growth and development in the western lands and he was largely responsible for the passage in 1800 of the so called harrison land law which enabled white settlers to acquire farms from the public domain on much easier terms than before.
in 1801 jefferson appointed harrison governor of the indiana territory to administer the presidents proposed solution to the indian problem jefferson offered the native americans a choice they could convert themselves into settled farmers and jeffersons assimilate become a part of white society offer or r ey cou migrate to the west of the mississippi.
in either case they would have to give up their claims to tribal lands in the northwest.
british canada iault ste.
marie dakota illinois z territory r trimichilimacrinac.
az michigan missisauga ceded before 1784 treaty of greenville 1795 ceded 1784 1799 treaty of ceded 1800 1812 fort wayne 1809 unceded indian battle lands 1812 mexico seminole british canada ceded 1784 1812 spread of prophet s influence unceded indian tecumseh s lands 1812 travel routes battle r nrpjx tribes joining movement gulf of mexico the indian response to white encroachment with land cessions and white western migration placing increased pressure on indian cultures after 1790 news of the prophet s tsponse to.
michiaan and westward along lake superior and the interior of wisconsin.
following the battle of tippecanoe revival fell on eager ears.
it spread especially quickly northward along the shores of lake michigan ana wesi a n it tecumseh eclipsed the prophet as the major leader of indian resistance but his trips south to forge political alliance met with less success.
206 chapter 9 in the fur trading posts of the pacific northwest in parts of texas and california settlers from mexico canada and the united states had created societies in which indians and whites were in intimate contact with each other.
even during the famous lewis and clark expedition white explorers had lived with western indians on terms of such intimacy that many of them contracted venereal disease from indian sexual partners.
sometimes these close contacts between whites and indians were beneficial to both sides even reasonably equal.
sometimes they were cruel and exploitive.
but the early multiracial societies of the west did not separate whites and indians.
they demonstrated ways in which the two cultures could interact each shaping the other.
by the mid nineteenth century however white americans had adopted a different model as they contemplated westward expansion.
much as the early british settlers along the atlantic coast had established plantations from which natives were in theory to be excluded so the westward moving whites of later years came to imagine the territories they were entering as virgin land with no preexisting civilization.
native americans they believed could not be partners either equal or subordinate in the creation of new societies in the west.
they were obstacles to be removed and as far as possible isolated.
indians andrew jackson once said had neither the intelligence the industry the moral habits nor the desire of improvement to be fit partners in the project of extending white civilization westward.
by dismissing native american cultures in that way white americans justified to themselves a series of harsh policies that they believed incorrectly would make the west theirs alone.
jackson and the bank war jacksons opposition to concentrated power jackson was quite willing to use federal power against rebellious states and indian tribes.
on economic issues however he was consistently opposed to concentrating power either in the federal government or in powerful and in his view aristocratic institutions associated with it.
an early example of his skeptical view of federal power was his 1830 veto of a congressional measure providing a subsidy to the proposed maysville road in kentucky.
the bill was unconstitutional jackson argued because the road in question lay entirely within kentucky and was not therefore a part of interstate commerce but the bill was also unwise he believed because it committed the government to what jackson considered extravagant expenditures.
jackson s opposition to federal power and aristocratic privilege lay behind the most celebrated episode of his presidency the war against the bank of the united states.
biddle s institution the bank of the united states in the 1830s was a mighty institution and it is not surprising that it would attract jacksons wrath.
its stately headquarters in philadelphia seemed to hard and soft money nicholas symbolize its haughty image of itself it biddle had branches in twenty nine other cities making it the most powerful and far flung financial institution in the nation.
by law the bank was the only place that the federal government could deposit its own funds the government in turn owned one fifth of the banks stock.
the bank did a tremendous business in general banking.
it provided credit to growing enterprises it issued bank notes which served as a dependable medium of exchange throughout the country and it exercised a restraining effect on the less well managed state banks.
nicholas biddle who served as president of the bank from 1823 on had done much to put the institution on a sound and prosperous basis.
nevertheless andrew jackson was determined to destroy it.
opposition to the bank came from two very different groups the soft money faction and the hard money faction.
advocates of soft money people who wanted more currency in circulation and believed that issuing bank notes unsupported by gold and silver was the best way to circulate more currency consisted largely of state bankers and their allies.
they objected to the bank of the united states because it restrained the state banks from issuing notes freely.
the hard money people believed that gold and silver were the only basis for money.
they condemned all banks that issued bank notes including the bank of the united states.
the soft money advocates were believers in rapid economic growth and speculation the hard money forces embraced older ideas of public virtue and looked with suspicion on expansion and speculation.
jackson supported the hard money position.
many years before he had been involved in some grandiose land and commercial speculations based on paper credit.
his business had failed in the panic of 1797 and he had fallen deeply into debt.
after that he was suspicious of all banks and all paper currency.
but as president he was also sensitive to the complaints of his many soft money supporters in the west and the south.
he made it clear that he would not favor renewing the charter of the bank of the united states which was due to expire in 1836 a philadelphia aristocrat unaccustomed to politics biddle nevertheless began granting financial favors to influential men who he thought might help him preserve the bank.
in particular he turned to daniel webster and cultivated a close personal friendship with him.
he named webster the banks legal counsel and director of its boston branch webster was also a frequent heavy borrower from the bank.
he helped biddle win the support of other important figures among them henry clay.
clay webster and other advisers persuaded biddle to apply to congress in 1832 for a bill to renew the banks charter.
that was four years ahead of the date the original charter was scheduled to expire.
but forcing a vote now would allow the bank to become a major issue in the 1832 national elections.
congress jacksons veto passed the recharter bill jackson prediet ably vetoed it and the banks supporters in jacksonian america 243 candidate party electoral vote popular vote andrew jackson democrat 219 687 502 55 a henry clay 49 national republican 530 189 42 william wirt anti mason 7 33 108 3 john floyd independent democrat not voted 11 2 the election of 1832 jacksons reelection victory in 1832 was almost as decisive as his earlier victory in 1828 what changes are visible in party loyalties since the previous election.
congress failed to override the veto.
just as clay had hoped the 1832 campaign now centered on the future of the bank.
clay ran for president that year as the unanimous choice of the national republicans who held a nominating convention in baltimore late in 1831 but the bank war failed to provide him with the winning issue for which he had hoped.
jackson with van buren as his running mate overwhelmingly defeated clay and several minor party candidates with 55 percent of the popular vote and 219 electoral votes more than four times as many as clay received.
these results were a defeat not only for clay but also for biddle.
appointed a new one.
when the new secretary similarly balked jackson fired him too and named a third more compliant secretary attorney general roger b taney his close friend and loyal ally.
taney began placing the governments deposits not in the bank of the united states as it had in the past but in a number of state banks which jacksons enemies called pet banks.
nicholas biddle whom jacksonians derisively called czar nicholas did not give in without a fight.
this worthy president he wrote sarcastically thinks that because he has scalped indians and imprisoned judges he is to have his way with the bank.
he is mistaken when the administration began to transfer funds directly from the bank of the united states to the pet banks as opposed to the initial practice of simply depositing new funds in those banks biddle called in loans and raised interest rates explaining that without the government deposits the banks resources were stretched too thin.
he realized his actions were likely to cause financial distress.
he hoped a short recession would persuade congress to recharter the bank.
nothing but the evidence of suffering he told a colleague would produce any effect in congress by now the struggle had become not just a conflict over policy and principle but also a bitter personal battle between two proud men both of them acting recklessly in an effort to humiliate and defeat the other.
as financial conditions worsened in the winter of 1833 1834 supporters of the bank blamed jacksons policies for the recession.
they organized meetings around the country and sent petitions to washington urging a rechartering of the bank.
but the jacksonians blamed the recession on biddle and refused to budge.
when distressed citizens appealed to the president for help he dismissively answered go to biddle finally biddle contracted credit too far even for his own allies in the business community who began to fear that in his effort to save his own bank he was threatening their interests.
some of them did go to biddle a group of new york and boston merchants protested.
to appease the business community biddle at last reversed himself and began to grant credit in abundance and on reasonable terms.
his vacillating and unpopular tactics ended his chances of winning a recharter of the bank.
jackson had won a considerable political victory.
but when the bank of the united states died in 1836 the country lost a jackson valuable albeit flawed financial institution victorious and was left with a fragmented and chronically unstable banking system that would plague the economy for more than a century.
the monster destroyed ackson was now more determined than ever to destroy the monster bank as quickly as possible.
he could not legally abolish the institution before the expiration of its charter.
instead he tried to weaken it.
he decided to remove the government s deposits from the bank.
his secretary of the trea sury believed that such an action would destabilize the financial system and refused to give the order.
jackson fired him an removal of government deposits the taney court in the aftermath of the bank war jackson moved against the most powerful institution of economic nationalism of all the supreme court.
in 1835 when john marshall died the president appointed as the new chief justice his trusted ally roger b taney.
taney did not bring a sharp break in constitutional interpretation but he gradually helped modify marshalls vigorous nationalism.
perhaps the clearest indication of the new judicial mood was the celebrated case of charles river bridge v warren bridge 244 chapter 9 looking back the election of andrew jackson to the presidency in 1828 marked not only the triumph of a particular vision of government and democracy.
it represented as well the emergence of a new jackson s political world.
throughout the american legacy nation the laws governing political participa tion were loosening and the number of people permitted to vote which eventually included most white males but almost no one else was increasing.
along with this expansion of the electorate was emerging a new spirit of party politics.
parties had once been reviled by american leaders as contributing to the spirit of faction.
now a new set of ideas was emerging that saw in institutionalized parties not a challenge but a contribution to democracy.
party competition would be a way of containing and muting disagreements that might otherwise run amok.
it would be another of the healthy restraints another part of the system of checks and balances that made american government work.
andrew jackson was a party man and he set out as president to entrench his party the democrats in power.
he was also a fierce defender of his region the west and a sharp critic of what he considered the stranglehold of the aristocratic east on the nations economic life.
he sought to limit the role of the federal government in economic affairs fearful that it would serve to entrench existing patterns of wealth and power.
he worked to destroy the bank of the united states which he considered a corrupt vehicle of aristocratic influence.
jackson was finally a nationalist.
and he confronted the greatest challenge to american unity yet to have emerged in the young nation the nullification crisis of 1832 1833 with a strong assertion of the power and importance of the union.
these positions won jackson broad popularity and ensured his reelection in 1832 and the election of his designated successor martin van buren in 1836 but the democrats were not the only ones to have learned the lessons of the age of parties.
a new coalition of anti jacksonians who called themselves the whigs launched a powerful new party that used much of the same anti elitist rhetoric the democrats had used to win support for their own much more nationalist program.
their emergence culminated in the campaign of 1840 with the election of the first whig president.
key terms people places events andrew jackson 230 anti masonry 245 aroostook war 250 bank war 242 caroline affair 250 daniel webster 231 dorr rebellion 231 five civilized tribes 239 indian territory 240 john c calhoun 246 john tyler 248 martin van buren 233 nicholas biddle 242 nullification 235 panic of 1837 246 removal act 239 roger b taney 243 seminole war 241 specie circular 246 spoils system 234 trail of tears 240 webster ashburton treaty 251 webster hayne debate 236 whigs 234 william henry harrison 246 recall and reflect 1 what was andrew jacksons political philosophy and how was it reflected in the policies and actions of his administration.
2 who benefited under jacksonian democracy.
who suffered.
3 how did andrew jackson change the office of the presidency.
4 who supported and who opposed the bank of the united states and why.
who was right.
5 how and why did white attitudes toward native americans change and how did these changes lead to the indian removal act and the trail of tears.
jacksonian america 253 significant events 1828 1835 1842 calhoun s south carolina seminole war exposition and protest outlines nullification doctrine 1829 a 1836 andrew jackson inaugurated 9 jackson issues specie circular martin van buren elected 1830 1837 1842 a president webster and hayne debate commercial panic indian removal act passed and depression 1830 1838 1838 indians expelled from southeast aroostook war fought in maine and canada 1831 anti mason party established 1832 1833 nullification crisis erupts 1832 democrats hold first national party convention jackson vetoes bill to recharter bank of the united states jackson reelected president 1835 roger b taney succeeds marshall as chief justice of the supreme court whigs hold their first national convention 1841 harrison dies john tyler becomes president 1840 william henry harrison elected president 1842 dorr rebellion hastens reform in rhode island webster ashburton treaty signed americas economic revolution if looking ahead 1 what were the factors in the u s economic revolution of the mid nineteenth century.
2 how did the u s population change between 1820 and 1840 and how did the population change affect the nation s economy society and politics.
3 why did america s industrial revolution affect the northern economy and society differently than it did the southern economy and society.
the lowell mills fifteen years earlier lowell massachusetts had been a small farming village known as east chelmsford.
by the 1840s when fitzhugh lane painted the middlesex comply woolen mills the town had become one of the most famous manufacturing centers in america and a magnet for visitors from around the world.
lanes painting shows female workers who dominated the labor force in lowell entering the factory c american textile history museum setting the stage when the united states entered the war of 1812 it was still an essentially agrarian nation.
there were to be sure cities in america several of substantial size and there was modest but growing manufacturing activity.
but the overwhelming majority of americans were farmers and tradespeople and the economy was largely a local one.
by the time the civil war began in 1861 the united states had transformed itself.
most americans were still rural people but even most american farmers were now part of a national and increasingly international market economy as well as a growing urbanized nation.
the united states had developed a major manufacturing sector and was beginning to challenge the industrial nations of europe for supremacy.
the nation had experienced the first stage of its industrial revolution.
the dramatic changes that resulted from the industrial revolution affected the nations economy society culture and politics but the changes did not have the same impact everywhere.
the northeast and the northwest were rapidly developing a complex modern economy and society increasingly dominated by large cities important manufacturing and profitable commercial farming.
it was in many ways an unequal society but it was also a fluid one firmly committed to the ideal of free labor.
in the south and southwest there were changes too.
southern agriculture particularly cotton farming flourished as never before in response to the qrowinq demand from textile mills in new regional divergences england and elsewhere.
but the south remained much less economically developed than the north.
as the north became ever more committed to the fluidity and mobility of its free labor system the south was becoming more and more resolute in its defense of slavery.
the economic revolution was transforming the nation.
it was also dividing it.
the changing american population the american industrial revolution was a result of many factors.
before it could occur the united states needed a population large enough both to grow its own food and to provide a surplus workforce for an industrial economy.
it needed a transportation and communications system capable of sustaining commerce over a large geographic area.
it needed the technology to permit manufacturing on a large scale.
and it needed systems of business organization capable of managing large industrial enterprises.
by 1860 the northern regions of the nation had acquired at least the beginnings of all those things.
the american population 1820 1840 three trends characterized the american population between 1820 and 1840 all of them contributing in various ways to economic growth.
the population was increasing rapidly much of it was moving from the countryside into the industrializing cities of the northeast and northwest and much of it was migrating westward.
the american population had stood at only 4 million in 1790 by 1820 it had reached 10 million by 1830 nearly 13 million and by 1840 17 million.
the united states was growing much more rapidly in population than britain or europe.
one reason for this substantial population growth was improvements in public health.
the number and ferocity of epidemics such as the great cholera plague of 1832 which had periodically decimated urban and even rural populations in america slowly declined as did the nations mortality rate.
the population increase was also a result of a high birth.
on average of 6 14 children each a decline from the very high rate.
in 1840 white women bore an average ui u j reasons for population increase but still substantial enough to produce rapid population increases rates of the eighteenth century particularly srnce a larger proportion of children could expect to grow o adulthood than had been the case a generation or two earlier.
255 256 chapter 11 education.
in 1860 there were 260 southern colleges and universities public and private with 25 000 students enrolled in them or more than half the total number of educational students in the united states.
but universi opportunities ties were within the reach of only the upper class.
the elementary and secondary schools of the south were not only fewer but also inferior to those of the northeast although not much worse than the crude schools of the northwest and a higher proportion of whites were illiterate than in other parts of the country.
that a majority of the souths white population consisted of modest farmers largely excluded from the dominant plantation society raises another important question about the antebellum south.
why did the plain folk have so little power in the public world of the old south.
why did they not oppose the aristocratic social system in which they shared so little.
why did they not resent the system of slavery from which they generally did not benefit.
some nonslaveowning whites did oppose the planter elite but for the most part in limited ways and in a relatively few isolated areas.
these were southern highlanders the hill hill people peop e w lived in the appalachian ranges east of the mississippi in the ozarks to the west of the river and in other hill country or backcountry areas cut off from the commercial world of the plantation system.
of all southern whites they were the most isolated from the mainstream of the regions life.
they practiced a simple form of subsistence agriculture owned practically no slaves and had a proud sense of seclusion.
they were in most respects unconnected to the new commercial economy that dominated the great cotton planting region of the south.
they produced almost no surplus for the market had little access to money and often bartered for the goods they could not grow themselves.
to such men and women slavery was unattractive for many of the same reasons it was unappealing to workers and small farmers in the north because it threatened their sense of their own independence.
hill country farmers lived in a society defined by individual personal freedom and unusual isolation from modern notions of property.
they also held to older political ideals which for many included the ideal of fervent loyalty to the nation.
such whites frequently expressed animosity toward the planter aristocracy of the other regions of the south.
the mountain region was the only part of the south to defy the trend toward sectional conformity and the only part to resist the movement toward secession when it finally developed.
even during the civil war many hill country southerners refused to support the confederacy some even fought for the union.
far greater in number however were the nonslaveowning whites who lived in the midst of the plantation system.
many perhaps most of them accepted that system because they were tied to it in important ways.
small farmers depended on the local plantation aristocracy for many things access to cotton gins markets for their modest crops and their livestock credit or other financial assistance.
in many areas there were also extensive kinship close relations with the plantation aristocracy networks linking lower and upper class whites.
the poorest resident of a county might be a cousin of the richest aristocrat.
together these mutual ties helped mute what might otherwise have been pronounced class tensions.
small farmers felt tied to the plantation society in other ways as well.
for white men at least the south was an unusually democratic society in that participation in politics both through voting and through attending campaign meetings and barbecues was even more widespread than in the north where participation was also high.
just as political participation gave workers in the north a sense of connection to the social order so it did for farmers in the south although officeholders in the south even more than in the north were almost always members of the regions elites.
in the 1850s moreover the boom in the cotton economy allowed many small farmers to improve their economic fortunes.
some bought more land became slaveowners and moved into at least the fringes of plantation society.
others simply felt more secure in their positions as independent yeomen and hence more likely to embrace the fierce regional loyalty that was spreading throughout the white south in these years.
small farmers even more than great planters were also committed to a traditional male dominated family structure.
their household centered economies required the participation of all family members and they believed a stable system commitment of gender relarions to ensure order and sta to bility.
men were the unquestioned masters paternalism of their homes women and children who were both family and workforce were firmly under the masters control.
as the northern attack on slavery increased in the 1840s and 1850s it was easy for such farmers to believe and easy for ministers politicians and other propagandists for slavery to persuade them that an assault on one hierarchical system slavery would open the way to an assault on another such system patriarchy.
there were other white southerners however who did not share in the plantation economy in even limited ways and yet continued to accept its premises.
these were the members of a particularly degraded class numbering perhaps a half million in 1850 known to other classes variously and demeaningly as crackers sand hillers or poor white trash a phrase used as a chapter 11 waving from the shore this image from the mid 1800s depicts slaves picking cotton along a riverbank.
they are waving to men sitting on bales as they ride the barge on route to the market.
archive photos getty images life under slavery slaves generally received at least enough necessities to enable them to live and work.
their masters usually furnished them with an adequate if mostly coarse diet consisting mainly of cornmeal salt pork molasses and on special occasions fresh meat or poultry.
many slaves cultivated gardens for their own use.
they received cheap clothing and shoes.
they lived in crude cabins called slave quarters usually clustered in a complex near the masters house.
the plantation mistress or a doctor retained by the owner provided some medical care but slave women themselves as healers and midwives or simply as mothers were the more important source.
slaves worked hard beginning with light tasks as children.
their workdays were longest at harvest time.
slave women worked particularly hard.
they generally labored in the fields with the men and they assumed as well the crucial chores traditionally reserved for women cooking special position of women cleaning and child rearing.
because slave families were often divided with husbands and fathers frequently living on neighboring plantations or at times sold to plantation owners far away black women often found themselves acting in effect as single parents.
within the slave family therefore women had special burdens but also a special authority.
slaves were as a group much less healthy than southern whites.
after 1808 when the international slave trade became high slave ihegal in america the proportion of blacks mortality t0 whites steadily declined.
in 1820 there rates was one african american to every four whites in 1840 one to every five.
the slower increase of the black population was a result of its comparatively high death rate.
slave mothers had large families but the enforced poverty in which virtually all african americans lived ensured that fewer of their children would survive to adulthood than the children of white parents.
even those who did survive typically died at a younger age than the average white person.
cotton slavery and the old south 305 even so according to some scholars the actual material conditions of slavery may have been better than those of some northern factory workers and better than those of both peasants and industrial workers in much of nineteenth century europe.
the conditions of american slaves were certainly less severe than those of slaves in the caribbean and south america crops which required more arduous labor.
sugar production in the caribbean islands in particular involved extraordinarily backbreaking work and a high risk of fatal tropical diseases.
caribbean and south american planters continued to use the african slave trade well into the nineteenth century to replenish their labor supply so they had less incentive than american planters who no longer had access to that trade to protect their existing laborers.
growing cotton the principal activity for most slaves in the united states was much less debilitating than growing sugar and planters had strong economic incentives to maintain a healthy slave population.
one result of this was that america became the only country where a slave population actually increased through natural reproduction although it grew much more slowly than the white population.
most masters did make some effort to preserve the health and thus the usefulness of their slaves.
one example was the frequent practice of protecting slave children from hard work until early adolescence.
masters believed that doing so would nursing the masters child this photograph shows a black slave woman caring for a white child.
the image was taken in arkansas in 1855 black women typ y cared for white children on plantations sometimes with great affection and sometimes this photograph may suggest dutifully and without enthusiasm.
the library of co g lc uszc4 5251 make young slaves more loyal and would also ensure better health as adults.
another example was the use of hired labor when available for the most unhealthy or dangerous tasks.
a traveler in louisiana noted for example that irishmen were employed to clear malarial swamps and to handle cotton bales at the bottom of chutes extending from the river bluff down to a boat landing.
if an irish worker died of disease or in an accident a master could hire another for a dollar a day or less.
but a master would lose an investment of perhaps 1 000 or more if a prime field hand died.
still cruel masters might forget their pocketbooks in the heat of anger.
slaves were often left to the discipline of overseers who had less of an economic stake in their well being overseers were paid in proportion to the amount of work they could get out of the slaves they supervised.
household servants had a somewhat easier life physically at least than did field hands.
on a small plantation the same slaves might do both field work and housework.
but on a house slaves large estate there would generally be a sep arate domestic staff nursemaids housemaids cooks butlers coachmen.
these people lived close to the master and his family eating the leftovers from the family table and in some cases even sleeping in the big house between the blacks and whites of such households affectionate almost familial relationships might sometimes develop.
more often however house servants resented their isolation from their fellow slaves and the lack of privacy that came with living in such close proximity to the masters family.
among other things that proximity meant that their transgressions were more visible than those of field hands and so they received punishments more often than did other slaves.
when emancipation came after the civil war it was often the house servants who were the first to leave the plantations of their former owners.
female household servants were especially vulnerable to sexual abuse by their masters and white overseers who sometimes pressured them into supposedly consensual sexual relationships and sometimes raped them.
in addition to unwanted sexual attention from white men female slaves often received vindictive treatment from white women.
plantation mistresses naturally resented the sexual liaisons between their husbands and female slaves.
punishing their husbands was not usually possible so they often punished the slaves instead with arbitrary beatings increased workloads and various forms of psychological torment.
sexual abuse slavery in the cities the conditions of slavery in the cities differed significantly from those in the countryside.
on relatively isolated plantations slaves had little contact with free blacks and lower class whites and masters maintained direct and effective control a deep and seemingly unbridgeable chasm yawned between slavery and freedom.
in the city however a master often could not supervise his slaves closely and at the same time use them debating the past io the character of slavery kt a ssue n american history has produced a richer literature or a more spirited debate than jai u the nature of american slavery.
the debate began even before the civil war when abolitionists strove to expose slavery to the world as a brutal dehumanizing institution while southern defenders of slavery tried to depict it as a benevolent paternalistic system.
but by the late nineteenth century as historian david blight noted in race and reunion 2002 with white americans eager for sectional conciliation both northern and southern chroniclers of slavery began to accept a romanticized and unthreatening picture of the old south and its peculiar institution.
the first major scholarly examination of slavery was ulrich b phillips s american negro slavery 1918 which portrayed slavery as an essentially benign institution in which kindly masters looked after submissive childlike and generally contented african americans.
phillips s apologia for slavery remained the authoritative work on the subject for nearly thirty years.
challenges to phillips began to emerge in the 1940s as concern about racial injustice increasingly engaged the attention of white americans.
in 1941 melville j herskovits challenged phillips s contention that black americans retained little of their african cultural inheritance in 1943 herbert aptheker published a chronicle of slave revolts as a way of refuting phillips s claim that blacks were submissive and content.
a somewhat different challenge to phillips emerged in the 1950s from historians who emphasized the brutality of the institution.
kenneth stampp s the peculiar institution 1956 and stanley elkinss slavery 1959 described a labor system that did serious physical and psychological damage to its victims.
stampp and especially elkins portrayed slavery as something like a prison in which men and women had no space in which to develop their own social and cultural lives.
in the 1970s new scholarship on slavery focused on slaves striking success in building a culture of their own despite their enslavement.
john blassingame in 1973 argued that the most remarkable aspect of the whole process of enslavement is the extent to which the american born slaves were able to retain their ancestors culture.
herbert gutman in the black family in slavery and freedom 1976 challenged the prevailing belief that slavery had weakened and even destroyed the african american family.
on the contrary he argued the black family survived slavery with impressive strength eugene genovese s roll jordan fto 1974 and other works revealed how african americans manipulated the paternalist assumptions at the heart of slavery to build a large cultural space of their own within the system where they could develop their own family life social traditions and religious patterns.
that same year robert fogel and stanley engerman published their profitably.
even if they slept at night in carefully watched backyard barracks slaves moved about during the day alone performing errands of various kinds.
thus urban slaves gained numerous opportunities to mingle with free blacks and with whites.
in the cities the line between slavery and freedom became increasingly indistinct.
there was a considerable market in the south for common laborers particularly since unlike in the north there were few autonomy of european immigrants to perform menial urban slaves chores.
even the poorest whites tended to prefer working on farms to doing ordinary labor and so masters often hired out slaves for such tasks.
slaves on contract worked in mining and lumbering often far from cities but others worked on the docks and on construction sites drove wagons and performed other unskilled jobs in cities and towns.
slave women and children worked in the regions few textile mills.
particularly skilled workers such as blacksmiths or carpenters were also often hired out.
many white southerners considered slavery to be incom patible with city life and as southern cities grew the number of slaves in them declined relatively if not absolutely.
fearing conspiracies and insurrections many urban slaveowners sold off much of their male property to the countryside.
the remaining black women outnumbered black men.
the same cities also had more white men than women a situation that helped account for the birth of many mulattoes.
even while slavery in the cities was declining the forced segregation of urban blacks both free and slave from white society increased.
segregation was a means of social control intended to make up for the loosening of the discipline of slavery in urban areas.
free african americans there were about 250 000 free african americans in the slaveholding states by the start of the civil war more than half of them in virginia and maryland.
in some cases they were slaves who had somehow earned money with which they managed to buy their own and their families freedom usually by developing a skill they could market independently of their masters.
it was usually urban blacks with their greater freedom of movement and activity who could take that route.
one example was elizabeth keckley a slave woman who bought freedom for herself and her son with proceeds from sewing.
she later became a seamstress personal servant and companion to mary todd lincoln in the white house.
but few masters had any incentive or inclination to give up their slaves so this route was open to relatively few people.
306 the granger collection new york defined by their dual roles as members of the plantation workforce and anchors of the black family.
recent works by walter johnson and ira berlin mark at least a partial return to the damage thesis.
in soul by soul 2000 a study of the new orleans slave market johnson contends that for whites purchasing slaves was a way of fulfilling the middle class fantasy of success and independence but for the slaves themselves the trade was destructive and dehumanizing.
ira berlins many thousands gone 2000 generation of captivity 2003 and the making of african america 2010 similarly emphasize the dehumanizing character of the slave market and argue that slavery was less a social system than a commodification of human beings.
understand analyze and evaluate controversial time on the cross a highly quantitative study that supported some of the claims of gutman and genovese about black achievement but that went much further in portraying slavery as a successful and reasonably humane if ultimately immoral system.
slave workers they argued were better treated and lived in greater comfort than most northern industrial workers of the same era.
other scholarship on slavery has focused on the role of women within it.
elizabeth fox genovese s within the plantation household 1988 examined the lives of both white and black women on the plantation.
rejecting the claims of some feminist historians that black and white women shared a common female identity born of their shared subordination to men she portrayed slave women as 1 why have scholarly studies of slavery interpreted the system so differently.
do the differing interpretations reflect general social attitudes of the period in which the studies were written.
2 why might the conclusions drawn by robert fogel and stanley engerman in time on the cross have provoked vehement criticism.
3 what might be some reasons for the resurgence of focus on the damage thesis of slavery as in the works by walter johnson and ira berlin.
tightened restrictions on free blacks some slaves were sometimes set free by a master who had moral qualms about slavery or by a master s will after his death for example the more than 400 slaves belonging to john randolph of roanoke freed in 1833 from the 1830s on however state laws governing slavery became more rigid.
that was in part a response to the fears nat turners revolt see p 310 created among white southerners free blacks removed from close supervision by whites might generate more violence and rebellion than slaves.
it was also in part because the community of free blacks in southern cities was becoming larger and to whites more threatening a dangerous example to blacks still in slavery.
the rise of abolitionist agitation in the north and the fear that it would inspire slaves to rebel also persuaded southern whites to tighten their system.
the new laws made it more and more difficult and in some cases practically impossible for owners to set free or manumit their slaves all southern states forbade free african americans from entering.
arkansas even forced the freed slaves living there to leave.
a few free blacks generally those on the northern fringes of the slaveholding regions attained wealth and promi nence.
some owned slaves themselves usually relatives whom they had bought in order to ensure their ultimate emancipation.
in a few cities new orleans natchez charleston free black communities managed to flourish relatively unmolested by whites and with some economic stability.
most free blacks however lived in abject poverty under conditions worse than those of african americans in the north.
law or custom closed many occupations to them forbade them to assemble without white supervision and placed numerous other restraints on them.
they were only quasi free but they had all the burdens of freedom the necessity to support themselves to find housing to pay taxes.
yet great as were the hardships of freedom these blacks preferred them to slavery.
the slave trade the transfer of enslaved people from one part of the south to another was one of the most important and terrible consequences of slavery.
sometimes slaves moved to the new cotton slave lands in the company of their original own markets ers wh were mi8ratin8 themselves.
but more often the transfer occurred through the efforts of professional slave traders.
for shorter journeys slaves traveled on foot trudging in coffles of hundreds along dusty highways.
for transfers over longer distances the traders 307 308 chapter 13 the mexican war 1846 1848 shortly after the settlement of the oregon border dispute with britain the united states entered a war with mexico over another contested border.
this map shows the movement of mexican and american troops during the fighting which extended from the area around santa fe south to mexico city and west to the coast of california.
note the american use of its naval forces to facilitate a successful assault on mexico city and other attacks on the coast of california.
note too how unsuccessful the mexican forces were in their battles with the united states.
mexico won only one battle a minor one at san pasqual near san diego in the war.
how did president polk deal with the popular clamor for the united states to annex much of present day mexico.
president polk soon came to share their dream and committed himself to acquiring both new mexico and california for the united states.
at the same time that he dispatched troops to texas he sent secret instructions to the commander of the pacific naval squadron to seize the california ports if mexico declared war.
representatives of the president quietly informed americans in california that the united states would respond sympathetically to a revolt against mexican authority there.
the mexican war having appeared to prepare for war polk turned to diplomacy and dispatched a special minister john slidell to try to buy off the mexicans.
but mexican leaders rejected slidelps offer to purchase the disputed territories.
on january 13 1846 as soon as he heard the news polk ordered taylor s army in texas to move across tne ixueces failure of the slidell had been stationed to the rio grande.
for mission months the mexicans refused to fight.
but finally according to disputed american accounts some mexican troops crossed the rio grande and attacked a unit of american soldiers.
polk now told congress war exists by the act of mexico herself on may 13 1846 congress declared war by votes of 40 to 2 in the senate and 174 to 14 in the house.
the war had many opponents in the united states.
whig critics charged from the beginning and not without justification that polk had deliberately maneuvered the country into the conflict and had staged the border incident that had pre cipitated the declaration.
many other critics argued that the hostilities with mexico were draining resources and attention away from the more important issue of the pacific northwest even when the united states finally reached its agreerneni the impending crisis 349 opposition to with britain on the oregon question the war opponents claimed that polk had settled for less than he should have because he was preoccupied with mexico.
opposition intensified as the war continued and as the public became aware of the casual ties and expense.
to others the war was a moral crime.
ulysses grant then an officer in the mexican war called it one of the most unjust ever waged abraham lincoln criticized the war on the grounds that it gave the president too much power.
allow the president to invade a neighboring country whenever he shall deem it necessary.
he said and you allow him to make war at pleasure pacifists were particularly dismayed.
henry david thoreau was so horrified by the war that he refused to pay taxes which he said financed the conflict and spent time in jail.
american forces did well against the mexicans but victory did not come as quickly as polk had hoped.
the president ordered taylor to cross the rio grande seize parts of northeastern mexico beginning with the city of monterrey and then march on to mexico city itself.
taylor captured monterrey in september 1846 but he let the mexican garrison evacuate without pursuit.
polk now began to fear that taylor lacked the tactical skill for the planned advance against mexico city.
he also feared that if successful taylor would become a powerful political rival as in fact he did.
in the meantime polk ordered other offensives against new mexico and california.
in the summer of 1846 a small army under colonel stephen w kearny captured santa fe bear flag no pposition then kearny pro revolution ceeded to california where he joined a conflict already in progress that was being staged jointly by american settlers a well armed exploring party led by john c fremont and the united states navy the so called bear flag revolution.
kearny brought the disparate american forces together under his command and b xw iwi 9 3 rzl 9 ih ifi one of the most important conflicts of the mexican war.
troops under the command of general zachary taylor defeated the battle of monterrey the battle of monterrey in 18 was mexican army on september 26 was a result of the americans surrounding the mexican soldiers.
it was an mexican forces but not without significant american casualties.
the surre important step in the american victory in the mexican war.
historicus inc 350 chapter 15 i ii three reconstruction bills i i finally established nearly two years after the end of the war a coherent plan for reconstruction.
under the congressional plan tennessee which had ratified the fourteenth amendment was promptly readmitted.
but congress rejected the lincoln johnson governments of the other ten confederate states and instead combined those states into five military districts.
a military commander governed each district and had orders to register qualified voters defined as all adult black males and those white males who had not participated in the rebellion.
once registered voters would elect conventions to prepare new state constitutions which had to include provisions for black suffrage.
once voters ratified the new constitutions they could elect state governments.
congress had to approve a state s constitution and the state legislature had to ratify the fourteenth amendment.
once that happened and once enough states ratified the amendment to make it part of the constitution then the former confederate states could be restored to the union.
by 1868 seven of the ten former confederate states arkansas north carolina south carolina louisiana alabama georgia and florida had fulfilled these conditions including ratification of the fourteenth amendment which now became part of the constitution.
they were readmitted to the union.
conservative whites held up the return of virginia and texas until 1869 and mississippi until 1870 by then congress had added one more fifteenth requirement for readmission ratification of amendment another constitutional amendment the fifteenth which forbade the states and the federal government to deny suffrage to any citizen on account of race color or previous condition of servitude to stop the president from interfering with their plans the congressional radicals passed two remarkable laws of dubious constitutionality in 1867 one the tenure of office act forbade the president to remove civil officials including members of his own cabinet without the consent of the senate.
the principal purpose of the law was to protect the job of secretary of war edwin m stanton who was cooperating with the radicals.
the other law the command of the army act prohibited the president from issuing military orders except through the commanding general of the army general grant who could not be relieved or assigned elsewhere without the consent of the senate.
managedn 7retuurn icnai owtr 0x 0 southeys ws what had to happen for a state to be readnutted to the mon.
who had to happen before a state could experience option.
reconstruction and the new south 407 the congressional radicals also took action to stop the supreme court from interfering with their plans.
in 1866 the court had declared in the case of ex parte milligan that military tribunals were unconstitutional in places where civil courts were functioning a decision that seemed to threaten the system of military government the radicals were planning for the south.
radicals in congress immediately proposed several bills that would require two thirds of the justices to support any decision overruling a law of congress would deny the court jurisdiction in reconstruction cases would reduce its membership to three and would even abolish it.
the justices apparently took notice.
over the next two years the court refused to accept jurisdiction in any cases involving reconstruction and the congressional bills concerning the court never passed.
the impeachment of the president president johnson had long since ceased to be a serious obstacle to the passage of radical legislation but he was still the official charged with administering the reconstruction programs.
as such the radicals believed he remained a serious impediment to their plans.
early in 1867 they began looking for a way to impeach him and remove him from office.
republicans found grounds for impeachment they believed when johnson dismissed secretary of war stanton despite congresss refusal to agree thus deliberately violating t the tenure of office act in hopes of test office act big aw before the courts.
elated radicals in the house quickly impeached the president and sent the case to the senate for trial.
by that time the radicals were determined to impeach president johnson.
who does not know said benjamin butler an opponent of johnson that from the hour johnson began these his usurpations of power he everywhere denounced congress the legality and constitutionality of its action and defied its legitimate power the trial before the senate lasted throughout april and may 1868 the radicals put heavy pressure on all the republican senators but the moderates who were losing kith in the radical program vacillated.
on the first johnson three charges to come to a vote seven acquitted republicans joined the democrats and independents to support acquittal.
the vote was 35 to 19 one short of the constitutionally required two thirds majority.
after that the radicals dropped the impeachment effort.
the south in reconstruction when white southerners spoke bitterly in later years of the effects of reconstruction they referred most frequently to the governments congress helped impose on them governments they claimed were both incompetent and corrupt that saddled the region with enormous debts and that trampled on the rights of citizens.
when black southerners and their defenders condemned reconstruction in contrast they spoke of the failure of the national and state governments to go far enough to guarantee freedmen even the most elemental rights of citizenship a failure that resulted in a harsh new system of economic subordination.
see debating the past pp.
the reconstruction governments in the ten states of the south that were reorganized under the congressional plan approximately one fourth of the white males were at first excluded from voting or holding office.
that produced black majorities among voters in south carolina mississippi and louisiana states where blacks were also a majority of the population and in alabama and florida where they were not.
but the government soon lifted most suffrage restrictions so that nearly all white males could vote.
after that republicans maintained control only with the support of many southern whites.
critics called these southern white republicans scalawags many were former whigs who had never felt comfortable the burdened south this reconstruction era cartoon expresses the south s sense of its oppression at the hands of northern republicans.
president grant whose hat bears abraham lincoln s initials rides in comfort in a giant carpetbag guarded by bayonet wielding soldiers as the south staggers under the burden in chains.
more evidence of destruction and military occupation is visible in the background.
the granger collection new york 408 chapter 15 tuskegee institute 1881 from these modest beginnings booker t washington s tuskegee institute in alabama became the preeminent academy offering technical and industrial training to black men.
it deliberately de emphasized the traditional liberal arts curricula of most colleges.
washington considered such training an unnecessary frill and encouraged his students to work o developing practical skills.
corbis cases.
the court eventually voided the grandfather laws but it validated the literacy test in the 1898 case of williams v mississippi and displayed a general willingness to let the southern states define their own suffrage standards as long as evasions of the fifteenth amendment were not too glaring.
laws restricting the franchise and segregating schools were only part of a network of state statutes known as the jim crow laws that by the first years of the twentieth century had institutionalized an elaborate system of segregation reaching into almost every area of southern life.
blacks and whites could not ride in the same railroad cars sit in the same waiting rooms use the same washrooms eat in the same restaurants or white sit in same t ieaters blacks had no ac control cess t0 many public parks beaches and perpetuated picnic areas they could not be patients in many hospitals.
much of the new legal structure did no more than confirm what had already been widespread social practice in the south since well before the end of reconstruction.
but the jim crow laws also stripped african americans of many of the modest social economic and political gains they had made in the more fluid atmosphere of the late nineteenth century.
the laws served too as a means for whites to retain control of social relations between the races in the newly growing cities and towns of the south where traditional patterns of deference and subjugation were more difficult to preserve than in the countryside.
what had been maintained by custom in the rural south was to be maintained by law in the urbanizing south.
more than legal efforts were involved in this process.
the 1890s witnessed a dramatic increase in white violence against blacks which along with the jim crow laws served to inhibit black agitation for equal rights.
the worst such violence lynching of blacks by white mobs either because the victims were accused of crimes or because they had seemed somehow to violate their expected station reached appalling levels.
in the nation as a whole in the 1890s there was an average of 187 lynchings each year more than 80 percent of them in the south.
the vast lynchings majority of victims were black.
one african american woman lucy mcmillan said john hunter s wife came to my house on saturday morning and reconstruction and the new south 425 a lynch mob 1893 a large almost festive crowd gathers to watch the lynching of a black man accused of the murder of a three year o d white girl.
lynch ngs remained frequent n the south un il as late as the 1930s but they reached their peak in the 1890s and the firs years of the twentieth century.
lynchings such as this one pubhshed well n advance and attracting whole families who traveled great distances to see them were infrequent.
most lynchings were the work of smaller groups operating with less visibility.
the library of congress told they were going to whip me.
i was afraid of them.
there was so much talk of ku klux drowning people and killing them.
the most celebrated lynchings occurred in cities and towns where large well organized mobs occasionally with the tacit cooperation of local authorities seized black prisoners from the jails and hanged them in great public rituals.
such public lynch tags were often planned well in advance and elaborately orga nized.
they attracted large audiences from surrounding regions.
entire families traveled many miles to witness the spectacles.
but such great public lynchings were relatively rare.
muc more frequent and more dangerous to african americans because less visible or predictable were lynchings performe by small vigilante mobs often composed of friends or relative of the victim or supposed victim of a crime.
those invo ve lynchings often saw their actions as a legitimate enforcement and indeed some victims of lynchings a in ac committed crimes.
but lynchings were also a means y w ic whites controlled the black population through terror an intimidation.
thus some lynch mobs killed african arne whose only crime had been presumptuousness chose as victims outsiders in the community w ose p threatened to disturb the normal pattern of race relations.
black men who had made any sexual advances toward white women or who white men thought had done so were particularly vulnerable to lynchings the fear of black sexuality and the unspoken fear among many men that white women might be attracted to that sexuality was always an important part of the belief system that supported segregation.
whatever the reasons or circumstances the victims of lynch mobs were denied the protection of the laws and the opportunity to prove their innocence.
the rise of lynchings shocked the conscience of many white americans in a way that other forms of racial injustice did not.
almost from the start there was a substantial anti lynching movement.
in 1892 ida b wells a committed black journalist launched what became an international anti lynching movement with a series of impassioned articles after the lynching of three of her friends in memphis tennessee her home.
the movement gradually gathered strength in the first years of the twentieth century attracting substantial support from whites particularly white women in both the north and the south.
its goal was a federal anti lynching law which would allow the national government to do what how we remember the past can tell us a great deal about remembering black history our vajues and priorities as a nation.
when these memories take official form as in a public monument erected in a culturally significant setting they offer a view into how americans understood history in a particular time.
what is revealed however is rarely a popular consensus about what individuals or events were worthy of being celebrated.
rather the final construction and placement of any public monument typically reflects a series of tough debates between people with different views of the meaning of the past.
the two monuments pictured on the following page are among the most famous in american history in general and african american history in particular.
the first is a bronze relief by augustus saint gaudens commemorating the fifty fourth massachusetts volunteer infantry regiment the first military unit composed of black soldiers raised in the north during the civil war.
at full fighting strength with over 1000 african american men led by an all white officer corps the 54th became a national symbol of african american freedom.
leading the assault on july 18 1863 against the confederate stronghold fort wagner on morris island south carolina it sustained heavy losses including that of its commanding officer colonel robert shaw.
despite failing to take the fort the black troops fought passionately and with discipline thereby silencing critics who doubted the very ability of african americans to stand strong in battle.
saint gaudens unveiled his memorial in may 1897 eleven feet high and 14 feet long it depicts the 54th marching through boston in the first leg of its journey to the battle front.
leading the unit is colonel shaw on horseback.
it still sits in its original locale at the edge of the boston common in the shadow of the massachusetts state house.
the second monument is a white granite statue by lie yixin a sculptor from the people s republic of china honoring the life of civil rights pioneer martin luther king jr king a baptist minister born in atlanta georgia who led the fight to end segregation in the south in the 1950s and 1960s.
he spearheaded the drive to pass the civil rights act of 1964 and the voting rights act of 1965 he was assassinated in 1968 the king statue is actually part of a larger four acre park dedicated to his life that sits in the southwest corner of the national mall in washington d c the 30 foot high statue has a clear view of the lincoln memorial and the jefferson memorial and is accompanied by a 450 foot long inscription wall that bears quotes from kings most famous speeches.
the king memorial is the first dedicated to a black american on the national mall.
memorializing black history in 1897 memorial to robert gould shaw and the fifty fourth regiment.
egg images alamy understand analyze and evaluate 1 what does the monument tell us about the public role of black history in the late 19th century.
2 how do you interpret the relationship between the black foot soldiers and the white officer on the horse.
3 what does the memorial suggest about liberty and progress for african americans.
memorializing black history in 2011 the martin luther king jr national memorial.
evan golub demotix corbis make connections 1 how would you describe the memory of black history in this monument.
2 what is the relationship between king and the surrounding environment.
3 what connections can you draw between how the public remembered black history in the late nineteenth century and the early twenty first century.
427 428 chapter 16 hispanic societies survived in the southwest in part because they were so far from the centers of english speaking society that anglo american migrants and the railroads that carried them were slow to get there.
but resistance mexican americans in the region also fought at times to preserve control of their societies.
in the late 1880s for example mexican peasants in an area of what is now nevada successfully fended off the en croachment of english speaking cattle ranchers.
but by then such successes were already the exception.
the anglo american presence in the southwest grew rapidly once the railroads established lines into the region in the 1880s and early 1890s.
with the railroads came extensive new ranching farming and mining.
the expansion of economic activity in the region attracted a new wave of mexican immigrants perhaps as many as 100 000 by 1900 who moved across the border which was unregulated until world war i in search of work.
but the new immigrants unlike the earlier hispanic residents of the southwest were coming to a society in which they were from the beginning subordinate to anglo americans.
the english speaking proprietors of the new enterprises restricted most mexicans to the lowest paying and least stable jobs.
hispanic california and texas in california spanish settlement began in the eighteenth century with a string of christian missions along the pacific coast.
the missionaries and the soldiers who accompanied them gathered most of the coastal indians into their communities some forcibly and some by persuasion.
the indians were targets of the evangelizing efforts of the missionaries who baptized more than 50 000 of them.
but they were also a labor force for the flourishing and largely self sufficient economies the missionaries created the spanish forced most of these laborers into a state of servitude little different from slavery.
the missions had enormous herds of cattle horses sheep and goats most of them tended by indian workers they had brickmakers blacksmiths weavers and farmers most of them indians as well.
few of the profits of the mission economy flowed to the workers.
in the 1830s after the new mexican government had begun reducing the power of the church the mission society largely collapsed despite strenuous resistance from the missionaries themselves.
in its place emerged a secular of mission mexican aristocracy which controlled a society chain of large estates some of them former missions in the fertile lands west of the sierra nevada.
for them the arrival of anglo americans before and after the civil war was disastrous.
so vast were the numbers of english speaking immigrants that the californios as the hispanic residents of the state were known had little power to resist the onslaught.
in the central and northern parts of the state where the anglo population growth was greatest the californios experienced a series of defeats.
english speaking prospectors organized to exclude them sometimes violently from the mines during the gold rush.
many californios also lost ir lands either through corrupt business deals or through outright seizure sometimes with the help of the courts and often through simple occupation by squatters.
years of litigation by the displaced hispanics had very little effect on the changing distribution of landownership.
in the southern areas of california where there were at first fewer migrants than in other parts of the state some mexican landowners managed to hang on for a time.
the booming anglo communities in the north of the state created a large market for the cattle that southern rancheros were raising.
but a combination of reckless expansion growing indebtedness and a severe drought in the 1860s devastated the mexican ranching culture.
by the 1880s the hispanic aristocracy in california had largely ceased to exist.
increasingly mexicans and mexican americans became part of the lower end of the states working class clustered in barrios in los angeles or elsewhere or becoming migrant farmworkers.
even small landowners who managed to hang on to their farms found themselves unable to raise livestock as the once communal grazing lands fell under the control of powerful anglo ranchers.
the absence of herding destroyed many family economies and by forcing farmers into migrant work displaced much of the peasantry.
a similar pattern of dispossession occurred in texas where many mexican landowners lost their land after the territory joined the united states see pp.
this occurred as a result of fraud coercion and the inability of even the most substantial mexican ranchers to compete with the enormous emerging anglo american ranching kingdoms.
in 1859 mexican resentments erupted in an armed challenge to american power a raid on a jail in brownsville led by the rancher juan cortina who freed all the mexican prisoners in declining si e but such resistance had little long status of term effect.
cortina continued to harass hispanics anglo communities in texas until 1875 but the mexican government finally captured and imprisoned him.
as in california mexicans in southern texas who constituted nearly three quarters of the population there became an increasingly impoverished working class relegated largely to unskilled farm or industrial labor.
on the whole the great anglo american migration was less catastrophic for the hispanic population of the west than it was for the indian tribes.
indeed for some hispanics it created new opportunities for wealth and station.
for the most part however the late nineteenth century saw the destruction of mexican americans authority in a region they had long considered their own and it saw the movement of large numbers of hispanics both longtime residents of the west and more recent immigrants into an impoverished working class serving the expanding capitalist economy of the united states.
the chinese migration at the same time that ambitious or impoverished europeans were crossing the atlantic in search of opportunities in the new world many chinese crossed the pacific in hopes of better lives than they could expect in their own poverty stricken land.
not all came to the united states.
many chinese moved the conquest of the far west 435 to hawaii australia south and central america south africa and even the caribbean some as coolies indentured servants whose condition was close to slavery.
a few chinese had come to california even before the gold rush see pp.
351 352 but after 1848 the flow increased dramatically.
by 1880 more than 200 000 chinese had settled in the united states mostly in california where they constituted nearly a tenth of the population.
almost all came as free laborers.
for a time white americans welcomed the chinese as a racism conscientious hardworking people.
in 1852 the governor of california called them one of the most worthy classes of our newly adopted citizens and called for more chinese immigration to swell the territory s inadequate labor force.
very quickly however white opinion turned hostile in part because the chinese were so industrious and successful that some white americans began considering them rivals even threats.
the experience of chinese immigrants in the west became therefore a struggle to advance economically in the face of racism and discrimination.
in the early 1850s large numbers of chinese immigrants worked in the gold mines and for a time some of them enjoyed considerable success.
but opportunities for chinese to prosper in the mines were fleeting.
in 1852 the california legislature began trying to exclude the chinese from gold mining by enacting a foreign miners tax which also helped exclude mexicans.
a series of other laws in the 1850s were designed to discourage chinese emigration to the territory.
gradually the effect of the discriminatory laws the hostility of white miners and the declining profitability of the surface mines drove most chinese out of prospecting.
those who remained in the mountains became primarily hired workers in the mines built by corporations with financing from the east.
these newer mines which extended much deeper into the mountains than the transcontinental railroad this complicated trestle ra lroad.
it gives some indication of the enormous engineering challenges t e rai roa construction by the union pacific was one of many large spans necessary for the completion of the transcontinental un er cons overcome.
universal history archive uig the bridgeman art library 436 chapter 17 railroads 1870 1890 this map illustrates the rapid expansion of railroads in the late nineteenth century.
in 1870 there was already a dense network of rail lines in the northeast and midwest illustrated here by the green lines.
the red lines show the further expansion of rail coverage between 1870 and 1890 much of it in the south and the areas west of the mississippi river.
why were railroads so essential to the nations economic growth in these years.
created than for its contribution to the growth of a new institution the modern corporation.
the corporation there had been various forms of corporations in america since colonial times but the modern corporation emerged as a major force only after the civil war when railroad magnates and other industrialists realized that no single person or group of limited partners no matter how wealthy could finance their great ventures.
under the laws of incorporation passed in many states in the 1830s and 1840s business organizations could raise money by limited selling stock to members of the public after liability the civil war one industry after another began doing so.
at the same time affluent americans began to consider the purchase of stock a good investment even if they were not involved in the business whose stock they were purchasing.
what made the practice appealing was that investors had only limited liability that is they risked only the amount of their investments they were not liable for any debts the corporation might accumulate beyond that.
the ability to sell stock to a broad public made it possible for entrepreneurs to gather vast sums of capital and undertake great projects.
the pennsylvania railroad and others were among the first to adopt the new corporate form of organization.
but andrew quickly spread beyond the railroad in carnegie dustry.
in steel the central figure was andrew carnegie a scottish immigrant who had worked his way up from modest beginnings and in 1873 opened his own steelworks in pittsburgh.
soon he dominated the industry.
his methods were much like those of other industrial titans.
he cut costs and prices by striking deals with the railroads and then bought out rivals who could not compete with him.
with his associate henry clay frick he bought up coal mines and leased part of the mesabi iron ore range in minnesota operated a fleet of ore ships on the great lakes and acquired railroads.
ultimately carnegie controlled the processing of his steel from mine to market.
he financed his undertakings not only out of his own profits but out of the sale of stock as well.
then in 1901 he sold out for 450 million to the banker j pierpont morgan who merged the carnegie interests with others to create the giant united states steel corporation a 1 4 billion enterprise that controlled almost two thirds of the nations steel production.
there were similar developments in other industries.
gustavus swift developed a relatively small chicago meatpacking industrial supremacy 465 andrew carnegie carnegie was one of a relatively small number of great industrialists of the late nineteenth century who genuinely rose from rags to riches born in scotland he came to the united states in 1848 at the age of thirteen and soon found work as a messenger in a pittsburgh telegraph office.
his skill in learning to transcribe telegraphic messages he became one of the first telegraphers in the country able to take messages by sound brought him to the attention of a pennsylvania railroad official and before he was twenty he had begun his ascent to the highest ranks of industry.
after the civil war he shifted his attention to the growing iron industry in 1873 he invested all his assets in the development of the first american steel mills.
two decades later carnegie was one of the wealthiest men in the world.
in 1901 he abruptly resigned from his businesses and spent the remaining years of his life as a philanthropist.
by the time of his death in 1919 he had given away more than 350 million which by some measures would be worth well over a hundred billion dollars in 2014.
the library of congress lc dig ggbain 13249 company into a great national corporation in part because of profits he earned selling to the military in the civil war.
isaac singer patented a sewing machine in 1851 and created i m singer and company one of the first modern manufacturing corporations.
many of the corporate organizations developed a new approach to management.
large national business enterprises deeded more systematic administrative structures than the limited local ventures of the past.
as a result corporate leaders introduced a set of managerial techniques the genesis of modern business administration that relied on the division of responsibilities a carefully designed hierarchy of control modern cost accounting procedures and above all a new breed of new business executive the middle manager managerial who formed a layer of command between techniques workers and owners.
beginning in the railroad corporations these new management techniques moved quickly into virtually every area of large scale industry.
efficient administrative capabilities helped make possible another major feature of the modern corpora tion consolidation.
consolidating corporate america businessmen created large consolidated organizations primarily through two methods.
one was horizontal integration the iohn d rockefeller rockefeller s standard oil company became perhaps the argest and most powerful monopoly in america in the late nineteenth century and rockefeller lecame one of the nations wealthiest and most controversial men.
some historians consider rockefeller to have been the richest person in history with a personal fortune at the time of lis death of up to over a half trillion dollars adjusted for the late 2000s.
hulton archive setty images horizontal and vertical integration 466 chapter 19 own campaigns the tradition by which they stood for office rather than running for it bryan helped establish the modern form of presidential politics.
but he also antagonized many voters who considered his campaign undignified.
on election day mckinley polled 271 electoral votes to bryans 176 and received 51 1 percent of the popular vote to bryans 47 7 bryan carried the areas of the south and west where miners or struggling staple farmers predominated.
the democratic program like that of the populists had been too narrow to win a national election.
for the populists and their allies the election results were a disaster.
they had gambled everything on their fusion with the end of the democratic party and lost.
within months peoples party of the election the peoples party began to dissolve.
never again would american farmers unite so militantly to demand economic reform.
bryan whistle stopping by long established tradition candidates for the presidency did not actively campaign after receiving their partys nomination.
nineteenth century americans considered public stumping to be undignified and inappropriate for a future president.
but in 1896 william jennings bryan a young candidate little known outside his own region a man without broad support even among the leaders of his own party decided that he had no choice but to go directly to the public for support.
he traveled widely and incessantly in the months before the election appearing before hundreds of crowds and hundreds of thousands of people.
the library of congress lc uszc2 6259 mckinley ano recovery the administration of william mckinley which began in the aftermath of turmoil saw a return to relative calm.
one reason was the exhaustion of dissent.
by 1897 when mckinley took office the labor unrest that had so frightened many middle class americans and so excited working class people had subsided.
with the simultaneous decline of agrarian protest the greatest destabilizing forces in the nations politics were temporarily at least in retreat.
another reason was the shrewd character of the mckinley administration itself committed as it was to reassuring stability.
most important however was the gradual easing of the economic crisis a development that undercut many of those who were agitating for change.
mckinley and his allies committed themselves fully to only one issue one on which they knew virtually all republicans agreed the need for higher tariff rates.
within weeks of his inauguration the administration won approval of the dingley tariff raising duties to the highest point in american history.
the administration dealt more gingerly with the explosive silver question an issue that mckinley himself had never considered very important in any case.
mckinley sent a commission to europe to explore the possibility of a silver agreement with great britain and france.
as he and everyone else anticipated the effort produced no agreement.
the republicans then enacted the currency currency act or go standard act of 1900 which confirmed the nations commitment to the gold standard by assigning a specific gold value to the dollar and requiring all currency issued by the united states to hew to that value.
4 candidate party electoral vote popular vote william mckinley republican 271 7 104 779 51 1 6 502 925 47 7 william jennings bryan democratic 176 j ior me r a comfortahl h.
d rentiation they reveal.
william mckinley won the el x of the no h tnr t mar9in but his victry was bd based he carri virtually nothino i r3 ndustrlal mldwes.
along with california and oregon bi y n0 h n9 el b n carried the entire south and almost all of the agrarian v what campaign issues in 1896 help account for the regional character of thi from crisis to empire 531 and so the battle of the standards ended in victory for the forces of conservatism.
economic developments at the time seemed to vindicate the republicans.
prosperity began to return in 1898 foreign crop failures sent farm prices surging upward and american business entered another cycle of expansion.
prosperity and the gold standard it seemed were closely allied.
but while the free silver movement had failed it had raised an important question for the american economy.
in the quarter century before 1900 the countries of the western world had experienced a spectacular growth in productive facilities and population.
yet the supply of money had not kept pace with economic progress because the supply was tied to gold and the amount of gold had remained practically constant.
had it not been for a dramatic increase in the gold supply in the late 1890s a result of new techniques for extracting gold from low content ores and the discovery of huge new gold deposits in alaska south africa and australia populist predictions of financial disaster might in fact have proved correct.
in 1898 two and a half times as much gold was produced as in 1890 and the currency supply was soon inflated far beyond anything bryan and the free silver forces had anticipated.
by then however bryan like many other americans was becoming engaged with another major issue a growing united states presence in world affairs and the possibility of america becoming an imperialist nation.
stirrings of imperialism for over two decades after the civil war the united states expanded hardly at all.
by the 1890s however some americans were ready indeed eager to resume the course of manifest destiny that had inspired their ancestors to wrest an empire from mexico in the expansionist 1840s.
nn alaska u s so.
i t a greenland den.
a s i imperialism at high tide 1900 the united states became a formal imperial power in 1898 when it acquired colonies in the aftermath of the spanish american war.
but the u s was a decided latecomer to imperialism.
during the nineteenth century european nations dramatically expanded the reach of their empires moving in particular into africa and asia.
although the british remained the world s largest imperial power by a significant margin vast areas of the globe came under the control of other european colonizers as this map shows.
how did the united states and the european imperial nations justify their acquisition of empire.
pacicic ocean belgian british danish dutch french german italian ottoman v a a canada united states atlantic ocean a bahamas w v br.
lyiexloo jj maicay t guadeloupe fr.
british honduras martinique fr.
barbados br.
r trinidad br.
venezuela british guiana republic of french guiana colombia i f z i dutch suriname ecuador peru brazil chiif e argentina m portuguese russian spanish united states a i a j i.
1 532 chapter 19 determined to expand his power.
british friends had persuaded him that the war in cuba gave the united states a rare opportunity to expand the american empire.
roosevelt responded by sending the navys pacific fleet to the philippines with orders to attack as soon as american declared war.
on may 1 1898 commodore george dewey led the fleet into manila harbor quickly destroyed the aging spanish fleet and forced the spanish government to surrender with hardly a shot fired.
he became the first american hero of the war.
in the rejoicing over deweys victory few americans paused to note that the character of the war was changing.
what had begun as a war to free cuba was becoming a war to strip spain of its colonies.
the united states was now confronted with the question of what to do with the spanish possessions it was suddenly acquiring.
the battle for cuba the war in cuba continued after the capture of the philippines.
at first the american commanders planned a long period of training before actually sending troops into combat.
but when a spanish fleet under admiral pascual cervera slipped past the american navy into santiago harbor on the southern coast of cuba plans changed quickly.
the american atlantic fleet quickly bottled cervera up in the harbor.
and the u s armys commanding general nelson a miles hastily altered his strategy and left tampa in june with a force of 17 000 to attack santiago.
both the departure from florida and the landing in cuba were scenes of fantastic incompetence.
it took five days for this relatively small army to go ashore even with the enemy offering no opposition.
general william r shafter the american commander moved toward santiago which he planned to the rough surround and capture.
on the way riders he met and defeated spanish forces at las guasimos and a week later in two simultaneous battles el caney and san juan hill.
at the center of the fighting and on the front pages of the newspapers during many of these engagements was a cavalry unit known as the rough riders.
nominally commanded by general leonard wood its real leader was colonel theodore roosevelt who had resigned from the navy department to get into the war and who had struggled to ensure that his regiment made it to the front before the fighting ended.
his passion to join the war undoubtedly reflected the decision of his beloved father theodore roosevelt sr not to fight in the civil war a source of private shame within his family that his son sought to erase.
roosevelt rapidly emerged as a hero of the conflict.
his fame rested in large part on his role in leading a bold if perhaps tenn georgia spanish forces u s forces u s blockade u s victories atlantic ocean sarfttatgf schle yb1o.
sferdetail waph san juan jamaica br.
c a b b the spanish american war in cuba 1898 the military conflict between the united states and spain in cuba was a brief affair.
the cuban rebels and an american naval blockade had already brought the spanish to the brink of defeat.
the arrival of american troops was simply the final blow.
in the space of about a week u s troops won four decisive battles in the area around santiago in southeast cuba one of them the battle of kettle hill the scene of theodore roosevelt s famous charge up the adjacent san juan hill.
this map shows the extent of the american naval blockade the path of american troops from florida to cuba and the location of the actual fighting.
what were the implications of the war in cuba for puerto rico.
reckless charge up kettle hill a charge that was a minor port of the larger battle for the adjacent san juan hill directly into the face of spanish guns.
roosevelt himself emerged unscathed but nearly a hundred of his soldiers were killed or wounded.
he remembered the battle as the great day of my life from crisis to empire 543 african american cavalry substantial numbers of african americans fought in the u s army during the spanish american war.
although confined to all black units they engaged in combat alongside white units and fought bravely and effectively.
this photograph shows a troop of african american cavalry in formation in cuba.
corbis although shafter was now in position to assault santiago his army was so weakened by sickness that he feared he might have to abandon his position particularly once the commander of the american naval force blockading santiago refused to enter the harbor because of mines.
but unknown to the americans the spanish government had by now decided that santiago was lost and had ordered cervera to evacuate.
on july 3 cervera tried to escape from the harbor.
the waiting american squadron destroyed his entire fleet.
on july 16 the commander of spanish ground forces in santiago surrendered.
at about the same time an american army landed in puerto rico and occupied it against virtually no opposition.
on august 12 an armistice ended the war.
under the terms of the armistice spain recognized the independence of cuba.
it ceded puerto rico now occupied by american troops and the pacific island of guam to the united states.
and it accepted continued american occupation of manila pending the final disposition of the philippines.
spanish settlements since the founding of san juan in 1521 the native people of the island the arawaks had mostly disappeared as a result of infectious diseases spanish brutality and poverty.
puerto rican society developed therefore with a spanish ruling class and a large african workforce for the coffee and sugar plantations that came to dominate its economy.
as puerto rican society became increasingly distinctive resistance to spanish rule began to emerge just as it had in cuba.
uprisings occurred intermittently beginning in the 1820s the most important of them the so called lares rebellion was like the others effectively crushed by the spanish in 1868 but the growing resistance did prompt some reforms the abolition of slavery in 1873 representation in the spanish parliament and other changes.
demands for independence continued to grow and in 1898 in response to political pressure organized by the popular politician luis munoz rivera spain granted the island a degree of independence.
but before the changes had any chance to take effect control of puerto rico shifted to the united states.
american military forces occupied the island during the war.
they remained in control until 1900 when the foraker act ended military rule and established a formal colonial government an american governor and a two chamber legislature the members of the upper chamber appointed by the united states the members of the lower elected by the puerto rican people.
the united states could amend or veto any legislation the puerto ricans passed.
agitation for independence continued and in 1917 under pressure to clarify the relationship between puerto rico and america congress passed the jones act which declared puerto rico to be united states territory and made all puerto ricans american citizens.
the puerto rican sugar industry flourished as it took advantage of the american market that was now open to it sugar without tariffs.
as in hawaii americans economy began establishing large sugar plantations on the island and hired natives to work them many of the planters did not even live in puerto rico.
the growing emphasis on sugar as a cash crop and the transformation of many puerto rican farmers into paid laborers led to a reduction in the growing of food for the island.
puerto ricans became increasingly dependent on imported food and hence increasingly a part of the international commercial economy.
when international sugar prices were high puerto rico did well.
when they dropped the islands economy sagged pushing the many plantation workers already poor into destitution.
unhappy with the instability the poverty among natives and the american threat to hispanic culture many puerto ricans continued to agitate for independence.
others however began to envision closer rela tions with the united states even statehood.
the debate over the philippines although the annexation of puerto rico produced relatively little controversy the annexation of the philippines created a puerto rico and the united states ahe annexation of puerto rico produced relatively little con annexation troversy in the united states.
the island of puerto f puert0 r c had been a part of the rico spanish empire since ponce de leon ar rived there in 1508 and it had contained 544 chapter 21 the paris peace conference wilson arrived in europe to a welcome such as few men in history have experienced.
to the war weary people of the continent he was nothing less than a savior the man who would create a new and better world.
when he entered paris on december 13 1918 he was greeted some observers claimed by the largest crowd in the history of france.
the negotiations themselves however proved less satisfying.
the principal figures in the negotiations were the leaders of the victorious allied nations david lloyd george representing great britain georges clemenceau representing france vittorio orlando the prime minister of italy and wilson who hoped to dominate them all.
from the beginning the atmo sphere of idealism wilson had sought to create was competing with a spirit of national aggrandizement.
there was moreover a strong sense of unease about the unstable situation in eastern europe and the threat of communism.
russia whose new bolshevik government was still fighting white counterrevolutionaries was unrepresented in paris but the radical threat it seemed to pose to western governments was never far from the minds of any of the delegates least of all wilson himself.
indeed not long before he came to paris wilson ordered the landing of american troops in the soviet union.
they were there he claimed to help a group of 60 000 czech soldiers trapped in russia to escape.
but the americans soon became involved at least indirectly in assisting the white russians the anti bolsheviks in their fight against the new regime.
some american troops remained in russia as late as april 1920 lenins wilson s retreat regime survived these challenges.
wilson refused to recognize the new government.
diplomatic relations between the united states and the soviet union were not restored until 1933 in the tense and often vindictive atmosphere of the negotiations in paris wilson was unable to win approval of many of the broad principles he had espoused freedom of the seas which the british refused even to discuss free trade open covenants openly arrived at the paris negotiations themselves were often conducted in secret.
despite his support for impartial mediation of colonial claims he was forced to accept a transfer of german colonies in the pacific to japan the british had promised them in exchange for japanese assistance in the war.
wilsons pledge of national self determination for all peoples suffered numerous assaults.
economic and strategic demands were constantly coming into conflict with the principle of cultural nationalism.
the treaty departed most conspicuously from wilsons ideals on the question of reparations.
as the conference began the president opposed demanding compensation from the defeated central powers.
the other allied reparations leaders however were insistent and slowly wilson gave way and accepted the principle of reparations the specific sum to be set later by a commission.
that figure established in 1921 was 56 billion supposedly to pay for damages to civilians and for military pensions.
continued negotiations over the next decade scaled the sum back considerably.
in the end germany paid only 9 billion which was still more than its crippled economy could afford.
the reparations combined with other territorial and economic penalties the big four in paris surface cordiality during the paris peace conference disguised serious tensions among the so called big four the leaders of the victorious nations in world war i as the conference progressed the european leaders developed increasing resentment of woodrow wilson s high and some of them thought sanctimonious moral posture in the negotiations.
shown here are from left to right david lloyd george of great britain vittorio orlando of italy georges clemenceau of france and wilson.
the library of congress lc dig ggbain 29038 america and the great war 605 constituted an effort to keep germany weak for the indefinite future.
never again the allied leaders believed should the germans be allowed to become powerful enough to threaten the peace of europe.
wilson did manage to win some important victories in paris in setting boundaries and dealing with former colonies.
he secured approval of a plan to place many former colonies and imperial possessions among them palestine in trusteeship under the league of nations the so called mandate system.
he blocked a french proposal to break up western germany into a group of smaller states.
he helped design the creation of two new nations yugoslavia and czechoslovakia which were welded together out of among other territories pieces of the former austro hungarian empire.
each nation contained an uneasy collection of ethnic groups that had frequently battled one another in the past.
but wilsons most visible triumph and the one most important to him was the creation of a permanent international organization to oversee world affairs and prevent future wars.
league of on january 25 1919 the allies voted to nations accept the covenant of the league of nations and with that wilson believed the peace treaty was transformed from a disappointment into a success.
whatever mistakes and inequities had emerged from the peace conference he was convinced could be cor rected later by the league.
the covenant provided for an assembly of nations that would meet regularly to debate means of resolving disputes and protecting the peace.
authority to implement league decisions would rest with a nine member executive council the united states would be one of five permanent members of the council along with britain france italy and japan.
the covenant left many questions unanswered most notably how the league would enforce its decisions.
wilson however was confident that once established the new organization would find suitable answers.
the ratification battle wilson was well aware of the political obstacles awaiting him at home.
many americans accustomed to their nations isolation from europe questioned the wisdom of this major new commitment to internationalism.
others had serious reservations about the specific features of the treaty and the covenant.
after a brief trip to washington in february 1919 during which he listened to harsh objections to the treaty from members of the senate and others he returned to europe and insisted on several modifications in the covenant to satisfy his critics.
the revisions ensured that the united states would not be obliged to accept a league mandate to oversee a territory and that the league would not challenge the monroe doctrine but the changes were not enough to mollify his opponents and wilson refused to go further.
wilson presented the treaty of versailles which took its name from the palace outside paris where the final negotiating sessions had taken place to the senate on july 10 1919 asking dare we reject it and break the heart of the world.
in the wilsons weeks that followed he refused to consider intransigence even the most innocuous compromise.
his deteriorating physical condition he was suffering from hardening of the arteries and had apparently experienced something like a mild stroke undiagnosed in paris may have contributed to his intransigence.
the senate in the meantime was raising many objections.
some senators the fourteen so called irreconcilables many of them western isolationists opposed the agreement on principle.
but other opponents with less fervent convictions were principally concerned with constructing a winning issue for the republicans in 1920 and with weakening a president whom some members of the senate had come to despise.
most notable of these was senator henry cabot lodge of massachusetts the henry cabot powerful chairman of the foreign relations lodge committee.
a man of stunning arrogance and a close friend of theodore roosevelt who had died early in 1919 spouting hatred of wilson to the end lodge loathed the president with genuine passion.
i never thought i could hate a man as i hate wilson he once admitted.
he used every possible tactic to obstruct delay and amend the treaty.
wilson for his part despised lodge as much as lodge despised him.
public sentiment clearly favored ratification so at first lodge could do little more than play for time.
when the document reached his committee he spent two weeks slowly reading aloud each word of its 300 pages then he held six weeks of public hearings to air the complaints of every disgruntled minority irish americans for example angry that the settlement made no provision for an independent ireland.
gradually lodges general opposition to the treaty crystallized into a series of reservations amendments to the league covenant limiting american obligations to the organization.
at this point wilson might still have won approval if he had agreed to some relatively minor changes in the language of the treaty.
but the president refused to yield.
when he realized the senate would not budge he decided to appeal to the public.
wilson s ordeal what followed was a political disaster and a personal tragedy.
wilson embarked on a grueling cross country speaking tour to arouse public support for the treaty.
in a little more than three weeks he traveled over 8 000 miles by train speaking as often as four times a day resting hardly at all.
finally he reached the end of his strength.
after speaking at pueblo colorado on september 25 he collapsed with severe headaches.
canceling the rest of his itinerary he rushed back to washington d c where a few days later he suffered a major stroke.
for two weeks he was close to death for six weeks more he was so seriously ill that he could conduct virtually no public business.
his wife and his doctor formed an almost impenetrable barrier around him shielding him from any official pressures that might impede his recovery preventing the public from receiving any accurate information about the gravity of his condition.
606 chapter 21 league membership rejected wilson ultimately recovered enough to resume a limited official schedule but he was essentially an invalid for the remaining eighteen months of his presidency.
his left side was partially paralyzed more important like many stroke victims he had only partial control of his mental and emotional state.
his condition only intensified what had already been his strong tendency to view public issues in moral terms and to resist any attempts at compromise.
when the senate foreign relations committee finally sent the treaty to the full senate for ratification recommending nearly fifty amendments and reservations wilson refused to consider any of them.
when the full senate voted in november to accept fourteen of the reservations wilson gave stern directions to his democratic allies they must vote only for a treaty with no changes whatsoever any other version must be defeated.
on november 19 1919 forty two democrats following the presidents instructions joined with the thirteen republican irreconcilables to reject the amended treaty.
when the senate voted on the original version without any reservations thirty eight senators all but one democrats voted to approve it fifty five senators some democrats among them voted no.
there were sporadic efforts to revive the treaty over the next few months.
but wilsons opposition to anything but the precise settlement he had negotiated in paris remained too formidable an obstacle.
he was moreover becoming convinced that the 1920 national election would serve as a solemn referendum on the league.
by now however public interest in the peace process had begun to fade partly as a reaction against the tragic bitterness of the ratification fight but more in response to a series of other crises.
a society in turmoil even during the paris peace conference many americans were less concerned about international matters than about turbulent wt events at home.
the american economy ex new social environment perienced a severe postwar recession.
and much of middle class america responded to demands for change with a fearful conservative hostility.
the aftermath of war brought not the age of liberal reform that progressives had predicted but a period of repression and reaction.
industry and labor citizens of washington d c on the day after the armistice found it impossible to place long distance telephone calls the lines were jammed with officials of the war agencies canceling government contracts.
the fighting had ended sooner than anyone had anticipated and without warning without planning the nation was launched into the difficult task of economic reconversion.
at first the wartime boom continued.
but the postwar prosperity rested largely on the lingering effects of the war government deficit spending continued for some months after the armistice and on sudden temporary demands a union membership 1900 1920 this chart illustrates the steady increase in union membership in the first part of the twentieth century a membership dominated by unions associated with the afl.
note the particularly sharp increase between 1915 and 1920 the years of world war i.
w did the war years see such an expansion of union labor.
booming market for scarce consumer goods at home and a strong market for american products in the war ravaged nations of europe.
this brief postwar boom was accompanied however by raging inflation a result in part of the rapid abandonment of wartime price controls.
through most of 1919 and 1920 prices rose at an average of more than 15 percent a year.
finally late in 1920 the economic bubble burst as many of the temporary forces that had created it disappeared and as inflation began killing the market for consumer goods.
between postwar 1920 and 1921 the gross national product recession gnp declined nearly 10 percent 100 000 businesses went bankrupt 453 000 farmers lost their land nearly 5 million americans lost their jobs.
in this unpromising economic environment leaders of organized labor set out to consolidate the advances they had made in the war which now seemed in danger of being lost.
the raging inflation of 1919 wiped out the modest wage gains workers had achieved during the war many laborers worried about job security as hundreds of thousands of veterans returned to the workforce arduous working conditions such as the twelve hour workday in the steel industry continued to be a source of discontent.
employers aggravated the resentment by using the end of the war and the end of government controls to america and the great war 607 rescind benefits they had been forced to give workers in 1917 and 1918 most notably recognition of unions.
the year 1919 therefore saw an unprecedented wave of strikes more than 3 600 in all involving over 4 million workers.
in january a walkout by shipyard workers in seattle washington evolved into a general strike that brought the entire city almost to a standstill.
the mayor requested and received the assistance of u s marines to keep the city running and eventually the strike failed.
but the brief success of a general strike something americans associated with european radicals made the seattle incident reverberate loudly throughout the country.
in september there was a strike by the boston police force which was responding to layoffs and wage cuts by demanding recognition of its union.
seattle had re boston police.
strike mained generally calm during its strike but with its police off the job boston erupted in violence and looting.
efforts by local businessmen veterans and college students to patrol the streets proved ineffective and finally governor calvin coolidge called in the national guard to restore order.
his public statement that there is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody anywhere any time attracted national steelworkers strike defeated acclaim.
eventually boston officials dismissed the entire police force and hired a new one.
in september 1919 the greatest strike in american history began when 350 000 steelworkers in several eastern and mid western cities walked off the job demanding an eight hour workday and recognition of their union.
the steel strike was long bitter and violent most of the violence coming from employers who hired armed guards to disperse picket lines and escort strikebreakers into factories.
it climaxed in a riot in gary indiana in which eighteen strikers were killed.
steel executives managed to keep most plants running with nonunion labor and public opinion was so hostile to the strikers that the afl having at first endorsed the strike soon timidly repudiated it.
by january the strike had collapsed.
it was a setback from which organized labor would not recover for more than a decade.
the demands of african americans the nearly 400 000 black men who had served in the armed forces during the war came home in 1919 and marched in front of a store where broken windows suggest looting has already occurred during the boston police strike the boston police strike national guardsmen stand guard f 1919.
bettmann corbis 608 chapter 22 mechanized of tractors on american farms for example farming quadrupled during the 1920s especially after they began to be powered by internal combustion engines like automobiles rather than by the cumbersome steam engines of the past.
they helped to open 35 million new acres to cultivation.
increasingly sophisticated combines and harvesters were proliferating helping make it possible to produce more crops with fewer workers.
agricultural researchers were already at work on other advances that would later transform food production in america and around the world the invention of hybrid corn made possible by advances in genetic research which became available to farmers in 1921 but was not grown in great quantities until the 1930s and the creation of chemical fertilizers and pesticides which also began to have limited use in the 1920s but proliferated quickly in the 1930s and 1940s.
the new technologies greatly increased agricultural productivity both in the united states and in other parts of the world.
but the demand for agricultural goods was not rising as fast as production.
the results were substantial surpluses a disastrous decline in food prices and a severe drop in farmers income beginning early in the 1920s.
more than 3 million people left agriculture in the course of the decade.
of those who remained many lost ownership of their lands and had to rent instead from banks or other landlords.
in response some farmers began to demand relief in the form of government price supports.
one price raising scheme parity in particu ar came to dominate agrarian demands the idea of parity parity was a complicated formula for setting an adequate price for farm goods and ensuring that farmers would earn back at least their production costs no matter how the national or world agricultural market might fluctuate.
champions of parity urged high tariffs against foreign agricultural goods and a government commitment to buy surplus domestic crops at parity and sell them abroad at whatever the market would bring.
the legislative expression of the demand for parity was the mcnary haugen bill named after its two principal sponsors in mcnary haugen conress and introduced repeatedly bill between 1924 and 1928 in 1926 and again in 1928 congress where farm interests enjoyed disproportionate influence approved a bill requiring parity for grain cotton tobacco and rice but president coolidge vetoed it both times.
the new culture the increasingly urban and consumer oriented culture of the 1920s helped many americans in all regions live their lives and perceive their world in increasingly similar ways.
that same culture exposed them to a new set of values that reflected the prosperity and complexity of the modern economy.
but the new culture could not of course erase the continuing and indeed increasing diversity of the united states.
consumerism growing mass consumption among the many changes industrialization produced in the united states was the creation of a mass consumer culture.
by the 1920s america was a society in which many men and women could afford not merely the means of subsistence but a considerable measure of additional discretionary goods and services a society in which people could buy items not just because of need but for pleasure as well.
middle class families purchased such new appliances as electric refrigerators washing machines electric irons and vacuum cleaners which revolutionized housework and had a particularly dramatic impact on the lives of women.
men and women wore wristwatches and smoked cigarettes.
women purchased cosmetics and mass produced fashions.
above all americans bought automobiles.
by the end of the decade there were more than 30 million cars on american roads.
the automobile affected american life in countless ways.
it greatly expanded the geographic horizons of millions of people who in the past had seldom ventured far from their homes.
rural men and women in particular found in the automobile a means of escaping the isola tion of farm life now they could visit friends or drive into town quickly and at will rather than spending hours traveling by horse or foot.
city dwellers found in the automobile an escape from the congestion of urban life.
weekend drives through the countryside became a staple of urban leisure.
many families escaped the city in a permanent sense by social impact of the automobile moving to the new suburbs that were rapidly growing up around large cities in response to the ease of access the automobile had created.
the automobile also transformed the idea of vacations.
in the past the idea of traveling for pleasure had been a luxury reserved for the wealthy.
now many middle class and even working class people could aspire to travel considerable distances for vacations which were a new concept for most men and women in this era.
many businesses and industries began to include paid vacations among their employee benefits and many employers encouraged their vacationing workers to travel on the assumption that a change of scene would help restore their energy and vigor at work.
for young people in families affluent enough to afford a car the automobile was often a means of a different kind of escape.
it allowed them to move easily away from parents and family an to develop social lives of their own.
it contributed to one o the distinctive developments of the early twentieth cen turyj t 6 emer ence f a well developed and relatively independent youth culture.
advertising u1 cui15u1i1c11o1h the flxspts1 6 fr creatins v than the advertising indus a vertising and public relations firms n w ayer the new era 623 1900 area reached in 1 hour 3 hours railroads 1900 2 hours more than paved roads 1930 3 hours unpaved roads 1930 breaking down rural isolation the expansion of travel horizons in oregon illinois this map uses the small town of oregon illinois west of chicago to illustrate the way in which railroads and then automobiles reduced the isolation of rural areas in the first decades of the twentieth century.
the gold and purple areas of the two maps show the territory that residents of oregon could reach within two hours.
note how small that area was in 1900 and how much larger it was in 1930 by which time an area of over a hundred square miles had become easily accessible to the town.
note too the significant network of paved roads in the region by 1930 few of which had existed in 1900 why did automobile travel do so much more than railroads to expand the travel horizons of small towns.
walter thompson had appeared well before world war i but in the 1920s partly as a result of techniques pioneered by wartime propaganda advertising came of age.
publicists no longer simply conveyed information they sought to identify products with a particular lifestyle to invest them with glamour and prestige and to persuade potential consumers that purchasing a commodity could be a personally fulfilling and enriching experience.
advertisers also encouraged the public to absorb the val ues of promotion and salesmanship and to admire those who were effective boosters and publicists.
one of the most the man successful books of the 1920s was the nobody an nobody knows by advertising execu zcvovvs tive bruce barton.
it portrayed jesus christ as not only a religious prophet but also a super salesman who picked up twelve men from the bottom ranks of business and forged them into an organization that conquered the world the parables barton claimed were the most powerful advertisements of all time bartons message was fully in tune with the new spirit of the consumer culture.
jesus had been a man concerned with living a full and rewarding life in this world twentieth century men and women should do the same.
life is meant to live and enjoy as you go along barton once wrote.
jesus had succeeded because he knew how to make friends to become popular to please others that talent was a prescription for success in the modern era as well.
the advertising industry could never have had the impact it did without the emergence of new vehicles of communication that made it possible to reach large audiences quickly and easily.
newspapers were being absorbed into national chains and wire services were making it possible even for independent newspapers to carry nationally syndicated material.
new or expanded mass circulation magazines also attracted broad national audiences.
the saturday evening post which began publication as a magazine in 1871 appealed to rural and small town families with its homey stories and its conspicuous traditionalism its popularity was in some respects evidence of a yearning for an earlier time.
but other magazines responded directly to the realities of modern urban life.
the readers digest founded in 1921 by dewitt and lila wallace condensed stories and even books originally published in other places in an effort to make the expanding world of knowledge and information available in a brief efficient form for people who would otherwise have no access to it.
time magazine founded in 1923 by henry luce and briton hadden set out to condense the news of the week into a brief accessible lively format for busy people who did not have the time or desire to read newspapers.
mass circulation magazines hollywood the movies and broadcasting at the same time movies were becoming an ever more popular and powerful form of mass communication.
more than 100 million people saw films in 1930 as compared to 40 million in 1922 the addition of sound to motion pictures beginning in 1927 with the first feature length talkie the jazz singer with al jolson created nationwide excitement.
an embarrassing scandal in 1921 involving the popular comedian fatty arbuckle produced public outrage and political pressure to clean up hollywood.
in response the film industry introduced standards to its films.
studio owners created the motion picture association a new trade association and hired former postmaster general will hays to head it.
more important they gave hays broad 624 chapter 23 some victims of the depression expressed anger and struck out at the economic system.
many however seemed to blame themselves.
nothing so surprised foreign observers of america self blame in as the apparent passivity of the unemployed many of whom were so ashamed of their joblessness that they refused to leave their homes.
at the same time millions of people responded eagerly to reassurances that they could through their own efforts restore themselves to prosperity and success.
the writer and lecturer dale carnegies self help manual how to win friends and influence people 1936 was one of the best selling books of the decade.
carnegies message was not only that personal initiative was the route to success it was also that the best way for people to get ahead was to fit in and make other people feel important.
artists and intellectuals in the great depression just as many progressives had become alarmed when early in the twentieth century they discovered the existence of widespread poverty in the cities so many discovery.
of rural americans were shocked during the 1930s poverty at their discovery of debilitating rural poverty.
among those who were most effective in conveying the dimensions of this poverty was a group of documentary photographers many of them employed by the federal farm security administration in the late 1930s who traveled through the south recording the nature of agricultural life.
roy stryker walker evans arthur rothstein ben shahn margaret bourke white dorothea lange and others produced memorable studies of farm families and their in the rural south.
depression literature surroundings studies often designed to reveal the savage impact of a hostile environment on its victims.
many writers similarly turned away from the personal concerns of the 1920s and devoted themselves to exposes of social injustice.
erskine caldwells tobacco road 1932 which later became a long running broadway play was an expose of poverty richard wright a major african american novelist exposed the plight of residents of the urban ghetto in native son 1940.
john steinbecks novels portrayed the trials of workers and migrants in california.
john dos passoss trilogy u s a 1930 1936 attacked modern capitalism outright.
playwright clifford odets provided an explicit demonstration of the appeal of political radicalism in waiting for lefty 1935.
but the cultural products of the 1930s that attracted the widest popular audiences were those that diverted attention away from the depression.
and they came to americans primarily through the two most powerful instruments of popular culture in the 193 os radio and the movies.
radio almost every american family had a radio in the 1930s.
in cities and towns radio consoles were now as familiar a part of the furnishing of parlors and kitchens as tables and chairs.
even in remote rural areas without access to electricity many families purchased radios and hooked them up to car batteries when they wished to listen.
unlike in later times radio in the 1930s was often a community experience.
young people would place radios on their front porches and invite friends over to sit talk or dance.
in poor urban neighborhoods many people who could not afford a radio play among the most popular entertainments of the 1930s were live readings of plays over the radio many of them mysteries or romances written specifically for the new medium.
here a group of actors performs a radio comedy over wnbc in new york city in the early 1930s.
the actors from left to right are jack benny george murphy jean cranford and reginald gardiner.
hulton archive getty images the great depression 651 kitty orlbie alum 4 johesl sewm geoftst kaufman wmorrie ovswnt sam woon a night at the opera the antic comedy of the marx brothers provided a popular and welcome escape from the rigors of the great depression.
the marx brothers shown here in a poster for one of their most famous films effectively lampooned dilemmas that many americans faced in their ceaseless and usually unsuccessful efforts to find an easy route to wealth and comfort.
everett collection other kinds of social activities would gather on a street or in a backyard to listen to sporting events or concerts.
within families the radio often drew parents and children together in the evening to listen to favorite programs.
what did americans hear on the radio.
although radio stations occasionally carried socially and politically provocative escapist programs the staple of broadcasting was programming escapism comedies such as amos n andy with its humorous if demeaning picture of urban blacks adventures such as superman dick tracy and the lone ranger and other entertainment programs.
radio brought a new kind of comedy previously limited to vaudeville or to ethnic theatersto a wide audience.
jack benny george burns and gracie allen and other masters of elaborately timed jokes and repartee began to develop broad followings that they would later take with them to television.
soap operas also later to become staples of television programming were enormously popular on radio in the 1930s especially with women who were alone in the house during the day.
that was one reason they became known as soap operas soap companies whose advertising was targeted at women generally sponsored them.
almost invariably radio programs were broadcast live and as a result radio spawned an enormous number of public performances.
radio comedies and dramas were often performed before audiences in theaters or studios.
band concerts were broadcast from dance halls helping jazz and swing bands to achieve broad popularity.
classical music too was broadcast bve from studios.
radio provided americans with their first direct access to important public events and radio news and sports divisions grew rapidly to meet the demand.
some of the most dramatic moments of the 1930s were a result of radio coverage of celebrated events the world series major college football games the academy awards political radios conventions presidential inaugu impact rations.
when the german dirigi ble the hindenburg crashed in flames in lakehurst new jersey in 1937 after a transatlantic voyage it produced an enormous national reaction largely because of the live radio account by a broadcaster overcome with emotion who cried out as he watched the terrible crash oh the humanity.
oh the humanity the actor director orson welles created another memorable event in 1938 when he broadcast war of the worlds which created panic among millions of people who believed for a while that the fictional events it described were real.
see patterns of popular culture pp.
radio was important for the way it drew the nation together by creating the possibility of shared experiences and common access to culture and information.
it was also significant for the way it helped reshape the social life of the nation for the way it encouraged many families and individuals to center their lives more around the home than they had in the past.
continuing popularity of movies movies in the new era moviegoing would seem particularly vulnerable to hard times.
families struggling to pay the rent or buy food could easily decide to forgo an evening at the movies.
in the first years of the depression movie attendance did drop significantly.
by the mid 1930s however most americans had resumed their moviegoing habits in part because movies were a less expensive entertainment option than many other possibilities and in part because the movies themselves all of them now with sound and by the end of the decade many of them in color were becoming more appealing.
in many ways movies were as safely conventional in the 1930s as they had been in the late 1920s.
hollywood continued to exercise tight control over its products in the 1930s through its resilient censor will hays who ensured that most movies carried no sensational or controversial messages.
the studio system through which a few large movie companies exercised iron control over actors writers and directors and through which a few great moguls such as louis b mayer or jack warner could single handedly decide the fate of most projects also worked to ensure that hollywood films avoided controversy.
but neither the censor nor the studio system could or wished to prevent films from exploring social questions altogether.
a few films such as king vidors our daily bread 1932 and john fords adaptation of john steinbecks novel the grapes of wrath 1940 did explore political themes.
the director frank capra provided a muted social message in several of his comedies mr deeds goes to town 1936 mr smith goes to washington 1939 and meet john doe 1941 which the films of frank capra d a kt ttf capra is probably best remembered today for his last successful film it s a i4 ll il ix wonderful life 1946 widely replayed every year at christmas.
in it george bailey a kind and compassionate small town savings and loan operator played by jimmy stewart is almost destroyed by a wealthy greedy and malicious banker.
in despair and contemplating suicide bailey receives a visit from an angel who shows him what life in his community bedford falls would have been like had george never been born.
after a few hours of wandering through a coarse corrupt degraded version of the town he knew bailey comes to understand the value of his own life.
he returns to the real bedford falls to find that his family friends and neighbors have rallied together to rescue him from his financial difficulties and affirm his value to them and theirs to him.
by the time it s a wonderful life appeared frank capra had been the most famous and successful director in hollywood for more than a decade.
his films during those years had almost all been great commercial and critical successes.
capra s popularity was a result in part of his tremendous talent as a director but it was also a result of his ideas.
most of his films expressed a vision of society and of politics that resonated clearly with the concerns of millions of americans as they struggled through the years of the great depression.
capra was born in 1897 in a small village in sicily and moved with his family to america six years later after working his way through college he found a job in the still young movie industry in california and eventually became a director of feature films.
his great mr deeds goes to town gary cooper playing the newly wealthy longfellow deeds leaves the friendly virtuous small town of mandrake falls en route to new york to receive the fortune he has inherited.
capra s evocation of the warmth and generosity of mandrake falls was part of his effort to contrast the decent america of ordinary people with the grasping and corrupt america of the wealthy and the city.
columbia pictures photofest promoting capra capra was unusual among directors of the 1930s in having a distinct following of his own.
most films attempted to attract audiences by highlighting their stars.
capra films highlighted capra himself.
columbia pictures photofest celebrated the virtues of the small town and the decency of the common people in contrast to the selfish corrupt values of the city and the urban rich.
see patterns of popular culture pp.
gangster movies such as little caesar 1930 and the public enemy 1931 portrayed a dark gritty violent world with which few americans were familiar but their desperate stories were popular nevertheless with those engaged in their own difficult struggles.
more often however the commercial films of the 1930s were deliberately and explicitly escapist lavish musicals such 652 as gold diggers of 1933 whose theme song was were in the money screwball comedies such as capras it happened one night or the many films of the marx brothers films designed to divert audiences from their troubles and often indulge their fantasies about quick and easy wealth.
the 1930s saw the beginning of walt disneys long reign as the champion of animation and childrens entertainment.
after producing cartoon shorts for theaters in the late 1920s many walt disney t em starring the newly created charac ter f mickey mouse who made his debut frank capra frank capra was one of the most famous and successful hollywood movie directors of the 1930s and 1940s.
his films evoked a romantic populism and patriotism during a time of great stress and deprivation.
moviepix getty images breakthrough came in 1934 with it happened one night a now classic comedy that won five major academy awards including best picture and best director.
over the next seven years he built on that success by making a series of more pointed films through which he established himself as a powerful voice of a comfortably populist vision of democracy and american life.
capra made no secret of his romantic image of the small town and the common man his distaste for cities his contempt for opportunistic politicians and his condemnation of what he considered the amoral and often immoral capitalist marketplace.
in mr deeds goes to town 1936 a simple man from a small town inherits a large fortune moves to the city and not liking the greed and dishonesty be finds there gives the money away and moves back home.
in mr smith goes to washington 1939 a decent man from a western state is elected to the u s senate refuses to join in the self interested politics of washington and dramatically exposes the corruption and selfishness of his colleagues.
the rugged western actor gary cooper portrayed mr deeds and jimmy stewart played mr.
in meet john doe 1941 released on the brink of american entry into world war ii an ordinary man played again by gary cooper is manipulated by a fascist cartel to dupe the public on their behalf.
he comes to his senses just in time and by threatening suicide rallies ordinary people to turn against the malign plans of the fascists.
he then disappears into the night.
capra was entirely conscious of the romantic populism that he brought to his films.
he was intensely patriotic and he believed fervently that america stood for individual opportunity and was defined by the decency of ordinary people.
he did not like the term masses and found it insulting degrading.
he saw the people rather as a collection of free individuals each an island of human dignity.
when america entered world war ii capra collaborated with the government and the walt disney studios to make a series of films designed to explain to new soldiers what the war was about a series known as why we fight.
they contrasted the individualistic democracy of the american small town with the dark collectivism of the nazis and fascists.
capra poured into them all his skills as a filmmaker and all his romantic patriotic images.
it s a wonderful life released a year after the war ended continued his evocation of the decency of ordinary people.
in the decades that followed capra ceased to be an important force in american cinema.
the sentimental populism and comic optimism that had been so appealing to audiences during the hard years of the depression and the war gave way to a harder more realistic style of filmmaking in the 1950s and 1960s and capra a romantic to the end was never fully able to adjust.
but in a time of crisis capra had helped his audiences find solace in his romantic vision of the american past and in the warmth and goodness of small towns and the decency of ordinary people.
understand analyze and evaluate 1 why were capras films so popular with people suffering through the economic crisis of the great depression.
2 what social messages do capras films convey.
3 if capra s style was considered dated after world war ii why has his film it s a wonderful life continued to be so popular.
in the 1928 cartoon steamboat willie disney began to produce feature length animated films starting in 1937 with snow white.
other enormously popular films of the 1930s were adaptations of popular novels the wizard of oz and gone with the wind both released in 1939 popular literature and journalism the social and political strains of the great depression found voice much more successfully in print than they did on the airwaves or the screen.
much literature and journalism in the 1930s dealt directly or indirectly with the tremendous disillusionment and the increasing radicalism of the era.
not all literature of course was challenging or controversial.
the most popular books and magazines of the time were as escapist and romantic as the most popular radio shows and movies.
two of the best selling novels of the decade were romantic sagas set in ear life magazine lier eras margaret mitchells gone with the wind 1936 and hervey allens anthony adverse 1933.
leading magazines 653 654 chapter 23 they had been in the 1920s to evocations of community generosity and the dignity of common people.
they were more open to experiments in government and business and even private lives than they had been in earlier years.
but for most americans belief in the american way of life a phrase that became widely resonant in the 1930s for the first time remained strong throughout the long years of economic despair.
key terms people places events agricultural marketing act 656 black tuesday 640 bonus army 657 clifford odets 650 dust bowl 645 erskine caldwell 650 frank capra 651 tariff act of 1930 656 hindenburg 651 hoovervilles 656 john dos passos 650 john steinbeck 650 life magazine 653 okies 645 orson welles 651 popular front 654 reconstruction finance corporation 657 richard wright 650 scottsboro case 646 soap operas 651 recall and reflect 1 was the 1929 stock market crash the cause of the depression.
why or why not.
2 how did farmers fare during the depression.
what environmental conditions contributed to their plight.
3 what particular problems faced women both black and white who worked outside the home.
4 how did radio affect both social life and the life of the family.
5 what was the popular front.
what groups did it comprise.
how did they respond to the depression.
6 what popular protests arose in response to the depression.
how successful were these protests.
7 how did hoovers political beliefs affect his attempt to deal with the economic crisis of the depression.
significant events 1929 stock market crash signals onset of great depression agricultural marketing act passed 1931 scottsboro defendants arrested communist party stages hunger march in washington d c 1933 franklin roosevelt inaugurated new deal begins see chapter 26 thus in both the southern and central pacific the initiative had shifted to the united states by mid 1943.
the japanese advance had come to a stop.
with aid from australians and new zealanders the americans now began the slow arduous process of moving toward the philippines and toward japan itself.
holding off the germans in the european war the united states had less control over military operations.
it was fighting in cooperation with britain and with the exiled tree french forces in the west and it was trying also to conciliate its new ally the soviet union which was fighting hitler in the east.
the army chief of staff general george c marshall supported a plan for a major allied invasion of france across the english channel in the spring of 1943 but the american plan faced challenges from the allies.
the soviet union which was absorbing as it would throughout the war the brunt of the german effort wanted the allied invasion to proceed at the earliest possible moment.
the british on the other hand wanted first to launch a series of allied offensives around the edges of the nazi empire in soviet union iii i t pearl harbor december 7 1941 world war ii in the pacific this map illustrates the changing fortunes of the two combatants in the pacific phase of world war ii the in j r.
represents the eastern boundary of the vast areas of the pacific that had fallen under japanese control by the summer of 1942 the blue lines illustrate th 4 106 str h n9 rm bua t0 manc ur a pacific beginning in may 1942 and accelerating in 1943 and after which drove the japanese forces back.
the american advance was a result of two s 7 amencan frces n under the command of chester nimitz which moved west from hawaii the other under the command of douglas macarthur which moved north f at r ens ves one ln the centra pac c forces were approaching the japanese mainland and were bombing tokyo.
the dropping of two american atomic bombs on hiroshima and naonsdd r il t summer 1m5 a allied controlled areas areas under japanese control farthest extent of japanese control neutral nations atomic bomb allied victories japanese victories allied forces japanese forces why did the soviet union enter the pacific war in august 1945 as shown in the upper left corner of the map.
america in a world at war 707 northern africa and southern europe before undertaking the major invasion of france.
roosevelt realized that to support the british plan would antagonize the soviets and might delay the important crosschannel invasion.
but he also knew that the invasion of europe would take a long time to prepare and he was reluctant to wait so long before getting american forces into combat.
and so over the objections of some of his most important advisers he decided to support the british plan.
at the end of october 1942 the british opened a counteroffensive against nazi forces in north africa under general erwin rommel who was threatening the suez canal at el alamein and forced the germans to retreat from egypt.
on november 8 anglo american forces landed at oran and algiers in algeria and at casablanca in morocco areas under the nazi controlled french government at vichy and began moving east toward rommel.
the germans threw the full weight of their forces in africa against the inexperienced americans and inflicted a serious defeat on them at the kasserine pass in tunisia.
general george s patton however regrouped the american troops and began an effective counteroffensive.
with the help of allied air and naval power and of british forces attacking from the east under general bernard montgomery the hero of el alamein the american offensive finally drove the last germans from africa in may 1943 the north africa campaign had tied up a large proportion of the allied resources and contributed to the postponement of the planned may 1943 cross channel invasion of france.
that produced angry complaints from the soviet union.
by now however the threat of a soviet collapse seemed much diminished for during the winter of 1942 1943 stalingrad the red armv had success fully held off a major german assault at stalingrad in southern russia.
hitler had committed such enormous forces to the battle and had suffered such appalling losses that he could not continue his eastern offensive.
the soviet victory had come at a horrible cost.
the german siege of stalingrad had decimated the civilian population of the city and devastated the surrounding countryside.
indeed throughout the war the soviet union absorbed losses far greater than any other warring nation up to 20 million casualties a fact that continued to haunt the russian memory and affect soviet policy generations later.
but the soviet success in beating back the german offensive persuaded roosevelt to agree in a january 1943 meeting with churchill in casablanca to an allied invasion of sicily.
general marshall opposed the plan arguing that it would further delay the vital invasion of france but churchill prevailed with the argument that the operation in sicily might knock italy out of the war and tie up german divisions that might otherwise be stationed in france.
on the night of july 9 1943 american and british armies landed in southeast sicily thirty eight days later they had conquered the island and were moving onto the italian mainland.
in the face of these setbacks mussolinis government collapsed and the deposed dictator fled north to germany.
mussolinis successor pietro badoglio quickly committed italy to the allies but germany moved eight divisions into the country and established a powerful defensive line south of rome.
the allied offensive on the italian peninsula which began on september 3 1943 soon bogged down especially after a serious setback at monte cassino that winter.
not until may 1944 did the allies resume their northward advance.
on june 4 1944 they captured rome.
auschwitz december 1944 this photograph taken near the end of world war ii shows a group of imprisoned children behind a barbed wire fence in one of the most notorious nazi concentration camps.
by the time this picture was taken the nazis had been driven out of auschwitz and were under the control of allied soldiers.
keystone getty images 708.
chapter 27 the cold war 743 government seizure of the mines.
but in the process he pressured mine owners to grant the union most of its demands which he had earlier denounced as inflationary.
almost simultaneously the nations railroads suffered a total shutdown the first in the nations history as two major unions walked out on strike.
by threatening to use the army to run the trains truman pressured the workers back to work after only a few days.
reconversion was particularly difficult for the millions of women and minorities who had entered the workforce during the war.
with veterans returning home and looking for jobs in the industrial economy employers tended to push women blacks hispanics chinese and others out of the plants to make room for white males.
some of the war workers particularly women left the workforce voluntarily out of a desire to return to their former domestic lives.
but as many as 80 percent of women workers and virtually all black hispanic and asian males wanted to continue working.
the postwar inflation the pressure to meet the rising expectations of a high consumption society the growing divorce rate which left many women responsible for their own economic well being all combined to create among women a high demand for paid employment.
as they found themselves excluded from industrial jobs therefore women workers moved increasingly into other areas of the economy above all the service sector.
the fair deal rejected days after the japanese surrender truman submitted to congress a twenty one point domestic program outlining what truman s ater terme fair deal it called for fair deal expansion of social security benefits the raising of the legal minimum wage from 40 to 65 cents an hour a program to ensure full employment through aggressive use of federal spending and investment a permanent fair employment practices act public housing and slum clearance long range environmental and public works planning and government promotion of scientific research.
weeks later he added other proposals federal aid to funding for the st lawrence seaway nationalization of atomic energy and perhaps most important national health insurance a dream of welfare state liberals for decades but one deferred in 1935 when the social security act was written.
the president was declaring an end to the wartime moratorium on liberal reform.
he was also symbolizing as he later wrote my assumption of the office of president in my own right but many of the fair deal programs fell victim to the same public and congressional conservatism that had crippled the last years of the new deal.
indeed that conservatism seemed to be intensifying as the november 1946 congressional elections suggested.
using the simple but devastating slogan had enough the republican party won control of both houses of congress.
the new republican congress quickly moved to reduce government spending and chip away at new deal reforms.
the president bowed to what he claimed was the popular mandate to lift most remaining wage and price controls and congress taft hartley act moved further to deregulate the economy.
inflation rapidly increased.
when a public outcry arose over the soaring prices for meat senator robert taft perhaps the most influential republican conservative in congress advised consumers to eat less and added we have got to break with the corrupting idea that we can legislate prosperity legislate equality legislate opportunity true to the spirit of tafts words the republican congress refused to appropriate funds to aid education increase social security or support reclamation and power projects in the west.
it defeated a proposal to raise the minimum wage.
it passed tax measures that cut rates dramatically for high income families and moderately for those with lower incomes.
only vetoes by the president finally forced a more progressive bill.
the most notable action of the new congress was its assault on the wagner act of 1935 conservatives had always resented the new powers the legislation had granted unions and in light of the labor difficulties during and after the war such resentments intensified sharply.
the result was the labor management relations act of 1947 better known as the taft hartley act.
it made illegal the so called closed shop a workplace in which no one can be hired without first being a member of a union.
and although it continued to permit the creation of so called union shops in which workers must join a union after being hired it permitted states to pass right to work laws prohibiting even that.
repealing this provision the controversial section 14 b would remain a goal of the labor movement for decades.
outraged workers and union leaders denounced the measure as a slave labor bill truman vetoed it but both the house and the senate easily overruled him the same day.
the taft hartley act did not destroy the labor movement as many union leaders had predicted.
but it did damage weaker unions in relatively lightly organized industries such as chemicals and textiles and it made more difficult the organizing of workers who had never been union members especially women minorities and most workers in the south.
the election of 1948 truman and his advisers believed the american public was not ready to abandon the achievements of the new deal despite the 1946 election results.
as they planned strategy for the 1948 campaign therefore they placed their hopes in an appeal to enduring democratic loyalties.
throughout 1948 truman proposed one reform measure after another.
although congress ignored or defeated them all the president was building campaign issues for the fall.
there remained however the problems of trumans personal unpopularity the belief among much of the electorate democratic t iat an his administration were weak defections and inept and the deep divisions within the democratic party.
at the democratic national convention that summer two factions abandoned the party southern conservatives reacted angrily to trumans proposed civil rights bill the first major one of the century and to the approval at the convention of a civil rights plank in the platform engineered by hubert humphrey the mayor of minneapolis.
these two factions formed the states rights or dixiecrat party with governor strom thurmond of south carolina as its presidential nominee.
at the same time the democratic partys left wing formed a new progressive party with henry a wallace as its candidate.
wallace supporters objected to what they considered the slow and ineffective domestic policies of the truman administration but they resented even more the presidents confrontational stance toward the soviet union.
in addition many democratic liberals unwilling to leave the party attempted to dump the president in 1948 the americans for democratic action ada a coalition of liberals tried to entice dwight d eisenhower the popular war hero to contest the nomination.
only after eisenhower had refused did liberals bow to the inevitable and concede the nomination to truman.
the republicans in the meantime had once again nominated governor thomas e dewey of new york whose substantial reelection victory in 1946 had made him one of the nations leading political figures.
austere dignified and competent he seemed to offer an unbeatable alternative to the president.
polls showed dewey with an apparently insurmountable lead in september so much so that some opinion analysts stopped taking surveys.
dewey conducted a subdued statesmanlike campaign and tried to avoid antagonizing anyone.
but truman seemingly done believed he could win.
as the campaign gathered momentum truman became more and more aggressive turning the fire away from himself and toward dewey and the do nothing good for nothing republican congress election night 1948 throughout the 1948 campaign harry truman was considered a very unlikely victor for a new term as president.
but the combination of an energetic campaign by truman a lack of enthusiasm for his opponent thomas dewey and the lingering loyalty to the new deal led to a surprise victory.
the chicago daily tribune a strongly republican paper was so certain of dewey s victory that it published this headline which hit the newsstands just after it became clear that truman won.
this picture is one of the most famous political photographs of the twentieth century.
rue des archives the granger collection new york which was he told the voters responsible for fueling inflation and abandoning workers and the middle class.
to dramatize his point he called congress into a special session in july to give it a chance he said to enact the liberal measures the republicans had recently written into their platform.
congress met for two weeks and predictably did almost nothing.
the president traveled nearly 32 000 miles and made 356 speeches delivering blunt extemporaneous attacks.
he had told senator alben barkley of kentucky his running mate im going to fight hard.
im going to give them hell he called for repeal of the taft hartley act increased price supports for farmers and strong civil rights protection for blacks.
he was the first president to campaign in harlem.
he sought in short to re create much of franklin roosevelts new deal coalition.
to the surprise of virtually everyone he succeeded.
on election night truman won a narrow but decisive victory 49 5 percent of the popular vote to deweys 45 1 percent with the two splinter parties dividing the small remainder between them and an electoral vote margin of 303 to 189 democrats in the meantime regained both houses of congress by substantial margins.
trumans surprising victory the fair deal revived despite the democratic victories the eighty first congress was little more hospitable to trumans fair deal reform than its republican predecessor.
truman did win some important victories.
congress raised the legal minimum wage from 40 cents to 75 cents an hour.
it approved an important expansion 744.
chapter 28 the salk vaccine dr jonas salk a medical researcher at the university of pittsburgh developed in the mid 1950s the first vaccine that proved effective in preventing polio.
in its aftermath scenes similar to this one a mass inoculation of families in a municipal stadium in evansville indiana repeated themselves all over the country.
a few years later dr albert sabin of the university of cincinnati created a vaccine that could be administered more easily through sugar cubes.
ap images postwar computer technology prior to the 1950s computers had been constructed mainly to perform complicated mathematical tasks such as those required to break military codes.
in the 1950s they began to perform commercial functions for the first time as data processing devices used by businesses and other organizations.
the dawn of the computer age this massive computer powered by tubes was part of the first generation of mainframes developed after world war ii.
they served mostly government agencies and large corporations.
by the 1990s a small desktop computer could perform all the functions of this huge computer at much greater speed.
time life pictures getty images the first significant computer of the 1950s was the universal automatic computer or t za 4 univac which was devel univac j u r i tt.
oped initially for the u s bureau of the census by the remington rand company.
it was the first computer able to handle both alphabetical and numerical information easily.
it used tape storage and could perform calculations and other functions much faster than its predecessor the eniac developed in 1946 by the same researchers at the university of pennsylvania who were responsible for the univac.
searching for a larger market than the census for their very expensive new device remington rand arranged to use a univac to predict the results of the 1952 election for cbs television news.
it would they believed produce valuable publicity for the machine.
analyzing early voting results the univac accurately predicted an enormous landslide victory for eisenhower over stevenson.
few americans had ever heard of a computer before that night and the univacs television debut became therefore a critical breakthrough in public awareness of computer technology.
remington rand had limited success in marketing the univac but in the mid 1950s the international business machines company ibm introduced its first major data processing computers and began to find a wide market for them among businesses in the united states and abroad.
these early successes combined with the enormous amount of money ibm invested in research and development made the company the worldwide leader in computers for many years.
bombs rockets and missiles in 1952 the united states successfully detonated the first hydrogen bomb.
the soviet union tested its first h bomb a year later.
unlike the plutonium and uranium bombs developed during world war ii the hydrogen bomb derives its power not from fission the splitting of atoms but from fusion the joining of lighter atomic elements with heavier ones.
it is capable of producing explosions of vastly greater power than the earlier fission bombs.
the development of the hydrogen bomb gave considerable impetus to a stalled scientific project in both the united states and the soviet union the effort to develop unmanned rockets and missiles capable of carrying the the hydrogen bomb the affluent society 761 new weapons which were not suitable for delivery by airplanes to their targets.
both nations began to put tremendous resources into their development.
the united states in particular benefited from the emigration to america of some of the german scientists who had helped develop rocketry for germany during world war ii.
in the united states early missile research was conducted almost entirely by the air force.
there were significant early successes in developing rockets capable of traveling several hundred miles.
but american and soviet leaders were both struggling to build longer range missiles that could cross oceans and continents intercontinental ballistic missiles or icbms capable of traveling through space to distant targets.
american scientists experimented in the 1950s with first the atlas and then the titan icbm.
there were some early successes but there were also many setbacks particularly because of the difficulty of massing sufficient stable fuel to provide the tremendous power needed to launch missiles beyond launching a satellite 1961 four years after the successful russian launching of the satellite sputnik in 1957 threw americans into something close to a panic a thor able star rocket takes off from cape canaveral florida carrying an american satellite.
the satellite contained a nuclear generator capable of providing it with extended continuous power for its radio transmitters.
national archives and records administration the atmosphere.
by 1958 scientists had created a solid fuel to replace the volatile liquid fuels of the early missiles and they had also produced miniaturized guidance systems capable of ensuring that missiles could travel to reasonably precise destinations.
within a few years a new generation of missile known as the minuteman with a range of several thousand miles became the basis of the american atomic weapons arsenal.
american scientists also developed a nuclear missile capable of being carried and fired by submarines the polaris which could launch from below the surface of the ocean by compressed air.
a polaris was first successfully fired from underwater in 1960 the space program the origins of the american space program can be traced most directly to a dramatic event in 1957 when the soviet union the shock announced that it had launched an of sputnik earth orbiting satellite spurufk into outer space.
the united states had yet to perform any similar feats and the american government and much of american society reacted to the announcement with alarm as if the soviet achievement was also a massive american failure.
federal policy began encouraging and funding strenuous efforts to improve scientific education in the schools to create more research laboratories and above all to speed the development of america s own exploration of outer space.
the united states launched its first satellite explorer i in january 1958 the centerpiece of space exploration however soon became the manned space program established in 1958 through the creation of a new agency the national aeronautics and space administration nasa and through the selection of the first american space pilots or astronauts they quickly became among the nations most revered heroes.
nasas initial effort the mercury project was designed to launch manned vehicles into space to orbit the earth.
on may 5 1961 alan shepard became the first american launched into space.
but his short suborbital flight came several months after a soviet cosmonaut yuri gagarin had made a flight in which he had orbited the earth.
on february 2 1962 john glenn later a u s senator became the first american to orbit the globe.
nasa later introduced the gemini program whose spacecraft could carry two astronauts at once.
mercury and gemini were followed by the apollo program whose purpose was to land men on the moon.
it had some catastrophic setbacks most notably a fire in january 1967 that killed three astronauts.
but on july 20 1969 neil armstrong edwin aldrin and michael collins successfully traveled in a space capsule into orbit around the moon.
armstrong and aldrin then detached a smaller craft from the capsule landed the apollo program 762 chapter 28 could have launched the same movement fifty or a hundred years earlier or decades later.
why did they do so in the 1950s and 1960s.
several factors contributed to the rise of african american protest in these years.
the legacy of world war ii was one of w the most important.
millions of black legacy of.
world war ii men an a women had served m the mili tary or worked in war plants during the war and had derived from the experience a broader view of the world and of their place in it.
another factor was the growth of an urban black middle class which had been developing for decades but which began to flourish after the war.
much of the impetus urban black middle class fr the civil rights movement came from the leaders of urban black communities ministers educators professionals and much of it came as well from students at black colleges and universities which had expanded significantly in the previous decades.
men and women with education and a stake in society were often more aware of the obstacles to their advancement than poorer and more oppressed people to whom the possibility of advancement may have seemed too remote even to consider.
and urban blacks had considerably more freedom to associate with one another and to develop independent institutions than did rural blacks who were often under the very direct supervision of white landowners.
television and other forms of popular culture were another factor in the rising consciousness of racism among blacks.
more than any previous generation postwar african americans had constant vivid reminders of how the white majority lived of the world from which they were effectively excluded.
television also conveyed the activities of demonstrators to a national audience ensuring that activism in one community would inspire similar protests in others.
in addition to the forces that were inspiring african americans to mobilize other forces were at work mobilizing many white americans to support the movement once it began.
one was the cold war which made racial injustice an embarrassment to americans trying to present their nation as a model to the world.
another was the political mobilization of northern blacks who were now a substantial voting bloc within the democratic party politicians from northern industrial states could not ignore their views.
labor unions with substantial black memberships also played an important part in supporting and funding the civil rights movement.
eisenhower republicanism dwight d eisenhower was one of the least experienced politicians to serve in the white house in the twentieth century.
he was also among the most popular and politically successful presidents of the postwar era.
at home he pursued essentially moderate policies avoiding most new initiatives but accepting the work of earlier reformers.
abroad he continued and even intensified american commitments to oppose communism but brought to some of those commitments a measure of restraint that his successors did not always match.
what was good for general motors business leaders new outlook the first republican administration in twenty years staffed itself with men drawn from the same quarter as those who had staffed republican administrations in the 1920s the business community.
but by the 1950s many business leaders had acquired a social and political outlook very different from that of their predecessors.
above all many had reconciled themselves to at least the broad outlines of the keynesian welfare state the new deal had launched.
indeed some corporate leaders had come to see it as something that actually benefited them by helping maintain social order by increasing mass purchasing power and by stabilizing labor relations.
to his cabinet eisenhower appointed wealthy corporate lawyers and business executives who were not apologetic about their backgrounds.
charles wilson president of general motors assured senators considering his nomination for secretary of defense that he foresaw no conflict of interest because he was certain that what was good for our country was good for general motors and vice versa eisenhower s consistent inclination was to limit federal activities and encourage private enterprise.
he supported the private rather than public development of natural resources.
to the chagrin of farmers he lowered federal support for farm prices.
he also removed the last limited wage and price controls maintained by the truman administration.
he opposed the creation of new social service programs such as national health insurance.
he strove constantly to reduce federal expenditures even during the recession of 1958 and balance the budget.
he ended 1960 his last full year in office with a 1 billion budget surplus.
ihe survival of the welfare state the president took few new initiatives in domestic policy but he resisted pressure from the right wing of his party to disman federal r ose welfare policies of the new deal highway act a survived the conservative assaults of 1956 of the war years and after.
he agreed to extend the social security system to an additional 10 million people and unemployment compensation to an additional 4 million and he agreed to increase the legal minimum hourly wage from 75 cents to 1.
perhaps the most significant legislative accomplishment of the eisenhower administration was the federal highway act of 1956 which authorized 25 billion for a ten year project that built over 40 000 miles of interstate highways the largest public works project in american history.
the program was to be funded through a highway trust fund whose revenues would come rom new taxes on the purchase of fuel automobiles trucks and tires.
the affluent society 775 the highway bill president dwight eisenhower signs the federal highway act of 1956 into law from the oval office at the white house.
this initiative authorized 25 billion to build more than 40 000 miles of interstate highway.
in 1956 eisenhower ran for a second term even though he had suffered a serious heart attack the previous year.
with adlai stevenson opposing him once again he won by another even greater landslide receiving nearly 57 percent of the popular vote and 457 electoral votes to stevenson s 73 democrats retained control of both houses of congress which they had won back in 1954 and in 1958 during a serious recession they increased that control by substantial margins.
the decline of mccarthyism the eisenhower administration did little in its first years in office to discourage the anticommunist furor that had gripped the nation.
by 1954 however the crusade against subversion was beginning to produce significant popular opposition an indication that the anticommunist passion of several years earlier was beginning to abate.
the clearest signal of that change was the political demise of senator joseph mccarthy.
during the first year of the eisenhower administration mccarthy continued to operate with impunity.
but in january 1954 he overreached when he attacked secretary of the army robert stevens and the armed services in general.
at that point the administration and influential members of congress organized a special investigation of the charges which became known as the army mccarthy hearings.
they were among the first congressional hearings to be nationally televised.
the result was devastating to mccarthy.
watching mccarthy in action bullying witnesses hurling groundless and often cruel accusations evading issues much of the public began to see him as a villain and even a buffoon.
in december 1954 the senate voted 67 to 22 to condemn him army mccarthy hearings for conduct unbecoming a senator three years later with little public support left he died a victim apparently of complications arising from alcoholism.
eisenhower dulles and the cold war the threat of nuclear war with the soviet union created a sense of high anxiety in international relations in the 1950s.
but the nuclear threat had another effect as well.
with the potential devastation of an atomic war so enormous both superpowers began to edge away from direct confrontations.
the attention of both the united states and the soviet union began to turn to the rapidly escalating instability in the poor and developing nations of the third world.
dulles and massive retaliation eisenhowers secretary of state and except for the president himself the dominant figure in the nations foreign policy in the 1950s was john foster dulles an aristocratic corporate lawyer with a stern moral revulsion to communism.
he entered office denouncing the containment policies of the truman years as excessively passive arguing that the united states should pursue an active program of liberation which would lead to a rollback of communist expansion.
once in power however he had to defer to the more moderate views of the president himself.
the most prominent of dulless innovations was the policy of massive retaliation which dulles announced early in 1954.
776 chapter 29 democratic antiwar plank in the party platform that national both kennedy and mccarthy supporters convention favored.
miles away in a downtown park thousands of antiwar protesters were staging demonstrations.
on the third night of the convention as the delegates were beginning their balloting on the now inevitable nomination of hubert humphrey demonstrators and police clashed in a bloody riot in the streets of chicago.
hundreds of protesters were injured as police attempted to disperse them with tear gas and billy clubs.
aware that the violence was being televised the demonstrators taunted the authorities with the chant the whole world is watching and hubert humphrey who had spent years dreaming of becoming his partys candidate for president received a nomi nation that appeared at the time to be almost worthless.
the conservative response the turbulent events of 1968 persuaded many observers that american society was in the throes of revolutionary change.
in chicago 1968 demonstrators climb on a statue in a chicago park during the 1968 democratic national convention protesting both the vietnam war and the harsh treatment they had received from mayor richard daley s chicago police.
dennis brack black star fact however the response of most americans to the turmoil was a conservative one.
the most visible sign of the conservative backlash was the surprising success of the campaign of the segregationist alabama governor george wallace for the presidency.
in 1964 he had run in a few democratic presidential primaries and had done surprisingly well even in several states outside the south.
in 1968 he became a third party candidate for president basing his campaign on a host of conservative grievances not all of them connected to race.
he denounced the forced busing of students the proliferation of government regulations and social programs and the permissiveness of authorities toward race riots and antiwar demonstrations.
there was never any serious chance that wallace would win the election but his standing in the polls at times rose to over 20 percent.
a more effective effort to mobilize the silent majority in favor of order and stability was under way within the republican party.
richard nixon whose political career had seemed at an end after his losses in the presidential race of 1960 and a california gubernatorial campaign two years later george wallace candidate party electoral vote popular vote richard m nixon republican hubert h humphrey democratic george c wallace american independence 301 191 46 other candidates prohibition socialist labor d gregory socialist workers peace and freedom mccarthy 60 6 of electorate voting 31 770 237 43 4 31 270 533 42 3 9 906 141 12 9 218 347 the election of 1968 the 1968 presidential election which richard nixon won was almost as close as the election of 1960 which he had lost.
nixon might have won a more su stantia victory had it not been for the independent candidacy of governor george c a ace w o attracted many of the same conservative voters to whom nixon appealed.
how does the distribution of democratic and republicanltrenqth7n this election compare to that in 1960.
civil rights vietnam and the ordeal of liberalism 805 reemerged as the preeminent spokesman for what he called middle america nixon recognized that many americans were tired of hearing about their obligations to the poor tired of hearing about the sacrifices necessary to achieve racial jus tice tired of judicial reforms that seemed designed to help criminals.
by offering a vision of stability law and order government retrenchment and peace with honor in vietnam he easily captured the republican presidential nomination.
and after the spectacle of the democratic national convention he enjoyed a commanding lead in the polls as the november election approached.
that lead diminished greatly in the last weeks before the voting.
old doubts about nixons character continued to haunt the republican candidate.
a skillful last minute surge by hubert humphrey who managed to restore a tenuous unity to the democratic party narrowed the gap further.
and the wallace campaign appeared to be hurting the republicans more than the democrats.
in the end however nixon eked out a victory almost as narrow as his defeat in 1960 he received 43 4 percent of the popular vote to humphreys 42 3 percent a margin of only about 800 000 votes and 301 electoral votes to humphreys 191 george wallace who like most third party xt candidates faded in the last weeks of the nixon victorious campaign still managed to poll 12 9 percent of the popular vote and to carry five southern states with a total of 46 electoral ballots the best showing by a third party candidate since the 1920s.
nixon had not won a decisive personal mandate.
but the election made clear that a majority of the american electorate was more inter ested in restoring stability than in promoting social change.
looking back no decade of the twentieth century created more powerful and enduring images than the 1960s.
it began with the election and then the traumatic assassination of an attractive and energetic young president john kennedy who captured the imagination of millions and seemed to symbolize the rising idealism of the time.
it produced a dramatic period of political innovation christened the great society by president lyndon johnson which greatly expanded the size and functions of the federal government and its responsibility for the welfare of the nations citizens.
it saw the emergence of a sustained and enormously powerful civil rights movement that won a series of important legal victories including two civil rights acts that dismantled the jim crow system constructed in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
the very spirit of dynamism and optimism that shaped the early 1960s also helped bring to the surface problems and grievances that had no easy solutions.
the civil rights movement ended legalized segregation and disenfranchisement but it also awakened expectations of social and economic equality that laws alone could not provide.
the peaceful interracial crusade of the early 1960s gradually turned into a much more militant confrontational and increasingly separatist movement toward the decades end.
the idealism among white youths that began the 1960s and played an important role in the political success of john kennedy evolved into an angry rebellion against many aspects of american culture and politics.
it produced a large upsurge of student protest that rocked the nation at the decades end.
perhaps most of all a small and largely unnoticed cold war commitment to defend south vietnam against communist aggression from the north led to a large and disastrous american military commitment that destroyed the presidency of lyndon johnson shook the faith of millions in their leaders and their political system sent thousands of young american men to their deaths and showed no signs of producing a victory.
a decade that began with high hopes and soaring ideals ended with ugly and at times violent division and deep disillusionment.
key terms people places events bay of pigs 792 black power 790 community action program 784 congress of racial equality core 786 cuban missile crisis 793 dien bien phu 795 freedom rides 786 freedom summer 787 george wallace 787 great society 784 gulf of tonkin resolution 796 ho chi minh 794 ho chi minh trail 798 immigration act of 1965 785 john kennedy 782 malcolm x 791 march on washington 787 medicaid 784 medicare 784 new frontier 782 ngo dinh diem 796 richard nixon 804 robert kennedy 802 student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc 786 tet offensive 801 viet cong 796 806 chapter 29 recall and reflect 1 what were the political effects of jfks assassination.
2 how did increasing radicalism affect the successes and the setbacks of the civil rights movement.
3 what was the military strategy of the united states in vietnam.
what were the u s aims in that conflict.
why did the united states ultimately fail in vietnam.
4 what accounted for growing opposition to the war in vietnam.
5 what events made 1968 such a turbulent year both in the united states and elsewhere in the world.
how did these events affect u s politics.
significant events i960 john f kennedy elected president greensboro sit ins 1962 cuban missile crisis 1 8 gulf of tonkin resolution passed johnson elected president by record margin johnson launches war on poverty freedom summer campaign in mississippi congress passes civil rights act 1966 medicaid enacted king leads chicago campaign 1968 viet cong launch tet offensive johnson withdraws from presidential contest martin luther king jr assassinated racial violence breaks out in american cities robert kennedy assassinated demonstrators clash with police at democratic national convention george wallace launches third party presidential campaign richard m nixon elected president 196 1 freedom rides united states supports failed invasion of bay of pigs berlin wall erected 1963 test ban treaty signed kennedy assassinated lyndon b johnson becomes president march on washington king gives i have a dream speech 1965 american combat troops sent to vietnam medicare enacted race riot breaks out in watts los angeles malcolm x assassinated congress passes voting rights act immigration reform act passed 1967 race riot breaks out in detroit qpl the crisis of ju authority 5 i i robert kennedy the icon this photo and statement from robert kennedy date from 1968 the year of his presidential campaign and assassination.
almost immediately after his death kennedy became a symbol of a lost era and he remains a powerful image into our own time.
in 2008 the triborough bridge in new york city was renamed the rfk bridge.
henry diltz corbis.
looking ahead 1 what were some of the characteristics of the social and cultural revolutions of the 1960s and 1970s.
2 how did the u s strategy in vietnam change under nixon.
what was the result of the change in strategy.
3 what was the watergate scandal and how did it affect the presidency.
setting the stage mmimi hi mimmmm nnn i uhi iihi i i hi ii iiiiii i nm 111nmii hi iiiihi iiiii 11 uhi mu11 n m u imm 1111 hiiiiismi it 11 n throughout the late 1960s and early 1970s new movements and interest groups were mobilizing to demand protections and benefits.
new values and assumptions were emerging to challenge traditional patterns of thought and behavior.
some americans welcomed the changes.
but others feared them viewing the new movements as a dangerous assault on the foundations of their society and culture.
they looked for a restoration of stability and a relegitimization of traditional centers of authority.
in richard nixon they found a man who seemed to match their mood.
a product of a hardworking middle class family he projected an image of stern dedication to traditional values.
yet the presidency of richard nixon far from returning calm and stability to american politics coincided with and helped to produce more years of crisis.
several crises were not wholly of nixon s making.
he had inherited both an unpopular war in vietnam and an economy that was beginning to weaken.
by the beginning of his second term the economy was reeling under rapidly rising energy prices and growing inflation.
one crisis at least was directly attributable to nixon and the people in his administration.
an obscure break in at the democratic national committee headquarters in washington d c in june 1972 hardly noticed at the time gradually expanded to create one of the most serious crises in the history of the presidency and the first such crisis to drive a president from office.
having won election by railing against crises of authority that threatened social stability nixon left office having created a major crisis of authority himself.
the youth culture perhaps most alarming to conservative americans in the 1960s and 1970s was a pattern of social and cultural protest that was emerging from younger americans who were giving vent to two related impulses.
one was the impulse originating with the political left to create a great new community of the people which would rise up to break the power of elites and force the nation to end the war pursue racial and economic justice and transform its political life.
the other liberation equally powerful impulse was the vision of liberation it found expression through the efforts of particular groups african americans native americans hispanics women gays and lesbians and others to define and assert themselves and make demands on the larger society.
it also found expression through the efforts of individuals to create a new culture that would allow them to escape from what they considered the dehumanizing pressures of what some called the modern technocracy the new left in retrospect it seems unsurprising that young americans became so assertive and powerful in american culture and politics in the 1960s.
the postwar baby boom generation the unprecedented number of people born in a few years just after world war ii was growing up.
by 1970 more than half the american population was under thirty years old more than 8 million americans eight times the number in 1950 were attending college.
this was the largest generation of youth in american history and it was coming to maturity in a time of unprecedented affluence oppor tunity and for many frustration.
one of the most visible results of the increasingly assertive youth movement was a radicaliza tion of many american college and university students who in the 1960s formed what became known as the new left a large diverse group of men and women energized by the polarizing sources of developments f their time.
the new left embraced the cause of african the new left americans and other minorities but its own ranks consisted overwhelmingly r white peple blacks and minorities formed political movements of their own.
some members of the new left were the children of radical parents members of the so called old left of the 1930s and 1940s.
808 the crisis of authority.
809 che ernesto che guevara was an argentine marxist revolutionary who played a significant role in the cuban revolution.
his stylized portrait remains a major symbol of countercultural rebellion the world over.
axiom photographic design pics superstock the new left drew from the writings of some of the important social critics of the 1950s among them c wright mills a sociologist at columbia university who wrote a series of scathing and brilliant critiques of modern bureaucracies.
relatively few members of the new left were communists but many were drawn to the writings of karl marx and of contemporary marxist theorists.
some came to revere third world marxists such as che guevara the south american revolutionary and guerrilla leader mao zedong and ho chi minh.
but the new left drew its inspiration above all from the civil rights movement in which many idealistic young white americans had become involved in the early 1960s.
in 1962 a group of students most of them from prestigious universities gathered in michigan to form an organization to give voice t0 their demands students for a democratic society sds.
their declara tion of beliefs the port huron statement expressed their disillusionment with the society they had inherited and their determination to build a new politics.
some members of sds moved into inner city neighborhoods and tried for a time without great success to mobilize poor working class people politically.
but most members of the new left were students and their radicalism centered in part on issues related to the modern university.
a 1964 dispute at the university of california at berkeley over the rights of students to engage in political activities on campus gained national attention.
the free speech movement as it movement cailed itself created turmoil at berkeley as students challenged campus police occupied administrative offices and produced a strike in which nearly three quarters of the berkeley students participated.
the immediate issue was the right of students to pass out literature and recruit volunteers for political causes on campus.
but the protest quickly became as well an expression of a basic critique of the university and the society it seemed to represent.
the revolt at berkeley was the first outburst of what was to be nearly a decade of campus turmoil.
students at berkeley and elsewhere protested the impersonal character of the modern university and they denounced the role of educational institutions in sustaining what they considered corrupt or immoral public policies.
the antiwar movement greatly inflamed the challenge and expanded it to the universities and beginning in 1968 campus demonstrations riots and building seizures became almost commonplace.
at columbia university in new york city students seized several buildings including the offices of the president and occupied them for days until local police forcibly and violently ejected them.
harvard university had a similar and even more violent experience a year later.
also in 1969 berkeley became the scene of perhaps the most prolonged and traumatic conflict of any american college campus in the 1960s a battle over the efforts of a few students to build a peoples park on a vacant lot the university planned to use to build a parking garage.
this seemingly minor event precipitated weeks of impassioned and often violent conflicts between the university administration which sought to evict the intruders from the land and the students many of whom supported the advocates of the park and who saw the universitys efforts to close it as a symbol of the struggle between liberation and oppression.
by the end of the peoples park battle which lasted for over a week the berkeley campus was completely polarized even students who had not initially supported or even noticed the pfopi f park peoples park the great majority were by the end committed to its defense 85 per cent of the 15 000 students voted in a referendum to leave the park alone.
student radicals were for the first time winning large audiences for their extravagant rhetoric linking university administrators the police and the larger political and economic system describing them all as part of one united oppressive force.
most campus radicals were rarely if ever violent except at times in their rhetoric.
but the popular image of student 1 rock music in the sixties t rock music of the late 1960s and 1970s even more than the rock n roll of the 1950s.
and early 1960s emphasized release.
it gave vent to impulse and instinct to physical and emotional urges.
that was one reason it was so enormously popular among young people in an age of cultural and sexual revolution it was also why it seemed so menacing and dangerous to many conservative americans seeking to defend is sundays news rw h mew york s picture newspaper i i woodstock music art fair presents an aquarian exposition in white lake n y joan baez arlo guthrie tim hardin richie havens incredible string band ravi shankar sly and the family stone bert sommer sweetwater fri aug 15 with keef hartley canned heat creedence clearwater grateful dead janis joplin jefferson airplane mountain guilt santana the who sat.
aug 16 the band jeff beck group blood sweat and tears joe cocker crosby stills and nash jimi hendrix iron butterfly ten years after johnny winter sun.
aug 17 traditional values and behavior.
rock in the late 1960s seemed simultaneously subversive and liberating.
that was partly because of the behavior and lifestyles of rock musicians whose appearance and behavior were often deliberately outrageous.
rock musicians were connected at times to the drug culture of the 1960s especially through the so called psychedelic rock groups inspired by experiences with the hallucinogen lsd.
they had links to mystical eastern religions most notably the beatles who had spent time in india studying transcendental meditation and who beginning in 1967 with their album sergeant pepper s lonelg hearts club band incorporated those themes into their music.
and they often reveled in flouting social conventions beginning with the rolling stones and culminating perhaps in the extreme and self destructive behavior of jimi hendrix jim morrison and janis joplin all of whom died very young of drug related causes.
late sixties rock was among many expressions of the impulses that came to be known as the counterculture and like the counterculture it inspired widely varying reactions.
to its hippies mired in sea of mud ah ptoqtahis subject lo change without notice white lake.
town ot bethel.
sullivan county n y advertising woodstock even before the thousands of spectators gathered for the famous rock concert at woodstock in 1969 organizers envisioned it as something more than a performance.
it would this poster claims be a search for peace as well as for music.
hulton archive getty images reporting woodstock the new york daily news whose largely working class readership was not notably sympathetic toward the young people at woodstock ran this slightly derisive front page story on the concert as heavy rains turned the concert site into a sea of mud.
they dont melt the caption said.
new york daily news getty images defenders the new rock with its emphasis on emotional release was a healthy rebuke to the repressive norms of mainstream culture.
to them its virtues were symbolized by the great rock festival at woodstock new york in august 1969 where over 400 000 young people gathered on a remote piece of farmland for several days to hear performances by such artists as the who jimi hendrix the grateful dead janis joplin joe cocker the jefferson airplane and many others.
the festival was radicalism in mainstream culture was one of chaos and disorder based in part on the disruptive actions of small groups of militants among them the weathermen a violent offshoot of sds.
the weathermen were responsible for several cases of arson and bombing that destroyed campus buildings and claimed several lives.
not many people not even many students ever accepted the most radical political views that lay at the heart of the new left.
but many supported the position of sds and other groups on particular issues and above all on the vietnam war.
student activists tried to drive out training programs for military officers rotc and bar military 810 recruiters from college campuses.
they attacked the laboratories and corporations that were producing weapons for the war.
and between 1967 and 1969 they organized some of the largest political demonstrations in american history.
the october 1967 march on the pentagon where demonstrators were met by a solid line of armed troops the spring mobilization of april 1968 which attracted hundreds of thousands of demonstrators in cities around the country the vietnam moratorium of the fall of 1969 during which millions of opponents of the war gathered in major rallies across the nation and countless other demonstrations large and altamont hells angels security guards club a spectator near the stage during the rock concert at altamont as other concertgoers some curious some aghast watch.
one spectator died as a result of the beatings.
photofest end the cold war he has borne against his own kind of flesh.
the festival and its music many claimed had shown the path to an age of love and peace and justice.
altamont however suggested a dark underside of the rock culture its potential for destruction and violence.
as far as i was concerned one participant said altamont was the death knell of all those things that we thought would last forever.
i personally felt like the sixties had been an extravagant stage show and i had been a spectator in the audience.
altamont had rung down the curtain to no applause.
allen ginsberg s estate is affiliated with the naropa institute boulder co understand analyze and evaluate marred by heavy rains that produced a sea of mud and by supplies and facilities completely inadequate for the unexpectedly large crowd.
drugs were everywhere in evidence as was a kind of open sexual freedom that a decade earlier would have seemed unthinkable to all but a few americans.
but woodstock remained peaceful friendly and harmonious there was rhapsodic talk at the time of how woodstock represented the birth of a new youth culture the woodstock nation critics of the new rock and the counterculture were not impressed with the idea of the woodstock nation.
to them the essence of the counterculture was a kind of numbing hopelessness and despair with a menacing and violent underside.
to them the appropriate symbol was not woodstock but another great rock concert which more than 300 000 people attended only four months after woodstock at the altamont speedway east of san francisco.
the concert featured many of the groups that had been at woodstock but the rolling stones who had organized the event were the main attraction.
as at woodstock drugs were plentiful and sexual exhibitionism was frequent.
but unlike woodstock altamont was far from peaceful.
instead it became ugly brutal and violent and resulted in the deaths of four people.
several of them died accidentally one for example from a bad drug trip during which he fell into a stream and drowned but numerous people were brutally beaten by members of the hell s angels motorcycle gang who had been hired by the rolling stones as security guards.
one man was beaten and stabbed to death in front of the stage while the stones were playing sympathy for the devil.
woodstock and altamont then became symbols of two aspects of the counterculture of the late 1960s and early 1970s and of the rock music that created its anthems.
the beat poet allen ginsberg wrote an ecstatic poem proclaiming that at woodstock a new kind of man has come to his bliss to 1 how does rock music of the 1960s differ from rock h roll of the 1950s.
what accounts for these differences.
2 what two characteristics of the counterculture are represented by woodstock and altamont.
was there an altamont nation just as there was a woodstock nation.
3 does popular music today challenge the prevailing culture as rock music of the 1960s challenged the culture of that era.
what lasting effects if any did 1960s rock have on u s society and culture.
small all helped thrust the issue of the war into the center of american politics.
closely related to opposition to the war was opposition to the military draft.
the gradual abolition of many traditional deferments for graduate students teachers husbands fathers and others swelled the ranks of those faced with conscription and thus of those likely to oppose it.
some draft age americans simply refused induction accepting what occasionally were long terms in jail as a result.
others fled to canada sweden and elsewhere where they were joined by deserters from the armed forces to escape conscription.
not until 1977 when president jimmy carter issued a general pardon to draft resisters and a limited amnesty for deserters did the vietnam exiles begin to return to the country in substantial numbers.
the counterculture closely related to the new left was a new youth culture openly scornful of the values and conventions of middle class society.
as if to display their contempt for conventional standards young americans flaunted long hair shabby hippies or fiam oyant clothing and a rebellious 811 812.
chapter 31 candidate party george h w bush republican michael dukakis democrat electoral vote 426 112 50 of electorate voting popular vote 47 946 422 54 0 41 016 429 46 0 the election of 1988 democrats had high hopes going into the election of 1988 but vice president george bush won a decisive victory over michael dukakis who did only slightly better than walter mondale had done four years earlier.
what made it so difficult for a democrat to challenge the republicans in 1988 after eight years of a republican administration.
the wonder and excitement with which americans viewed the dramatic events in the rest of the world.
bush moved cautiously at first in dealing with the changes in the soviet union.
but like reagan he eventually cooperated with gorbachev and reached a series of significant agreements with the soviet union in its waning years.
the united states and the soviet union moved rapidly toward even more far reaching arms reduction agreements.
on domestic issues the bush administration was less successful.
his administration inherited a heavy burden of debt political an a e era deficit that had been growing gridlock for nearty a decade.
the president s pledges to reduce the deficit and simultaneously to promise no new taxes were in conflict with one another.
bush faced a democratic congress with an agenda very differ ent from his own.
the congress and the white house managed on occasion to agree on significant measures.
they cooperated in producing the plan to salvage the floundering savings and loan industry.
in 1990 the president bowed to congressional pressure and agreed to a significant tax increase as part of a multiyear budget package designed to reduce the deficit thus violating his own 1988 campaign pledge.
but the most serious domestic problem facing the bush administration was one for which neither the president nor congress had any answer a recession that began late in 1990 the bush campaign 1988 vice president george bush had never been an effective campaigner but in 1988 he revived his candidacy with an unabashed attack on his opponent s values and patriotism.
bush missed no chance to surround himself with patriotic symbols including this red white and blue hot air balloon in kentucky.
photo by cynthia johnson time life pictures getty images 1990 recession and slowly increased its grip on the national economy in 1991 and 1992 because of the enormous level of debt that corporations and individuals had accumulated in the 1980s the recession caused an unusual number of bankruptcies.
it also increased fear and frustration among middle and working class americans and put pressure on the government to address such problems as the rising cost of health care.
the first gulf war the collapse of the soviet union in 1989 1991 had left the united states in the unanticipated position of being the only real superpower in the world.
one result was that the united states would reduce its military strength and concentrate its energies and resources on pressing domestic problems.
another was that america would continue to use its power actively not to fight communism but to defend its regional from the age of limits to the age of reagan.
853 burning oil fields with the advance of coalition forces into kuwait the retreating iraqi military set fire to hundreds of oil wells and other oil related resources to punish kuwaiti overproduction and to create smoke screens to block smart weapons guided bombs and satellites.
peter turnley corbis and economic interests.
in 1989 that led the administration to order an invasion of panama which overthrew the unpopular military leader manuel noriega under indictment in the united states for drug trafficking and replaced him with an elected pro american regime.
on august 2 1990 the armed forces of iraq invaded and invasion of quickly overwhelmed their small oil rich kuwait neighbor the emirate of kuwait.
saddam hussein the militaristic leader of iraq soon announced that he was annexing kuwait and set out to entrench his forces there.
after some initial indecision the bush administration agreed to lead other nations in a campaign to force iraq out of kuwait through the pressure of economic sanctions if possible through military force if necessary.
within a few weeks bush had persuaded virtually every important government in the world including the soviet union and almost all the arab and islamic states to join in a united nations sanctioned trade embargo of iraq.
at the same time the united states and its allies including the british french egyptians and saudis began deploying a large military force along the border between kuwait and saudi arabia a force that ultimately reached 690 000 troops 425 000 of them american.
on november 29 the united nations at the request of the united states voted to authorize military action to expel iraq from kuwait if iraq did not leave by january 15 1991 on january 12 both houses of congress voted to authorize the use of force against iraq.
and on january 16 american and allied air forces began a massive bombardment of iraqi forces in kuwait and of military and industrial installations in iraq itself.
the allied bombing continued for six weeks.
on february 23 allied primarily american forces under the command of general norman schwarzkopf began a major ground offensive not primarily against the heavily entrenched iraqi forces along the kuwait border as expected but to the north of them into iraq itself.
the allied armies encountered almost no resistance and suffered relatively few casualties 141 fatalities.
estimates of iraqi deaths in the war were 100 000 or more.
on february 28 iraq announced its acceptance of allied terms for a cease fire and the brief persian gulf war came to an end.
the quick and for america relatively painless victory over iraq was highly popular in the united states.
but the tyrannical regime of saddam hussein survived weakened but still ruthless.
the gulf war preserved an independent nation and kept an important source of oil from falling into the hands of iraq.
but many muslims watching americans attacking their fellow religionists became incensed by the u s presence in the region.
the most conservative and militant muslims were insulted by the presence of women in the united nations forces.
but even more moderate middle east muslims began to believe that america was a threat to their world.
even before the gulf war middle eastern terrorists had been targeting americans in the region.
their determination to threaten america grew significantly in its aftermath.
the election of 1992 president bush s popularity reached a record high in the immediate aftermath of the gulf war.
but the glow of that victory faded quickly as the recession worsened in late 1991 and as the administration declined to propose any policies for combating it.
because the early maneuvering for the 1992 presidential election occurred when president bush s popularity remained high many leading democrats declined to run.
that gave 854.

chapter 1 the world before 1492 19 12 12 12 1 4 12 africa in the 1400s describe the political cultural and religious developments in africa that would shape contact between europeans and africans in the americas.
in the late 1400s parts of africa were also undergoing changes that would influence the cultural interactions that would take place in the new world in the 1500s.
just as in europe and the americas none of the people in africa knew that they were living on the edge of events that would turn their world upside down.
yet events were underway that would change the lives economies cultures and worldviews of almost everyone.
ancient ties between africa and europe contact between africa and europe did not begin with prince henrys voyages.
north africa had been part of mediterranean civilization for at least 3 000 years.
what are today the nations of egypt libya algeria morocco and tunisia were some of the richest provinces of the roman empire.
as christianity spread throughout the roman empire some of the strongest christian centers were in north africa.
one of the most influential of all early christian thinkers was st augustine 354 430 born in what is now algeria who served as bishop of the algerian city of hippo.
farther south christianity took root quickly in ethiopia and that part of east africa has remained predominantly christian for 2 000 years.
in addition southern europe and parts of africa south of the sahara desert shared a long history of trade see map 1 5.
this trade was never entirely interrupted even when arab armies conquered north africa in the 600s and islam replaced christianity as the dominant religion there.
1 4 atlantic ocean mediterranean sea ftunis map 1 5 african trade networks.
like american indians africans traded over great distances and the major trade routes made trade centers like timbuktu and gao rich and powerful as goods and often people being sold as slaves were transported through these cities from one region to another.
20 part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 the empires of ghana mali and songhay coastal areas of africa south of the sahara that the portuguese encountered in the mid 1400s differed in customs ethnicity and economic life from muslim north africa.
as these coastal africans met portuguese traders they quickly took an interest in particular european goods including iron and cloth acquiring them through exchanges of hides copper ivory and slaves.
trade produced a greater variety of goods on both continents and for the african elite added the prestige of owning goods from far away.
the africa that first began major economic and cultural contact with europe in those years was a continent that met its northern neighbor on terms of equality in military cultural and technological terms its population not yet decimated by the massive trade in slaves that was to come or by attacks by industrialized european colonial forces.
just south of the sahara the kingdom of ghana governed much of west africa for hundreds of years.
ghanas power was based on trade and its mastery of metalworking to make weapons and tools.
ghana was at the northern end of african trade routes that brought gold ivory and slaves out of the african interior and at the southern end of the desert routes by which muslim traders brought the slaves gold and ivory from south of the sahara to north africa the middle east and europe in exchange for salt silk and other goods.
control of that trade made ghana rich.
royal and religious officials soldiers merchants and iron workers dominated ghana.
as early as 1050 king barmandana of mali began to extend his kingdom and the empire of mali slowly dominated and replaced ghana as the leading power in the region.
barmandana converted to islam and made a pilgrimage to mecca the muslim holy city in arabia.
some 200 years later another malian king sundiata made mali the master of west africa.
when one of sundiatas successors mansa musa made his pilgrimage to mecca in 1324 his lavish caravan and generous gifts spread gold so freely that the value of cairos currency was depressed for many years.
mansa musa built new mosques and schools and established an islamic university at timbuktu that was respected throughout the muslim world for its scholarship.
this mosque in djenne mali was originally built in the 1300s of mud hardened by the sun and was restored in the early 1900s to look much as it did at the height of the mali empire.
to the east of mali another empire songhay grew stronger capturing timbuktu in 1458 just as the portuguese were exploring the african coast.
in the late 1400s under two of its greatest kings sunni ali r 1464 1492 who died in the year of columbuss first voyage and askia muhammad r 1493 1528 songhay became the strongest military and economic power in west africa.
when sunni ali became king of songhay in 1464 he quickly established himself as an effective military leader.
sunni ali also understood the religious divisions of his lands.
the urban inhabitants who controlled trade were mostly muslim.
but in the countryside most people held to traditional beliefs and they were the source of the agricultural wealth of the kingdom.
though himself a muslim sunni ali treated both groups with respect and brought stability and prosperity to his kingdom.
when sunni ali died in 1492 his son and heir sunni baru rejected islam but was overthrown and a new leader askia muhammad r 1493 1528 came to power.
askia muhammad was a devout muslim but like sunni ali he respected traditional customs.
as with mali and ghana songhays power was based on trade.
gold ivory and slaves could be collected from the south and east.
in exchange silks and other fine goods were brought in caravans across the sahara from egypt the middle east and europe.
trade created wealth which allowed both lavish lifestyles and military power that extended the empires.
and trade also facilitated the exchange of ideas and scientific information.
askia muhammads control was such that he was able to make his own pilgrimage to mecca in 1494 1497 trusting subordinates to maintain his rule in his absence.
kongo benin and central africa south of songhay in the kingdoms of kongo benin and surrounding areas government was powerful but far less structured than in the empires of mali and songhay.
in the 1490s portuguese missionaries converted the king of kongo to catholicism.
close ties developed between kongo and the papacy in rome despite the enormous distances between them.
miore than a century later slaves from kongo would confuse english and spanish authorities who did not expect their christian beliefs and knowledge of the catholic mass.
chapter review 24 columbus the columbian exchange and early conquests explain the reasons behind the voyages of columbus and describe early spanish encounters with the peoples of the caribbean mexico and south america.
review questions 1 contextualization what do columbuss words and actions on arriving in the new world tell us about his motives for making his voyages.
2 crafting an argument why did native populations decline so rapidly after 1492.
which cause for this was most important.
3 historical interpretation who were the winners and losers in the shift toward an ocean focused global trade system.
a divided europe the impact of the protestant reformation explain how the protestant reformation and the development of the nation state changed europe and european ideas about how best to settle and govern america.
review question 4 historical interpretation how did political and religious developments in 16th century europe shape the course of european settlement in the americas.
exploration and encounter in north america the spanish 23 analyze early spanish exploration of america north of mexico.
review questions 5 contextualization why did the french try to colonize florida.
why did the spanish respond to these efforts as they did.
6 historical interpretation how do you account for the failure to follow up on the de soto coronado and cabrillo expeditions.
why did spanish authorities remain uninterested in the future united states for so long.
7 contextualization how did the pueblos respond to early spanish efforts to find gold in their territory.
what does their response tell us about their strategies for dealing with these newcomers.
exploration and encounter in north america the french 2 4 analyze early french exploration and claims in north america.
review question 8 comparison compare french lack of interest in a permanent settlement in the northern parts of the future united states and canada in the 1500s with french and spanish interest in settlement in florida.
how do you account for the differences.
2 5 exploration and encounter in north america the english explain english explorers privateers and reasons for settlement.
review questions 9 chronological reasoning how did events in the decades before elizabeth i came to the throne shape her religious policies.
10 contextualization why did contemporaries see most of the european expeditions in north america during the 1500s as failures.
part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 settlements old and new 1607 1754 part part outline chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance this illustration was published in 1624 as part of john smith s book about his time in virginia showing among other things his battles with the american indians his rescue by pocahontas and his map of the colony.
way to make significant profits and created a royal monopoly and virginia its settlers discovered had the ideal climate and conditions for producing tobacco.
the settlers might have preferred to find silver or gold but tobacco quickly became valuable.
in 1622 led by openchancanough powhatans brother and the tribes new leader the algonquians attacked and killed some 300 of the 1 200 english settlers.
the indians had lost patience with the continual encroachment of the english and the lack of trade or other benefits.
attacks continued for more than a decade.
the conflict eventually bankrupted the virginia company but in 1624 virginia had been converted to a royal colony by the king so efforts to settle the area continued.
the shift from trade with indians to tobacco based agriculture in the 1620s sealed the fate of the indians who had been essential to the colonys early survival.
indian land became more valuable to the english than the indians themselves and disease was decimating indian populations.
the new emphasis on agriculture also meant that many from england would settle and farm the land.
the shift also changed the lives of thousands of africans who were brought to the americas as slaves to produce the new crops.
tobacco was a key factor in reshaping who would be a part of this new english speaking nation and the role they would play in the society that emerged.
the massachusetts colonies plymouth boston and beyond during the first two decades of the 1600s many in england were coming to see the country as overpopulated.
changes in agriculture were forcing people out of subsistence farming and into cities.
englands economy was stagnating.
what better outlet for excess population than the new colonies across the ocean.
it was a great service some argued to ship the poor to do the agricultural work that was so badly needed across the sea.
king james especially wanted to see one group on its way across the ocean the protestant extremists who were forever agitating for more change within the church of england also known as the anglican or episcopal church.
0 part ii settlements old and new 1607 protestants who wanted a more complete reformation than the church of england represented came to be known as puritans.
when henry viii and his successors had broken with the pope they maintained a religious liturgy much like the catholic mass and a church governed by bishops.
queen elizabeth i had sought religious peace by tolerating differences in viewpoints as long as people accepted her religious authority and agreed to use the form of worship prescribed in the book of common prayer.
but the puritans wanted change much more change.
they believed that the office of bishop had no base in the bible and that each individual congregation should be self governing.
they believed each individual was responsible for reading and understanding the bible.
those who opposed the church of englands demands for religious uniformity also had major differences among themselves.
some believed it was their duty to stay within the anglican church and work for change.
others thought that change could come only from leaving the established church.
the former tried to purify the church of england and were known as puritans.
the latter group called separatists thought that the church was hopelessly corrupt and that they needed to form their own separate religious communities.
the separatists were constantly in trouble with the authorities since everyone in england was expected to belong to the anglican church and attend its worship every sunday.
to separate oneself from the church to worship in a place or form not authorized by the church was treason.
no wonder king james wanted to harry them out of the land and that so many of the separatists wanted to leave.
separatists also known as pilgrims founded the second permanent english colony in north america at plymouth massachusetts in 1620 the origins of plymouth colony lay in a small community of separatists who left england for holland in 1607 where they were welcomed along with other english religious dissenters.
but the separatists still considered themselves english and they worried about raising children in holland who would become more dutch than english.
eventually they decided that english north america would be a happier place for them.
in 1619 these separatist pilgrims secured a grant of land from the virginia company got financial backing from investors and hired a ship.
after many delays the mayflower sailed from plymouth england on september 6 1620 with 102 passengers.
half the passengers were members of the congregation.
the others were strangers along for adventure or profit.
as william bradford who became plymouths historian wrote of this congregation they knew they were pilgrims after a stormy 2 month voyage they reached land far north of where they meant to go.
realizing that they were outside of the virginia territory and that their new community was split between its religious members and others they promised to combine ourselves together into a civil body politic for our better ordering and preservation future generations would see the mayflower compact as the beginning of government by the consent of the people.
but historians have seen it as something more modest an agreement among a diverse group of people to try to get along with each other through what they knew would be a hard winter in a strange land.
the pilgrims first landing in november 1620 was on the outer end of cape cod at what is now provincetown massachusetts.
by december however they had moved across cape cod bay to a place they named plymouth where a high hill offered protection and a large level area leading down to the harbor was a good place to build a town.
plymouth was empty when the pilgrims landed.
as recently as 1616 1 000 or more indians had lived around plymouth but an epidemic had wiped them out.
as had happened elsewhere in the americas disease traveled faster than people.
enough european fishermen and traders had been traveling along the coast to ensure a plentiful supply of microbes.
the new community quickly built on the smoking tobacco quickly became a popular symbol of sophistication in europe making the production of tobacco in virginia very profitable.
pilgrims a name given to the separatists within the church of england who settled plymouth massachusetts.
mayflower compact the 1620 agreement made among the pilgrims and others whom the pilgrims called strangers on board the ship that brought them to plymouth.
now empty land.
the pilgrims had arrived too late to build the kind of shelter they needed for a new england winter.
during the winter of 1620 1621 about half the community died from disease cold and malnutrition.
some families were wiped out altogether.
they had no contact with native americans but they knew they were being watched constantly.
chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 93 map 4 2 origin and destinations of enslaved africans 1700 1800 this map shows not only the places of origin in africa for most of the slaves transported across the atlantic between 1700 and 1800 but also their destinations in the americas.
while perhaps half a million humans were sold into slavery in british north america almost three times as many people were sold into the british caribbean colonies and an equal number to portuguese brazil.
others of what resistance would mean.
total and unquestionable authority became the order of the day for male owners making them absolute monarchs over their slaves.
by the early 1700s a small group of plantation owners controlled nearly all aspects of life in the southern colonies.
it was a society in which slaves were given no respect a few wealthy white males had unlimited power and the institution of slavery defined the social order.
part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 nations participating and their share in the slave traffic 1700 1800 r l britain d the netherlands 3 100 100 349 600 portugal uss denmark 1 846 900 52 770 i i france british colonies u s a.
1 028 950 211 100 roughly 800 000 africans perished at sea senegambia approximately 6 600 000 departed from africa 1700 1800 africans taken to the americas 1700 1800 es3 senegambia ess bight of biafra 389 150 1 174 050 i i windward coast sis west central africa 521 100 2 440 000 czs gold coast hi mozambique 758 550 131 000 i i bight of benin m 187 300 the fear of slave revolts south carolina and new york in the early 1700s british landowners especially in the southern colonies imported more and more slaves from africa.
the production of tobacco rice and indigo was growing quickly.
charleston south carolina became the largest slave trading center in mainland north america.
but slaves did not accept their fate easily.
they longed for and sometimes fought for their freedom.
as more white colonists came to depend on slave labor for their growing prosperity they also lived in constant fear of slave revolts uprisings that were far from uncommon in all of the colonies.
two examples reflect the volatile conditions throughout the colonies.
the stono slave rebellion of 1739 england and spain were often at war making the border between spanish florida and british south carolina and georgia a tense boundary see map 4 3.
in 1693 spain offered freedom to all fugitives from chanter 4 creatina the culture of british 1 map 4 3 british georgia and spanish florida.
while the border between georgia and florida was considered an international boundary between the british and spanish colonies the reality was that most of the unguarded territory was filled with forest and swamp and for slaves the path from south carolina to spanish florida was a path from slavery to freedom.
south carolina savannah georgia so tt charleston t l.
sullivans island h.
stono rebellion 1739 beaufort ort royai sound l purrysburg new inverness st simons island battle of bloody marsh 1742 atlantic ocean st george gulf of mexico ft mose st augustine english spanish competition and the expansion of slavery into georgia ezz3 southern extent of british slavery regime before 1751 e3 southern extent of british slavery regime 1751 1763 northern limit of spanish claim in 1670 southern limit of british claim in 1736 path from charleston to st augustine major battles 5 fort st george a british lookout post 5 fort mose spanish outpost made up of escaped south carolina slaves stono rebellion uprising in 1739 of south carolina slaves against whites inspired in part by spanish officials promise of freedom for american slaves who escaped to florida.
british territories who came into spanish territory and converted to catholicism.
many carolina slaves heard about spains offer and the number of runaways increased.
throughout the early 1700s a steady stream of slaves managed to make their way to florida and freedom.
some of these runaways were already catholic because they came from parts of africa such as the kingdom of kongo long since converted by portuguese missionaries.
for others converting to catholicism was a route to freedom.
at first the spanish authorities were slow to make good on their promise but they soon realized the value of their policy.
the runaway slaves were a drain on the carolina economy and an embarrassment to the british.
in addition the newly freed slaves were a strong first line of defense on the spanish side of the border.
after all as newly free people in spanish florida they had special reason to defend the territory from the british who wanted to perpetuate their slavery.
one of these former carolina slaves francisco menendez won a special commendation from the spanish in 1728 for his heroism in defending st augustine from english attack.
when the spanish authorities decided to create a separate settlement they called mose to the north of st augustine as a buffer against further attacks the spanish governor placed menendez in charge.
mose was more a fort than a town but it was home to approximately 100 africans who defended florida and organized attacks on the british in south carolina.
a large effort by carolina slaves to gain freedom in spanish florida in 1739 came to be called the stono rebellion the largest slave uprising in the colonies before the american revolution.
it terrified slave masters throughout the british colonies.
the rebellion began when some 60 slaves from the south carolina rice plantations led by a slave named cato walked off their plantations armed themselves burned buildings of the slave owners and killed whites who got in their way as they sought freedom in spanish florida.
fearful slave owners sent the south carolina militia to stop them.
in a battle at stono south carolina 50 miles from what was then the florida border many of the rebels and their white pursuers were killed.
other slaves were captured and returned to slavery.
but some made it to freedom in florida and 96 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 joined the free black community there.
in response the white planter government of south carolina temporarily restricted the importation of more african slaves and permanently curtailed the rights of slaves to assemble with one another.
after the stono rebellion was crushed individual slaves continued to escape south across the border.
menendez the former slave had further adventures.
traveling to spain he was captured by the british and threatened with execution but he eventually escaped and by 1752 was again back leading the militia in florida.
by 1763 mose had a population of 3 000 mostly escaped slaves.
when spain ceded florida to britain in that year they moved the mose africans to cuba where they were given land tools a subsidy and ironically a slave for each leader in the community.
tensions in new york city 1741 in the 1700s slavery was not limited to the southern colonies.
new york city and providence rhode island had some of the largest concentrations of slaves in north america at that time.
new yorks african american community included approximately 2 000 out of the citys 10 000 residents.
slave labor in new york might not have been as backbreaking as on a virginia tobacco or carolina rice plantation but it was slavery nonetheless.
slaves did the worst jobs got no pay and had limited freedom.
they could also be sold south at any time.
nevertheless unlike rural slaves urban slaves had a chance to meet other slaves either at their work or in those taverns that welcomed them.
some of these opportunities frightened whites leading them to react to what they assumed was pending rebellion.
in the early months of 1741 fires swept new york destroying businesses and homes including the governors house.
governor george clarke became convinced that the negros are rising whether or not slaves had anything to do with it the 1741 fires were real.
new yorkers were suffering through a harsh winter.
news of south carolinas stono slave rebellion was in circulation and memories of other slave revolts were fresh.
there had been a slave revolt in the caribbean in the 1730s.
in 1712 new york slaves had killed nine whites and wounded six more.
fear spread easily.
a zealous prosecutor became convinced that there was a conspiracy to kill the citys whites so he brought charges against targeted suspects pitted accused against accused and elicited confessions.
thirty africans most of them slaves and four whites were executed either hanged or burned at the stake.
eighty four other suspects were transported to slavery in jamaica.
the degree to which new yorkers experienced an actual revolt as opposed to being caught up in a fear induced mass hysteria will never be known but the trials illustrate the way those who enslaved others also feared the reality that they had created.
quick review what is the difference between a society with slaves and a slave society and how did part of north america become the latter.
4 3 stability and instability in the american and british worlds analyze the changes in the ideas and daily lives of the people in british north america in the 1700s as a result of events within and beyond the colonies.
in 1706 1707 the english and scottish parliaments passed the act of union formally uniting england and scotland to create great britain.
although the two countries had been ruled by a single monarch since james i came to the throne in 1603 they were separate nations with separate parliaments and the american colonies were english colonies after 1707 england and scotland were one country and the english colonies became british north america.
the act extended the political stability of the glorious revolution.
by 1707 third and fourth generations of people living in the american colonies had never seen britain even though they were of english and act of union the 1707 vote by the scottish and english parliaments to become one nation of great britain.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 123 the proclamation line royal proclamation of 1763 designed to protect indian tribes by setting a boundary at the peaks of the appalachian mountains beyond which no western white settlement was to take place.
western slopes of the mountains and beyond the proclamation line fulfilled what they believed they had been promised.
the grenville administration took other steps to keep peace with the indians.
they replaced amherst with the more conciliatory general thomas gage who immediately resumed negotiations and gift giving with the tribes.
the grenville administration also strengthened the authority of the superintendents of indian affairs who had sought accommodations with the tribes since the 1750s.
the proclamation line slowed white settlement into western pennsylvania ohio and what would become kentucky.
but it also infuriated the british colonists both land hungry farmers and rich speculators and did far too little to protect the indians.
grenville and parliament were too far away and despite the british military outposts their efforts to enforce the line were ineffectual which had fateful consequences in the.
next decade.
the paxton boys and rural white responses in the town of paxton in pennsylvanias lancaster county a group of farmers decided that the way to end warfare between whites and indians on the frontier was to get rid of j all indians whether they were allied with the british or the french.
calling themselves s the paxton boys or the hickory boys these frontier vigilantes said we have long been convinced from sufficient evidence that the indians that lived as independent commonwealths among us or near our borders were our most dangerous enemies.
in december 1763 the paxton boys attacked a delaware village killed six people and burned the town.
then they killed 14 indian survivors who were in protective custody in the town of lancaster.
they began a march to philadelphia to find other indians especially delawares who had taken refuge there.
before the mob got to philadelphia benjamin franklin and a delegation of the colonys leading citizens negotiated an end to the rebellion but the hatred of indians would haunt the inhabitants of north america for a long time to come.
after 1763 many white residents of british north america began to lump all american indians together as an enemy race even though their parents and grandparents had viewed different tribes quite separately depending on a tribes relationship to the british cause.
like many earlier wars the fighting in the french and indian war was between the british and the iroquois allies on one side and the french and the ojibwa ottawa shawnee wyandot and other tribes allied with them.
soon after the war the lines came to be seen as much more racial with all whites allied against virtually all indians.
this change in attitudes had far reaching consequences for the residents of north america.
threats of new taxes relations between the british colonists and the american indians were not the only concern of british authorities after 1763 victory in the war had virtually drained the kingdoms treasury.
britains national debt was double what it had been when the war began.
in 1764 george grenville and the majority in parliament asked britains north american colonists to pay what the authorities in london thought was a fair share of the war s cost.
their argument was that the war had protected colonists far more than it had anyone living in britain.
what seemed just and equitable in london however was seen quite differently in the colonies.
these differences on who should bear the cost of the war would soon have significant consequences.
5 1 quick review what expectations and concerns did indians come to have regarding the british in the aftermath of the war of 1756 1763.
what expectations and concerns were colonists beginning to have regarding native americans.
regarding the british government.
how were the various expectations and concerns in conflict.
124 partlll a rf freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 5 2 revolution was in the minds of the people explain why in the 15 years before the revolutionary war began support for the patriot cause spread so quickly among many different groups of north americans who opposed britain for different reasons.
long after the revolution was over former president john adams wrote to another former president thomas jefferson describing the revolutionary war that began in 1775 as only an effect and consequence according to adams ihe revolution was in the minds of the people and this was effected from 1760 to 1775 in the course of fifteen years before a drop of blood was shed at lexington he was right.
for many british north americans a revolutionary change did indeed take place in their minds between 1760 and 1775 and it took place for many different reasons.
while people like adams and jefferson and many of their peers moved from being loyal british subjects to revolutionary advocates of independence in those years others did not.
people such as thomas hutchinson of massachusetts william franklin benjamins son and perhaps a fifth of the white colonists remained loyalists americans who wanted to maintain loyal ties to great britain and who opposed the american revolution.
for reasons of their own a majority of african slaves were probably also loyalists.
the loyalists lived through the same momentous changes as those who embraced the revolutionary cause but they came to different conclusions.
still other colonists remained neutral throughout the struggle focusing on personal matters or simply not caring who ultimately governed them.
in addition people in the colonies came to their own differing conclusions at varying times.
sailors and shop owners in boston new york and philadelphia as well as backwoods farmers in western pennsylvania virginia and the carolinas were sometimes much more ready for revolution much sooner than their better known leaders.
for african slaves the growing spirit of revolution held both potential and danger.
some slaves and free blacks saw in the revolutionary rhetoric the possibility of their own freedom.
in contrast other african americans saw the british government as a potential protector and even liberator against slave owners who embraced the patriot cause.
potential for freedom was not a guarantee in any scenario however.
ihe iroquois cherokee and other indian tribes knew that frontier whites had little use for the kings ban on white settlement and if freed from british authority would stream west.
as the possibility of expanded settlement fueled revolutionary fervor among frontier whites it also fed fears among indians most of whom sided with the british after 1776 in effect during the 15 fateful years that john adams described above many different groups of people with wide ranging hopes and fears considered the possibility of an american revolution and arrived at different conclusions.
each of these groups fought their own revolutions sometimes in alliance with each other sometimes acting at cross purposes.
far from being clear the goals and tactics of the revolutionaries were an ever changing patchwork as different groups fought for their own purposes and made shifting alliances.
loyalists the name given to those in the colonies perhaps one fifth to one third of the total population who supported the british and opposed american independence.
transition from the rights of man to revolt many residents of the british colonies had grown up reading john lockes defense of britains glorious revolution of 1689 long before tensions between the colonies and the government in london reached a crisis colonists believed as locke said that the people always retained a supreme power to remove or alter the legislative authority when they wanted to.
throughout the 1770s lockes ideas guided some of the revolutions most articulate advocates such as ihomas jefferson john adams and benjamin franklin as well as backwoods rebels like ethan allen a man of modest chapter 5 the making of a revolution 141 recruited often by force from among the poorest germans and german princes would rent them out as units especially to the british.
many hessians soldiers had little interest in the british cause but had little choice except to fight for it.
washington had his own morale problems but his soldiers were somewhat more willing to fight.
as the two sides watched each other washingtons troops dug fortifications to defend brooklyn and manhattan.
in late august howes larger and better trained force attacked brooklyn.
rather than risk battle and capture at this point washington abandoned brooklyn and brought all 9 500 of his troops across the east river to manhattan on the night of august 30 when howe attacked manhattan in september washington again retreated.
throughout the early fall washington continued a retreat and the british advanced through new jersey.
as they settled down for the winter the british held most of new jersey while washingtons army was across the delaware river in pennsylvania.
then on christmas night of 1776 washington and 2 400 troops made a daring raid across the delaware river and captured trenton new jersey.
they also captured many hessian soldiers some of whom quickly joined the rebel side.
in january they would go on to successfully attack a british force in princeton.
by the winter of 1776 1777 washington controlled southern new jersey while the british held northern new jersey and new york city which they would control throughout the war.
in may 1777 british general john burgoyne assembled a large army in canada.
his plan was to proceed down the hudson river and smash the unnatural rebellion in new york and new england.
initially the plan went well.
burgoyne had some 8 300 men including 3 000 german troops.
he led his army across lake champlain overran the americans at fort ticonderoga and continued south into new yorks hudson river valley an exhausting effort that involved moving a large army with heavy supplies through dense forests.
as he moved through the area burgoynes sometimes pompous pronouncements to colonists and the german troops inability to communicate with them bred additional colonial resentment and motivated fresh volunteers for the american cause.
in september 1777 near saratoga new york burgoynes army encountered american troops under the command of an experienced general horatio gates and benedict arnold still on the american side but soon to be caught negotiating a plan with the british to defect.
the british were surprised that their bayonet charge could not break the american lines.
both armies suffered heavy losses but neither won a decisive victory.
burgoynes army was now cut off from its winter quarters and shortly after was forced to negotiate.
some 5 800 british troops were captured and held as prisoners until the end of the war.
the battle of saratoga was a turning point for the colonial cause.
it eliminated a significant british force and it proved to the world especially those in france and spain who were watching the war closely that the americans could stand up to britains toughest troops.
as a result american diplomats including benjamin franklin were able to negotiate an agreement with the french and later the spanish to recognize the united colonies and provide military assistance.
the british wanted not only to split the colonies and especially to capture washington and his army but also to catch the members of the continental congress by overtaking philadelphia where the congress met.
in september 1777 british troops captured philadelphia but the members of congress escaped before the british arrived.
washington was able to block supplies into the city and the following spring the british abandoned philadelphia which remained in colonial hands for the rest of the war though there were continued riots between patriots and loyalists in the city.
before the british left philadelphia however the american forces had to survive perhaps their most difficult winter.
washington selected valley forge pennsylvania 18 miles northwest from philadelphia as a place to keep an eye on the british in the city.
his army was exhausted cold and hungry and they got colder and hungrier as the winter continued.
for weeks there was little to eat.
in time however washington was able to appoint commissary officers who found food and clothing for the soldiers.
a prussian 142 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 officer volunteering in the american cause baron von steuben began training the troops in close order drills.
von steuben possessed expertise in military training and hoped to make a name and a home for himself in a free america.
in addition a french officer the marquis de lafayette was recruited to lead forces that harassed the british.
by the time the british sailed out of philadelphia the american troops were better fed and clothed better trained and ready for new battles preparation they would need in the next years.
in 1778 general sir henry clinton replaced howe and a new british strategy took shape.
clinton ordered the royal navy to harass the colonists up and down the atlantic coast and encouraged britains indian allies to attack frontier settlements.
in addition he sent the main british land force south to overrun the carolinas and georgia.
if he could detach those three colonies clinton thought the revolution might crumble.
after 1778 the major battles of the war would be in the colonies western and southern regions.
the importance of france and spain the revolution was won by the rebels for many reasons including the key fact that france and spain were willing to help.
the two countries had their own reasons for wanting to embarrass the british and reduce britains power on the world stage.
in particular both france and spain wanted greater access to trade with north america which was highly restricted as long as the british controlled the colonies.
by the 1770s the french still resented the british victory in the seven years war and wanted to ensure that france not britain was the dominant power in europe.
as early as 1775 france sent agents to america to see what might be gained from assisting in the rebellion.
similarly spain started to supply the colonists with food and gunpowder from spanish held new orleans and cuba.
while they were willing to support the rebellion neither france nor spain wanted to engage in war with britain unless the colonists were serious.
in arguing for a declaration of independence in 1776 adams told the congress foreign powers cannot be expected to acknowledge us till we have acknowledged ourselves and taken our station among them as a sovereign power an independent nation he had two specific foreign powers in mind.
in 1776 benjamin franklin led an american delegation in paris to seek further help.
franklin with his simple fur cap and plain spectacles yet sophisticated manner charmed the french.
however franklin needed more than charm to win real help.
with the americans declared independence and victory over britains troops at saratoga french leaders started to take him more seriously.
his diplomatic efforts secured important supplies and in february 1778 a full french alliance with the united states of america the first diplomatic recognition of the new nation.
a few months later france formally declared war on great britain.
for the rest of the war washington could count on the french army and navy to fight the british.
in 1779 spain also declared war on britain.
spanish forces moved up the mississippi river from new orleans and along the gulf coast and took the british forts at baton rouge natchez mobile and pensacola.
spanish attacks in the mississippi river valley diverted british troops from the atlantic coast helping the american effort.
once france and spain went to war with britain the american revolution became a world war.
the french and british navies fought in the english channel spain attacked british held gibraltar in the mediterranean and all of them fought battles in the caribbean.
most important for the american cause the french fleet supported washingtons troops throughout the latter part of the war while spanish funds and smuggling efforts provided badly needed supplies.
the iroquois and the british the iroquois were divided about how to respond to the rebellion and at the beginning of the war most sought to remain neutral.
however many saw britain as the key to their independence and as the war continued neutrality faded.
beginning in the summer of 1777 mohawks under the leadership of thayendanegea also known as joseph brant attacked white communities 5 1 2 53 chapter 6 creating a nation 163 american voices judith sargent murray on the equality of the sexes 1792 judith sargent murray was born into a merchant family in massachusetts in 1751 and lived through the revolution as a young woman.
she was a leader of the universalist movement in religion which believed that all people were saved a belief that led them to emphasize equality including equality of the sexes.
she argued that differences between the sexes were due to educational opportunities rather than inherent qualities and she wanted an education that would make women the equals of their brothers husbands and sons.
she argued that the way society constructed women s roles perpetuated the stereotype of women as overly emotional and not thoughtful.
with an equal education she insisted women could at least equal men.
her most famous book on the equality of the sexes was published in 1792 is it upon mature consideration we adopt the idea that nature is thus partial in her distributions.
is it indeed a fact that she hath yielded to one half of the human species so unquestionable a mental superiority may we not trace its source in the difference of education the one is taught to aspire and the other is early confined and limited.
as their years increase the sister must be wholly domesticated while the brother is led by the hand through all the flowery paths of science.
grant that their minds are by nature equal yet who shall wonder at the apparent superiority if indeed custom becomes second nature at length arrived at womanhood the uncultivated fair one feels a void which the employments allotted her are by no means capable of filling she experiences a mortifying consciousness of inferiority which embitters every enjoyment now was she permitted the same instructors as her brother with an eye however to their particular departments for the employment of a rational mind an ample field would be opened a mind thus filled would have little room for the trifles with which our sex are with too much justice accused of amusing themselves and they would thus be rendered fit companions for those who should one day wear them as their crown should it still be vociferated your domestic employments are sufficient i would calmly ask is it reasonable that a candidate for immortality for the joys of heaven an intelligent being who is to spend an eternity in contemplating the works of deity should at present be so degraded as to be allowed no other ideas than those which are suggested by the mechanism of a pudding or the sewing the seams of a garment.
pity that all such censurers of female improvement do not go one step further and deny their future existence to be consistent they surely ought.
yes ye lordly ye haughty sex our souls are by nature equal to yours the same breath of god animates enlivens and invigorates us and that we are not fallen lower than yourselves.
source judith sargent murray on the equality of the sexes first published in the massachusetts magazine april 1790 reprinted in eve kornfeld creating an american culture 1775 1800 a brief history with documents boston bedford st martin s 2001 pp.
127 132 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what differences did murray note between the education of boys and girls.
what consequences did she attach to those differences.
2 historical interpretation what vision of republican womanhood did murray support.
how did her vision differ from that embodied in the emerging ideology of republican motherhood.
who shut them.
man despotic man an education that produced such a speaker may have been more than rush envisioned when he proposed the school.
women also took a more direct role in politics when they could.
new jerseys 1776 constitution gave women the right to vote but the provision was repealed in 1807 ihe bill of rights that was added to the federal constitution in 1791 gave all citizens women as well as men the right to petition the government for a redress of grievances and women regularly petitioned congress and state legislatures.
after the revolution women also gained significant new rights to control their own property which they had not had before the war.
it would be a long time before law and culture would support the equality that abigail adams or judith sargent murray advocated.
but attitudes had begun to change.
within the ideology of republican motherhood however two double standards emerged.
first middle and upper class white women were expected to be the guardians of sexual morality.
men might stray but as a philadelphia newspaper editorialized ladies much depends on you towards a reformation in the morals of our sex and if men did stray it was expected they would do so only with lower class or poor white women or with blacks slave or free.
second servants and working women were part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 although it is often forgotten new jersey s 1776 state constitution gave that state s women the right to vote a right they exercised enthusiastically until the provision was repealed in 1807 not included in either the rules or the opportunities for education and influence that the ideal of republican motherhood gave to supposedly all women but in reality the increasingly well educated and active women of higher social and economic status.
quick review did the revolutionary war have a truly revolutionary effect on britain s former colonies.
address the changes or lack thereof among at least two groups in your answer.
creating a government writing the u s constitution explain the needs pressures and compromises that led to writing and adopting the constitution.
6 2 the years immediately after the revolution were not easy ones in the new united states of america.
many americans were unhappy with the situation in which they found themselves.
farmers were angry about taxes.
frontier whites and indians fought for control of the land.
many women were agitating for their own rights.
some of the most famous revolutionary leaders including washington franklin and hamilton were determined to end the growing chaos and reshape the new nation they had helped to create.
the crisis of the 1780s the failure of the articles of confederation the problems that the nation faced in the 1780s had many sources.
ihe articles of confederation that governed the nation were essentially a treaty among 13 independent nations.
all 13 states needed to agree to levy any taxes and 9 states had to agree to pass a law.
real sovereignty in this case the ability to make the most important decisions about how americans should govern themselves and pay for their government rested with the state governments.
chapter 6 creating a nation 177 chapter review 6 1 the state of the nation at war s end explain how the outcome of the american revolution affected different groups in the new united states.
review questions 1 historical interpretation what light do the newburgh conspiracy and shayss rebellion shed on the economic challenges facing the new nation at the conclusion of the revolutionary war.
what do they suggest about the connection between economic problems and political divisions during the period.
2 comparison compare and contrast the situation of african americans both enslaved and free in the northern states the middle states and the southern states in the decades following the american revolution.
what might explain the differences you note.
3 contextualization how did revolutionary ideology shape ideas about gender roles in the late 1700s and early 1800s.
6 2 creating a government writing the u s constitution explain the needs pressures and compromises that led to writing and adopting the constitution.
review questions 4 historical interpretation what role did economic issues play in prompting calls for the creation of a stronger central government.
5 crafting an argument is it fair to describe the constitution as ratified in 1788 asa proslavery document.
why or why not.
6 contextualization why did antifederalists view the constitution as a threat to liberty.
how did the experience of british colonial rule shape their views.
m new birth of freedom creating the united states of america h b president george washington reviews troops at fort cumberland on the potomac before leading them to suppress the whiskey rebellion.
frederick kemmelmeyer general george washington reviewing the western army at fort cumberland the 18th of october 1794 after 1794 oil on paperbacked with linen 18 1 8x23 1 8.
courtesy of winterthur museum.
when new hampshire and virginia voted to ratify the constitution in june 1788 it became the law of the land.
but putting that new law into effect was not easy.
the old congress as well as local and state officials in the 13 states needed to conduct elections.
those elected to the new positions as members of the u s house of representatives and senate and as the new president would breathe life into the words of the constitution and set precedents based on their interpretation of its meaning or their preferences that would last for generations.
different americans however interpreted the constitution differently.
americans discovered that they wanted the country to develop in diverse ways and began long term arguments with one another about policy.
soon after the new congress was elected it created and enacted the bill of rights 10 amendments that many thought should have been part of the original document.
with this addition more americans felt comfortable that they had created a government that would protect their rights and maintain their freedom.
once elected as president george washington quickly set out to define this important american role.
he appointed the first members of the supreme court and other judges and created a presidential cabinet to carry out the work of his administration.
one cabinet member secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton laid the foundation for the nations economic system.
washington himself asserted federal authority and expanded the u s army to win indian wars on the nations frontier.
washingtons vice president john adams and his secretary of state thomas jefferson who would later become the next two presidents worked together in this early government but eventually became bitter rivals whose arguments represented different directions for the country.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 189 7 1.
7 2 13 the battles between the u s military and a confederation of tribes that were fought between 1785 and 1795 were sometimes referred to as the northwest indian war or little turtle s war in recognition of the central role of the miami leader little turtle in the early defeats of the u s forces.
nevertheless between 1789 and 1791 he rode by carriage and horseback from new york through much of new england and across the south.
the trip allowed him to address important issues such as religious freedom hear from citizens and personalize a distant national government.
welcoming the nations greatest hero and leader was the social event of the season for these small town residents and for many it consolidated the sense of belonging to one nation.
privately washington sometimes complained about the accommodations but he was convinced that his speeches and meetings had done much to build good will and support for the nation and his administration.
indian wars building the u s army washington was deeply concerned about how to handle the frontier indian tribes.
he blamed much of the problem on the turbulence and disorderly conduct of settlers who would not wait for permission or protection to enter the new territories but then who complained bitterly when indians attacked them.
still he needed to act with caution because he wanted these new settlers to be loyal citizens despite his frustration with them.
on a personal level he himself like many members of congress had speculated in western lands and stood to make money if the land could actually be opened to white settlement.
but given the poverty of the federal government including only 600 soldiers in the army when washington became president the president hardly commanded a force that could make much of a difference in the vast western territory.
ihe chief representative of the u s government on the western frontier arthur st clair was both the appointed governor of what were then the northwest territories of the united states lands indians claimed and a major general in the army.
congress had ordered him to end all indian titles to the lands between the ohio and mississippi rivers.
but st clair lacked the resources to do his job.
his strategy as he wrote to washington was to divide and conquer to seek many treaties with individual tribes rather than one overall treaty with all the tribes.
but this strategy did not go well.
in 1789 just before washingtons inauguration st clair negotiated several treaties with one group of indian leaders at fort harmar but most other leaders and most tribes rejected these treaties making them virtually useless.
in 1790 washington asked congress to expand the army so it could force the tribes of the ohio region to sue for peace before a blow is struck at them congress agreed to expand the army to 1 000 men and added 1 500 state militia from kentucky virginia and pennsylvania.
this increased force however was still not strong enough to win the victories the president thought essential.
in september 1790 1 450 troops under general josiah harmar marched into the territory of the miami and shawnee to destroy villages and crops as a show of force that might stop the attacks on frontier settlements.
in october harmars army was attacked by shawnees miamis and pottawattamies and 500 of the americans were killed before the rest retreated.
after this defeat attacks on white settlements continued and attempts at negotiating peace failed.
although some indians led by a seneca named cornplanter sought to make a separate peace for their tribes most others rejected the governments proposed treaties.
in 1791 president washington ordered a new attack.
general st clair himself led 2 000 troops in a direct assault on the miamis on the wabash river in what is now indiana.
on november 4 1791 1 500 indians from several tribes led by mishikinakwa or little turtle of the miami and blue jacket of the shawnee killed over 500 troops and most of the expeditions female camp followers.
washington was shocked that st clair had allowed his army to be cut to pieces hacked butchered tomahawked and relieved st clair of his command.
as 1792 began most of the area the united states called its northwest territory was in indian hands.
190 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 throughout 1792 the washington administration and many of the indians tried to negotiate.
in june 1792 joseph brant the mohawk leader who had earlier traveled to london to meet with king george iii went to philadelphia and met with president washington becoming one of the few people to meet with both national leaders.
the meeting with washington was cordial but did not lead to any final agreements and brant continued to strengthen his ties with britain.
brant and most of the iroquois shawnee and miami leaders were determined to allow no white settlement west of the ohio river and demanded that the united states abandon its forts in that territory.
but white settlers continued to move across the ohio river.
they and their government wanted more land.
some of the negotiations were good faith efforts.
some were a sham.
all failed.
while some in congress and the press argued for peace and an end to the waste of money and lives in western military campaigns washington called for a full scale war on the indians.
secretary of war knox began to create a truly professional army of 5 000 men.
in late 1793 he launched a third military campaign in the northwest territory.
in place of the disgraced st clair washington appointed anthony wayne known as mad anthony wayne as major general of the u s army.
wayne trained his army and during the winter of 1793 1794 they built a new base fort recovery on the site of st clairs defeat.
in august 1794 waynes army defeated a large indian force led by the shawnee blue jacket at the battle of fallen timbers near present day toledo ohio.
after fierce fighting among twisted tree limbs and trunks the indians broke ranks and retreated.
british forces at the nearby fort miami did not support their indian allies and wayne decided not to attack the british fort see map 7 1.
a year later the treaty of greenville ended major hostilities between indians and whites in the future states of ohio and indiana.
the treaty established indian reserves treaty of greenville a treaty agreed to in 1795 in which native americans in the northwest territory were forced to cede most of the present states of ohio indiana illinois michigan and wisconsin to the united states.
nt british north america 7 1 7 2 73 x4 x.
o zliio new hampshire massachuset7 vermont fort efz oswegatchie 5 w 3 we9 mewyork aultste marie fort michiliimackinac 1 illinois fwme8 g0 hamar s 1 rt detrp sauk5and fort foxes dearbpirn 7572 pqwtayvatomis kickapoos territory ohio illinois touts shawnees kentucky quapaws tenness cr1ppewas pennsylvania wyandots st clair s delawares 1791.
sil rhode island connecticut new jersey sowiis is delaware amk maryland vt spanish territory vi ijiha north caroj na 3 33sfs is zz 3 3 mississippi 1 chickasaws territoryf horseshoe bend j 1814 creeks georgia choctaws s sfani south carolina atlantic ocean spanish florida seminoles y gulf of mexico j ceded before 1784 battle ceded 1784 1809 british fort unceded indian lands 1809 american fort map 7 1 indian removals and resistance 1790 1814 between the end of the revolution in 1783 and the treaty of greenville in 1795 there was almost constant warfare between native american tribes and the u s army in the northwest territory and further battles well into the 1800s elsewhere in what was then the west of the country.
chapter review how well did the early american government under the constitution uphold its spirit and ideals.
how did issues not addressed within the document lead to controversy later on.
chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 1801 1823 jefferson and the republican ideal the ideal of religious freedom beyond the mississippi the louisiana purchase and the expedition of lewis the war of 1812 expanding american territory and influence chapter will examine these ideals and explore their effect on the growth of religious bodies as well as on the expansion and consolidation of american territory and power through the louisiana purchase the war of 1812 and policies such as the monroe doctrine.
210 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 8 1 table 8 1 comparison of the first political parties federalists and democratic republicans jefferson and the republican ideal explain how jefferson s republicanism shaped and reflected the nation s democratic culture.
from the moment he took office jefferson set a new tone for the federal government.
his inaugural address emphasized conciliation and national unity while his actions involved dramatic changes.
jefferson wanted to preside over a country in which social equality among white male citizens and individual freedom were the order of the day.
the social hierarchies that had characterized the colonial era and the first years of the republic were he thought long out of date.
he wanted a limited government that fostered the kind of freedom that was his ideal.
most of his countrymen it seems agreed.
jefferson quickly sold the horses and coaches that john adams had used.
in place of formal state dinners he held smaller dinner parties.
what some called a pell mell seating arrangement marked these gatherings at the white house.
there was no assigned seating and no respect for the rank of the dignitaries who attended.
the president simply sat down with whomever he found interesting and expected the other guests to do the same.
a british diplomat described the new president as a host with a most perfect disregard to ceremony both in his dress and manner and vowed never to attend another white house dinner.
these changes in tone were not trivial.
they represented what was quickly becoming the dominant ideology of the united states quite different from that of the federalists a commitment to a democratic republican government but also republicanism in personal styles and political beliefs see table 9 1.
americans valued equality not only in terms of representation in government but also in terms of how americans treated others at state dinners in the white house at town meetings and in taverns and family homes.
they also valued a notion of freedom in which a nation of independent farmers could make their own decisions independent of one another if they preferred.
american republicanism was a new way for citizens to relate to each other emphasizing equality and independence far more than the class separation deference and dependence that had marked british north america and great britain itself.
federalists originally organized by supporters of the constitution although george washington insisted he stood above party and hated the idea of political parties he was usually considered to be a federalist.
the federalists supported john adams for president in the elections of 1796 and 1800 the party wanted a strong national government favored hamilton s economic reforms and generally supported stronger u s ties with great britain.
after the 1800 election the federalists never again dominated the national government but remained strong in new england for another 20 years.
they nominated their last presidential candidate in 1816 democratic republicans began as an informal protest movement led by jefferson and madison in response to hamilton s economic plans by the 1796 and 1800 elections democratic republicans formed a well defined caucus within the congress though hardly a modern political party.
between 1800 and 1820s it was the nation s majority party the democratic republican party sometimes called the jeffersonian republican or simply the republican party.
the party sought a smaller federal government wanted less federal involvement in economic matters and generally favored france over great britain.
by the 1820s it was the only remaining political party before splitting into the democrats and the whigs.
significant dates 8 1 1800 thomas jefferson elected president 1803 louisiana purchase u s supreme court s marbury v madison decision ohio admitted to the union 1804 1806 lewis and clark expedition 1807 chesapeake leopard affair congress passes embargo act 1808 james madison elected president 1812 1815 war of 1812 1812 american defeat at detroit 1813 american victories on great lakes and battle of the thames death oftecumseh 1814 jackson victory over creeks at battle of horseshoe bend the british burn washington d c treaty of ghent signed ratified 1815 1815 u s victory at battle of new orleans 1816 james monroe elected president 1817 rush bagot treaty demilitarized the great lakes between the united states and canada 1818 anglo american convention set the border between the united states and canada and included an agreement for temporary joint ownership of the oregon territory 1819 adams onis treaty spain cedes florida to the united states 1822 plans for slave revolt in charleston led by denmark vesey 1823 monroe doctrine republicanism a complex changing body of ideas values and assumptions that developed in the united states in the late 1790s and early 1800s around thomas jefferson and james madison s political organizing and their campaigns for the presidency.
chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 219 i 84 83 authorities that he knew he was ordained for some great purpose in the hands of the almighty and that the great day of judgment was at hand he confirmed what they had been fearing about slave religion.
the longing for freedom usually took less violent paths however.
slavery depended on hopelessness and religion gave slaves hope that could lead to resistance.
the songs of the slave quarter are often songs of freedom.
thus slaves sang steal away steal away steal away to jesus.
steal away steal away home i aint got long to stay here.
sometimes these lyrics meant stealing away to the religious meeting but they could also mean stealing away from slavery to flee north.
at the same time northern free blacks began to form their own religious orga j nizations.
richard allen was born a slave in delaware.
he converted to methodism and was able to purchase his freedom and begin preaching.
although allen preached to white and black congregations he soon saw a large field open in seeking and instructing my african brethren who had been a long forgotten people and few of them attended public worship because white churches were not always welcoming allen became convinced that a racially integrated congregation was impossible.
in response he organized the bethel church in philadelphia in 1794 thus was born the african methodist episcopal church which by 1820 had 4 000 members in philadelphia and 2 000 more in baltimore.
other black methodists founded the african methodist episcopal zion church in new york.
african american baptists also created their own congregations.
fears of religiously inspired slave rebellions especially after denmark veseys rebellion of 1822 led southern governments to block the growth of independent black churches but in the north free black churches thrived as their members exercised leadership developed their own ideas and worshipped among themselves.
american catholic and jewish communities in the early years of the republic there were few roman catholics or jews in the areas of the original 13 colonies.
during the late 1700s and early 1800s the largest number of catholics in north america lived in new orleans which had become part of the united states only in 1803 and in texas new mexico and california which were still part of mexico until the 1840s.
nearly all white immigrants to the british colonies had been at least nominally protestant except for catholics who had been granted safe haven in maryland.
religious freedom in the jeffersonian era was tremendously important to those who were in the smallest minorities.
the freedom to form their own religious organizations free of government control and often free of full authority by their own senior leaders was important to catholics and jews in jeffersonian america.
in 1790 john carroll was appointed the first catholic bishop in america.
he was based in maryland where catholics having lost their right to govern the colony had again gained religious freedom after the revolution see chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 225 the war of 1812 8 4 analyze the causes and impact of the war of 1812 jefferson expanded the united states but he had been able to do little about the british and french navies that threatened the country as a result of conflicts between the two european powers.
the actions jefferson took to protect the united states on the seas actually hurt the country economically what had begun as an irritating concern to jefferson escalated into the war of 1812 during the presidency of his successor james madison.
that conflict which continued from 1812 to 1815 deserves more attention than it often receives from historians.
the war resolved issues that had limited u s development for decades and its conclusion launched a new period of growth for the country.
it was the last war ever fought between the united states and great britain.
the two nations had been in conflict almost nonstop since 1775 but the end of this war brought real peace.
it was also the last war in which indian tribes were allied with one nation or against another.
after the war no tribe was ever again able to make an alliance with a foreign nation and the u s government treated the tribes less and less as sovereign nations and more as an internal matter renewed tension between the united states and great britain the tensions that led the united states and great britain to go to war in 1812 had existed since the battles of lexington and concord in 1775 despite treaties the two nations were never fully at peace and each made alliances with indian tribes to make trouble for the other.
for the british troubles in north america were a sideshow to a world war with france that had begun in 1689 and continued with brief pauses until 1815 english colonists fought on the british side until the french and indian war ended in 1763 in 1778 france had come to the aid decisive aid of the american colonists in the revolution.
with the coming of the french revolution in 1789 and the rise of napoleon in 1799 the war between britain and france took on a deeper ideological tone.
while earlier wars had primarily been territorial disputes after their revolution the french saw themselves as the agents of democracy against a despotic coalition led by britain.
especially after the rise of napoleon the british saw themselves as defenders of the free world against napoleonic tyranny.
in the united states the greatest divide between the emerging political parties was the federalist tilt toward britain and the democratic republican tilt toward france.
by early 1806 napoleons armies controlled most of the european continent while the british royal navy controlled the oceans.
for the united states british control of the seas was a much larger threat than worries about who controlled the european continent.
with britain and france each casting itself as the defender of freedom while fighting for national preservation the war was intense.
to survive britain depended on its navy to protect the island nation from invasion and to dominate the oceans.
but the royal navy was always short of sailors and one of the reasons for the shortage was the tendency of british sailors to desert and join the crew of a u s merchant vessel where the working conditions were better and the pay up to five times higher.
the british regularly stopped u s merchant vessels and occasionally warships on the high seas in violation of international law to search for their own sailors and all too often also to force any able bodied seaman british or american into service.
this policy of seizing sailors or impressment was seen as vital to britain but it was a direct threat to american freedom and to the economic survival of the united states.
impressments had long infuriated americans and in fact had helped spark the revolution in 1776 see chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 285 he said disunion by armed force is treason he told a south carolina congressman i will hang the first man of them i can get my hands on to the first tree i can find he backed his words with action reinforcing federal garrisons and sending armed revenue ships to charleston harbor.
he also shifted the collection of customs duties in charleston to warships offshore.
when governor hayne told senator thomas hart benton of missouri that he did not think jackson would really hang anyone benton who knew jackson better replied i tell you hayne when jackson begins to talk about hanging they can begin to look out for ropes jackson also lobbied to ensure no other southern state supported south carolina and pushed congress to keep the tariffs low.
in the end no shots were fired.
on march 1 1833 congress passed a compromise tariff that henry clay had crafted based on adamss proposals and gave the president the authority to put down the rebellion.
wiser heads in south carolina decided to compromise.
the state convention reconvened and declared victory based on the new clay tariff.
for spite they also nullified the congressional vote of new military authority which they called the force bill but that action was now meaningless since south carolina was no longer resisting federal authority.
jackson won the nullification battle but it was an incomplete victory.
he made it clear in words and actions which abraham lincoln would use as precedent that no state could nullify federal law and that the u s government would use force to assert its authority.
he was treated as a hero in many parts of the country and even thinking historically the nullification crisis the 1832 south carolina convention that passed the ordinance of nullification said whereas the congress of the united states by various acts purporting to be acts laying duties and imposts taxes on foreign imports but in reality intended for the protection of domestic manufacturers and giving the bounties to classes and individuals engaged in particular employments at the expense and to the injury and oppression of other classes and individuals hath exceeded it just powers under the constitution we therefore the people of the state of south carolina in convention assembled do declare and ordain that the several acts and parts of acts of the congress of the united states purporting to be laws for the imposing of duties and imposts on the importation of foreign commodities are unauthorized by the constitution of the united states and violate the true meaning and intent thereof and are null void and no law nor binding upon this state its officers or citizens.
this declaration was not the first time in u s history that a state had taken such a stand.
the kentucky and virginia resolves of 1798 and 1799 written by thomas jefferson and james madison had said the same thing about the alien and sedition acts.
the hartford convention that met in 1814 said the much the same thing about congress having declared war on great britain in 1812 yet unlike the response to earlier challenges president jackson declared the south carolina ordinance incompatible with the existence of the union and prepared for a military response.
source statues at large of south carolina vol.
columbia south carolina a s johnston 1836.
thinking critically 1 documentary analysis why did the authors of the ordinance of nullification believe that the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 were unconstitutional.
2 craft an argument defend or refute the following statement as the nullification crisis demonstrates the ratification of the constitution in 1788 was only a first tentative step towards defining the relationship between the federal government and the states what events and developments between 1788 and 1832 support your position.
i6 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 given an honorary degree by harvard university.
even so neither calhoun nor the south carolina legislature admitted defeat.
in fact that legislature passed a new law in 1834 requiring anyone holding state office to swear primary loyalty to south carolina and only conditional loyalty to the federal government.
this law effectively barred unionists those moderates who disagreed with nullification perhaps a third of the states voters from state office for the next 30 years.
alexis de tocqueville was in the united states during the nullification crisis.
he took a dim view of the compromise on the tariff and the decision of south carolina to nullify the force bill either i am mistaken or the federal government of the unites states is daily losing its power it is gradually withdrawing from public affairs and is increasingly narrowing its sphere of action 1 think i have seen a more lively feeling of independence and a more evident affection for regional government developing in the individual states of the union.
the outcome of this movement tocqueville said was hidden in the future and i do not claim the ability to lift the veil but he remained worried for the future of the country.
10j 10 2 10 j 10 1 quick review was andrew jackson s presidency democratic.
which of his actions and policies support your argument.
democratized religion the second great awakening analyze the diversity of american religious experience and how the freedom of the era gave rise to diverse religious expressions.
10 2 most americans had strong opinions about andrew jackson.
they might love or hate him but they followed his career.
however politics was far from the only interest of most people.
many things closer to home and sometimes closer to their own souls mattered more.
for many americans in the 1820s and 1830s the growth of a more popular democracy and popular social movements led by ordinary citizens was far more important than presidents jacksons policies or opinions.
no popular movement was more powerful than the upsurge in religious activity that took place in jacksonian america.
once again de tocqueville understood the country well there is no country in the whole world in which the christian religion retains a greater influence over the souls of men than in america he described the christianity he saw as a democratic and republican religion when de tocqueville wrote these words in the early 1830s the second great awakening was in full swing.
it had begun around 1800 see chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 287 103 in july 1824 finney was ordained a presbyterian minister in spite of his lack of formal training.
in 1826 the spirit of revivalism hit upstate new york and in 1830 finney led the largest religious revival ever seen in rochester new york.
six hundred people joined one of the towns three presbyterian churches and the other denominations were also strengthened.
finney did not seek an emotional catharsis from his congregants but like an attorney argued his case logically using wit and wisdom.
nevertheless in his preaching the rigid religious orthodoxy that dominated congregational and presbyterian churches gave way to a more egalitarian spirit.
finney called people to change their lives not necessarily to agreement with specific creeds.
because of his preaching hundreds then thousands took religion more seriously joined churches participated in reform movements and changed new york and american society.
by the late 1830s the area along the erie canal where finney preached had become known as the burned over district because of the fires of religious enthusiasm that rolled over the region.
finney was far from the only revivalist in new york.
however he gave the new york revivals a distinct tone different not only from the emotionalism of frontier revivals but also from the staid life of many established churches.
ihe erie canal also made communications easier and faster than before so word of the revivals traveled fast.
lyman beecher and the growth of voluntary societies as a young minister lyman beecher had been one of the staunchest defenders of state support for the congregational churches in connecticut see chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 289 this illustration from an anti alcohol publication makes the claim that drunkenness was the cause of many problems in society especially the abuse of women.
prove her point.
the result beginning in massachusetts was that a system of state hospitals for the insane replaced the earlier prisons.
many other reforms also blossomed.
although the campaign against alcohol would reach its peek many decades later it began during the second great awakening.
lyman beecher preached temperance sermons that were widely reprinted including one in which he said what then is this universal natural and national remedy for intemperance.
it is the banishment of ardent spirits from the list of lawful objects of commerce many including members of congress took the pledge to stop drinking the u s army stopped the old tradition of a ration of alcohol and refusing to drink became a mark of religious observance in many circles.
at the same time the american peace society advocated an end to all wars.
the american sunday school union distributed not only bible stories but also basic reading books in places where there were no schools.
schools were opened for those who were deaf and blind.
efforts were made to rescue prostitutes.
countless reforms designed to create a better more humane and sometimes more tightly controlled society emerged from the enthusiasm of the awakening.
utopian religious communities the religious enthusiasm of the early 1800s also inspired untraditional ways of thinking about religious matters.
large american spaces that allowed people to develop their own communities relatively undisturbed and the american emphasis on liberty even the liberty to be eccentric made the united states fertile ground for radical experiments and utopian religious communities.
some of these religious experiments were short lived.
others lasted for generations.
a few most of all the mormons have continued to the present.
mother ann lee and the shakers the founder of the united society of believers in christs second appearing or the shakers was ann lee known as mother ann lee who before the american revolution gathered a few supporters in england and came to america in 1774 lee was convinced that she was receivings special revelation from god that human sexuality was the basis of all sin and celibacy was the only way to live a godly life.
lee inspired shaker communities in new york and new england.
shaker worship reflected lees spirituality and according to observers included shaking and singing hopping and turning smoking and running groaning and laughing shaker communities at new lebanon new hampshire sabbath day lake maine and elsewhere thrived and the shakers became one of the largest and most successful of the pre civil communitarian movements.
290 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 sblsglmkbiiamsibb in shaker worship and community life women and men were kept separate but all participated in lively music and dance designed to shake sin out of their bodies.
shaker theology placed ann lee on a par with jesus and committed the society to the equal leadership of women with men.
but shakers were united by their community life more than by theology.
they demanded celibacy a requirement that limited the communitys appeal and prevented increasing membership by means of childbirth.
instead all new members had to be converts who were attracted to shaker life.
the revivals produced many such converts who sought a deeper spiritual life than they found in traditional churches.
shaker beliefs were reflected in their commitment to making things of beauty and shaker furniture remains a reminder of their beliefs.
american voices the shaker community tis the gift to be simple 1830s rhe simplicity and joyfulness of the shakers have infiltrated american culture in many ways.
shaker furniture now so popular was not just a product for them.
mildred barker leader of a shaker community in maine who died in 1990 once reflected i almost expect to be remembered as a chair or a table.
but barker reminded those who came to interview her that behind oil of the shakers physical artifacts there s the religion.
and while many of their complex theological ideas have largely been forgotten the basic joy humility and playfulness of the shakers continue to be remembered in this familiar hymn that dates to the 1830s tis the gift to be simple tis the gift to be free tis the gift to come down where we ought to be and when we find ourselves in the place just right twill be in the valley of love and delight.
when true simplicity is gaind to bow and to bend we shan t be asham d to turn turn will be our delight till by turning turning we come round right.
source stephen j stein the shaker experience in america new haven yale university press 1992 p 191 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what values and priorities are extolled in the hymn.
2 historical interpretation why might simplicity certainty and humility have been particularly appealing to 1830s americans.
what aspects of the larger society might shakers have found most disturbing and unwelcome.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of how the idea of manifest destiny and the policies of the polk administration almost doubled the size of the united states in 12 years in spite of opposition from many people in the country.
manifest destiny the importance of an idea explain what manifest destiny meant and how it led the united states to involvement in texas california and oregon.
the u s war with mexico 1846 1848 analyze the causes strategies and outcomes of the u s war with mexico.
west to the pacific analyze the causes and outcomes of u s expansion in california and into the pacific region including establishing new relationships with hawaii china and japan.
11 1 11 2 chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 299 113 significant dates 1821 mexico gains independence from spain first american colony established in texas 1829 mexico abolishes slavery including in texas 1830 revolts against mexican authority begin in texas 1835 americans in texas capture the alamo drive out mexican army 1836 narcissa and marcus whitman help found the first protestant mission in oregon texas declares independence from mexico fall of the american forces in the alamo to mexican army treaty of velasco recognizes independent republic of texas congress passes gag rule forbidding discussion of slavery 1837 financial panic of 1837 1842 webster ashburton treaty resolves u s canadian border dispute 1844 treaty of wang hsia gives united states open trading rights in china 1845 the term manifest destiny becomes popular james k polk inaugurated as president u s annexation of texas 1846 beginning of u s war with mexico 1848 treaty of guadalupe hidalgo ends war with mexico gold rush in california 1849 thoreau s civil disobedience published 1851 herman melville s moby dick published 1853 commodore perry enters tokyo harbor begins opening japan to united states gadsden purchase last acquisition of land in continental united states manifest destiny the doctrine first expressed in 1845 that the expansion of white americans across the continent was inevitable and ordained by god and was a means to spread protestant christianity and jacksonian democracy to more people.
republic of mexico by 1830 they too were seeking protection from the american government.
in all these cases many in the government were happy to oblige seeing the movement of colonists as a first step in expanding the nation.
being aware of the nations long term expansion the power of the idea of manifest destiny and the political and military actions that the nations leaders took in the name of that idea is essential to understanding how the nation expanded into the shape it has today.
this chapter will explore the political diplomatic and military issues involved in turning the idea of manifest destiny into a geographic reality.
it is also important to understand how the acquisition of so much new territory in the 1830s and 1840s as well as other developments in peoples thinking changed the lives of those who lived in the united states.
the population of the country was expanding as dramatically as its geographical borders.
migrants from around the world especially flocked to california to find their fortunes in the gold.
citizens of the republic of mexico suddenly found themselves living in the united states because the border had moved as did american indians who rejected the claims of all nations to their lands.
other immigrants came to the already established parts of the nation.
in addition amid the many changes slaves supporters and opponents of slavery and women became increasingly vocal about the issue of freedom and equality.
these issues will be explored in chapter 12 the great territorial expansion of these years and dramatic changes in the makeup and the thinking of people in the united states during the same time period transformed the country and its future.
manifest destiny the importance of an idea explain what manifest destiny meant and how it led the united states to involvement in texas california and oregon.
ifllli at the mythical level manifest destiny was seen as the spirit hovering over the westward movement of white settlers leading them and urging them on whether they came by foot covered wagon or stage coach.
11 1 the idea that the united states had a manifest destiny led to more than simply acquiring land though between 1845 and 1848 the united states would almost double in size from 1 8 million square miles to almost 3 million.
advocates of manifest destiny claimed that the united states with gods blessing should rule the heart of north america from the atlantic ocean to the pacific and from a still to be defined border with british canada to an even more undefined border with the republic of mexico.
for o sullivan and other supporters of manifest destiny it was the nations appointed role to spread not only democracy in its jacksonian form but also to spread protestant christianity in place of the catholicism of mexico or the native beliefs of american indians.
the same year that osullivan coined the term manifest destiny illinois representative john wentworth told congress that he did not believe the god of heaven designed that the original states should be the only abode of liberty on earth.
on the contrary he only designed them as the great center from which civilization religion and liberty should radiate and radiate until the whole continent shall bask in their blessing.
that belief held by many beyond wentworth that the united states was specially chosen by divine will to bring liberty and democracy to the planet and especially north america was a driving force in the push for new lands in the 1840s.
many americans supported versions of manifest destiny for their own reasons.
land speculators and those promoting the extension of the nations railroads wanted to exploit the vast lands in the west.
farmers dreamed of starting over in rich and cheap new lands.
workers believed that rapid national expansion would guarantee industrial profits and thus their jobs or give them a chance to start over if necessary.
protestant leaders and missionaries saw u s control of the new lands as an opportunity to ensure that a protestant united states not a catholic mexico controlled the continent.
manifest destiny also referred to a patriotic belief that the nation had a divine mission to become a world power.
and a national identity 1800 1848 in contrast many other americans opposed the whole idea of a manifest destiny democrats tended to support expansion but most whigs led by henry clay had grave reservations.
clays goal was not necessarily a larger country but a better developed one with roads canals railroads and industries knitting it together and ensuring its prosperity.
antislavery advocates opposed the acquisition of more land especially texas since they were certain that new lands meant new slave states.
however some proslavery advocates notably south carolina senator john c calhoun wanted texas but worried that other incorporated lands especially california and oregon might become free states peopled by darker skinned citizens which would shift power away from the white slaveholding regions.
some americans also saw the violence associated with expansion as simply wrong.
many residents of the lands from texas to california did not want to become part of the united states at all.
antonio maria osio spoke for those who did not want to become u s residents when he described himself as a californio who loves his country and a mexican on all four sides and in my heart he opposed the annexation of california to the united states and when it happened he left eventually settling in baja california so that he could to remain a citizen of mexico.
while many americans debated manifest destiny in the congress the press and the pulpits other americans especially trappers and farmers moved into the regions just as a generation before the same types of people had expanded beyond the mississippi.
regardless of whether the united states mexico or britain claimed the land these frontiersmen and women were confident that in time their government would follow them.
most of all they moved into texas see map 11 1.
the birth of the texas republic the tensions between americans living in texas and the mexican government that governed it had been building even before mexico gained its independence from spain in 1821 when the united states purchased louisiana from france in 1803 the western chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 237 the last states ended their support for specific churches.
many protestant groups made significant new gains among both white and black adherents with revivals in what came to be known as the second great awakening.
the louisiana purchase opened up trade along the mississippi river and through new orleans.
lewis and clark led an expedition to explore the huge expanse of new u s territory even venturing beyond its scope to reach the pacific ocean.
their explorations aided greatly by various indian tribes revealed tremendous potential for future american growth.
tensions leading up to the war of 1812 began during jeffersons term and came to a head under the administration of madison.
ultimately the inconclusive war resolved issues that had limited u s development for decades and launched a new period of growth for the country.
it was the last war ever fought between the united states and great britain.
it was also the last war in which indian tribes were allied with another nation against the united states and afterward the united states dealt with native americans as an internal matter rather than a focus of foreign policy.
although the cost was high in terms of lives lost money spent and economies devastated the end of the war left the united states more confident proud and self sufficient than ever before.
with peace came further territorial expansion especially a series of treaties between 1817and 1823 that established the border with canada gave the nation joint ownership of the oregon territory with great britain and gave the country control of florida.
the end of the war also launched an extraordinary economic and commercial transition that fundamentally changed the nation and transformed the lives of americans.
the bold new confidence of the united states reflected in the monroe doctrine declaring that there could be no new european claims on any lands in north or south america surprised the world.
chapter 9 new industries new politics 243 new spain atlantic ocean 500 kilometers map 9 1 the growth of slavery in the black belt.
as the black belt area of cotton production expanded slave labor became they key to its success and the number of slaves grew dramatically.
m more than 50 slave qh 10 to 50 slave less than 10 slave no slaves or no statistics available 250 500 miles the people who worked the land cotton and the transformation of slavery the white settlers who were able to buy large parcels of land in the rich new territory of what was known as the old southwest did not do most of the hard work of actually planting hoeing and picking the cotton that would be grown there.
other americans did that work african slaves whose lives were also transformed by the explosive growth of cotton production and whose value to their white owners increased even more than the value of the new land on which they labored.
between 1800 and 1860 more than 1 million black americans were forced to move from the homes they knew and often from their families too to new homes in the interior cotton growing lands of georgia alabama mississippi and louisiana and later arkansas and texas.
while slavery slowly disappeared in the north after 1800 and the slave population of maryland virginia and the carolinas stabilized or declined slavery exploded in the new land.
in the 60 years before the civil war more slaves made the journey from coastal states to inland plantations than had made the terrible middle passage from africa to north america in the previous 200 years.
in some ways similar to the passage from africa to north america the journey from a settled community in virginia maryland or the carolinas to the new interior plantations was a terrible ordeal.
as more slaves were sold into the interior or sold from place to place within it slaves on the coast lived in terror of being sold and los ing all connections to family and birthplace.
slave owners used the threat of sale or the sale of a perceived troublemaker to maintain discipline in the slave quarter.
slaves often pleaded with masters not to be sold.
sometimes the pleas were successful but often not.
jeff randolph the executor of thomas jeffersons estate was considered especially humane because he refused to sell the former presidents slaves to a buyer from georgia but sold them instead at less profit to other virginians.
the sale of a part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 map 9 2 the expanding cotton belt.
the areas of greatest cotton production in the united states grew dramatically between 1801 and 1860 spouse broke up one slave marriage in five and one third of all slave children were sold away from their parents.
men were sold more often than women planters wanted male muscle and slave owners in older regions were happy to keep women so that they could bear more children who could in turn also be sold.
slaves between ages 14 and 35 were sold much more often than the very young or the aging.
a literate slave arena screven learned that he was to be sold from georgia to new orleans and wrote to his wife with much regret that he hoped if we shall not meet in this world i hope to meet in heaven laura clark a slave remembered her mother asking another slave who had been sold in the same group as she to take care of my baby child and if i never sees her no more raise her for god such heartbreak led many slaves to despair to run away or to rebel.
once sold either to a plantation owner who had come east for additional slaves or more often to a slave trader whose job was brokering other humans slaves were organized in groups called slave coffles to walk west.
coffles of 20 to 50 slaves sometimes more trudging west became a normal sight of southern life.
walking 15 to 20 miles a day it could take the slaves 2 months to go from virginia to the mississippi valley often longer when rain flooded streams and turned roads to mud.
in later years more slaves were transported by ship to new orleans which became the largest slave trading center in the united states by the 1820s.
when they could slaves rebelled.
slave trading was a dangerous business and stories of slaves murdering slave traders were well known.
in 1841 slaves being shipped from norfolk virginia to new orleans on the creole forced the captain to deliver them to the bahamas a british colony where they found freedom because britain had abolished slavery in 1833 more often slaves simply ran away when they could though many went home to family where they were recaptured and sold again.
once slaves arrived at their destination they often faced difficult and unfamiliar work.
work in cotton fields was backbreaking for men women and children.
while tobacco and rice required more skill cotton required long hours and hard work.
chapter 9 new industries new politics 249 9 1 92 93 only as ada shared these challenges and hopes in biblical terms that her peers would appreciate do unto others as ye would that they should do to you is a great precept given to us by our great teacher what but the neglect of this great principle has brought into the world all this confusion this disorder this isolated state of interest between man and man all this monopoly and competition in business.
as the industrial revolution expanded ada would not be the last one to ask that question.
new york and the international cotton trade as significant as the mills of new england were in cotton production most american cotton was shipped in its raw state to manchester and leeds in england.
the permanent peace that had been established between the united states and great britain after the end of the war of 1812 made this trade easy.
new york city became the center of the shipment of cotton across the atlantic and in the process became the nations largest city and commercial center a position it has retained ever since.
new york city enjoyed several advantages that allowed it to play such a dominant role in the nations cotton economy even though no cotton was grown within hundreds of miles of the city and few cotton mills were nearby.
first new york had an extraordinary deep water harbor.
ships could dock directly in manhattan and american voices h robinson worked in the cotton mills at lowell from b 1835 to 1848 she was 10 when she began and left at age 23 to be married.
she published her story half a century later.
the book loom and spindle or life among the early mill girls remains a classic story of what life was like for the first generation of young women most fresh from the farms to take these jobs.
the working hours of all the girls extended from five o clock in the morning until seven in the evening with one half hour for breakfast and for dinner one of the first strikes of cotton factory operatives that ever took place in this country was that in lowell in october 1836 when it was announced that the wages were to be cut down great indignation was felt and it was decided to strike en mass.
this was done.
the mills were shut down and the girls went in procession and listened to incendiary speeches from early labor reformers.
one of the girls stood on a pump and gave vent to the feelings of her companions in a neat speech declaring that it was their duty to resist all attempts at cutting down the wages.
this was the first time a woman had spoken in public in lowell and the event caused surprise and consternation among her audience my own recollection of this first strike or turn out as it was called is very vivid.
i worked in a lower room where i had heard the proposed strike fully if not vehemently discussed i had been an ardent listener to what was said against this attempt at oppression on the part of the corporation and naturally i took sides with the strikers.
when the day came on which the girls were to turn out those in the upper rooms started first and so many of them left that our mill was at once shut down.
then when the girls in my room stood irresolute uncertain what to do asking each other would you.
or shall we turn out.
and not one of them having the courage to lead off i who began to think they would not go out after all their talk became impatient and started on ahead saying with childish bravado i don t care what you do i am going to turn out whether anyone else does or not and i marched out and was followed by the others.
as i looked back at the long line that followed me i was more proud than i have ever been since at any success i may have achieved and more proud than i shall ever be again until my own beloved state gives to its women citizens the right of suffrage.
source harriet h robinson loom and spindle or life among the early mill girls boston t y.
crowell 1898.
31 83 85 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis how did robinson explain the factors that led to her decision to join the strike at her mill.
2 contextualization how did work in a textile factory change robinson s outlook.
what connections can you make between her strike experience and her commitment to the suffrage movement.
50 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 brooklyn without needing to anchor offshore and unload goods to smaller boats.
the port was also easily accessible by coastal vessels from southern ports.
as the production of cotton expanded after 1815 most of the souths cotton was shipped north to new york and then reshipped either across the atlantic to english ports or up long island sound to boston for the new england mills.
second new york already had the infrastructure necessary to accommodate this level of shipping including miles of docks and a community of merchants.
third new york an established port already had experienced workers including dockworkers and longshoremen who handled cargo to handle the hundreds of ships that did business there.
the already large numbers of workers grew rapidly as new york not counting brooklyn which was a separate city until 1898 grew six times its size between the american revolution and 1820 in 1820 it mushroomed again from 125 000 residents and to over 500 000 in 1850 new york businesses sent agents called factors to charleston south carolina savannah georgia mobile alabama and new orleans to buy cotton for shipment to new york.
in turn the cotton was transferred from coastal ships to larger transatlantic ships that sailed to ports in england racing each other to make the trip in the shortest amount of time.
on the return trip from england these ships brought cash from the sale of cotton and all sorts of british and european goods iron and steel tools from sheffield england wine from france and manufactured goods that the united states needed and that could often be bought in new york for less than it cost to make them elsewhere in america.
while american manufacturers disliked this reality merchants from across the country flocked to new york to stock up on cheap goods enhancing the citys commerce.
in 1818 shipping across the atlantic was improved when a quaker businessman jeremiah thompson founded the black ball line and established a fixed schedule of weekly departures of fast ships from new york to liverpool england.
the black ball line announced that it had undertaken to establish a line of vessels between new york and liverpool to sail from each place on a certain day in every month through the year and printed the schedule.
until that time commercial vessels waited to fill their holds with cargo however long that took before sailing.
now with the fixed schedule passengers and goods could be sure of leaving on time and factories in england could be sure of a steady flow of cotton to keep their mills operating.
the new ships were called packet ships because the line had a contract with the federal government to carry packets of u s mail.
these packet ships became a regular feature of world commerce and new yorks waterfront.
any packet ship captain who made the trip to liverpool in under 22 days or the return trip to new york which took longer because of less favorable winds in under 35 days would be rewarded with a new coat and a dress for his wife courtesy of thompson.
competition with the black ball line soon developed and the passenger cabins became elegant as different lines competed for business.
shipwrights along new yorks east river changed the construction of new ships so they could make the voyage even more quickly than the original schedule.
but most important the black ball lines ships and its many competitors that emerged in the 1820s and 1830s ensured a steady supply of cotton for english mills and steady profits to u s cotton growers.
new york was also the place in the united states to raise money.
from the time alexander hamilton established the first bank of the united states in new york city in 1791 some new yorkers grew rich financing commercial activities that were far away from the city itself.
many farmers had long needed to borrow money for seed and fertilizer to plant a crop.
after industrialists like francis cabot lowell began creating giant new corporations to build the factories for producing the cotton cloth that launched the industrial revolution they too needed ways to borrow much larger amounts of money as well as longer periods of time to make profits and pay off the loans.
without such financing the industrial revolution would never have happened.
financial brokers had agreed to work together in new york in 1792 and the new 9 1 chapter 9 new industries new politics 259 before the american revolution most farmers lived in a barter economy in which most goods and services were simply traded.
in that economy life moved at a slow and predictable pace and little money was transacted.
by the 1820s the barter economy had disappeared in all but the most remote areas.
farmers sold their goods on the world market and used the cash they received to purchase not only necessities but also often luxuries that their pre revolutionary forbearers never imagined.
to many americans not just to national leaders distances seemed shorter money more important and politics more omnipresent after 1815 than one would have thought possible even a few years before.
visitors to remote farm settlements in illinois in the 1820s found that cloth coats and calico dresses purchased from a trader or a store were replacing homespun and buckskin.
once one family made the shift everyone in the village felt pressure to earn enough money to keep up.
as people worked harder and longer public clocks with an added hand that noted minutes not just the passage of the hours became more prominent.
chauncey jeromes connecticut clock company made a fortune manufacturing and shipping clocks to every part of the nation.
as one 1840 traveler reported in every dell of arkansas and in cabins where there was not a chair to sit on there was sure to be a connecticut clock rip van winkle was not the only one waking up in a different time and in a money conscious country.
9 2 quick review how did new trading routes progressively improve the u s economy and in doing so change the united states.
93 era of good feelings the period from 1817 to 1823 in which the decline of the federalists enabled the democratic republicans to govern in a spirit of seemingly nonpartisan harmony.
from the era of good feelings to the politics of division explain the political developments in the united states during the 1820s including the shift of power toward the south and west that resulted from the changing economic situation.
james monroes two terms as president from 1817 to 1825 were known as the era of good feelings because of the lack of rancor in his virtually unanimous election and reelection during a time when the opposing federalist party had almost disappeared.
the period was quite a change from the days when john adams and thomas jefferson contested the presidency and federalists and democratic republicans fought in the press and on the floor of congress.
but even during the era of good feelings all was not calm on the political front.
the supreme court was rapidly expanding its reach and the reach of the federal government into new aspects of the country.
in addition political tensions over the cotton economy territorial expansion and slavery exploded with surprising force in the 1820s.
the good feelings were not destined to last.
the supreme court defines its place john marshall served as chief justice of the u s supreme court from 1801 to 1835 throughout his long tenure on the court marshall was usually able to convince a majority of the justices to go along with his views no matter what their prior political beliefs were.
he used his position to define the role of the court as arbiter of the constitution and he expanded the role and power of the federal government in many aspects of national life.
early in his tenure marshalls 1803 marbury v madison decision claimed a role for the supreme court in reviewing the constitutionality of acts of congress.
marshall never again invoked that right but in a series of subsequent decisions he created the same right for the court in relationship to state legislatures and state courts.
two 1819 decisions from the marshall court were especially important in expanding the role of the supreme court and the federal government.
160 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 in an appeal to the supreme court in the case of dartmouth college v woodward 1819 the old federalist marshall reviewed a decision by lower courts that began when the democratic republican dominated new hampshire legislature revised the original charter of dartmouth college converting the school from a private to a state college.
the supreme court ruled that state charters including charters from colonial legislatures like dartmouths were contracts and that contracts once agreed to were inviolable thus the legislatures actions were unconstitutional.
the case was important not only because it asserted the right of the supreme court to review the actions of state legislatures not just congress but also because it asserted the inviolability of contracts.
as a result it became an important bedrock of the american economic system.
after the dartmouth college decision the nations growing businesses and industries were able to be certain that their contracts once agreed to could not be overturned by legislative action.
the other important 1819 decision was mcculloch v maryland.
congress had chartered the second bank of the united states at the end of the war of 1812 to stabilize the nations finances.
but the bank was not popular with many people especially farmers and others who saw it as an instrument of the commercial elite.
in response to the general opposition to the bank and to charges of irregularities in the banks maryland branch the state of maryland imposed a tax on the bank as a way to drive it out of business or at least out of maryland.
in response the bank brought suit in the federal courts and the case worked its way up to the supreme court.
in the decision written by marshall the court took alexander hamiltons view that the necessary and proper clause of the constitution meant that congress had the right to charter a bank if it thought it was in the national interest despite the tenth amendments mandate that states should retain any power that was not specifically delegated to the national government in the constitution.
marshall went further saying that the power to tax involves the power to destroy while the power to create that congress had invoked in the case of the bank implies a power to preserve the issue marshall referred to was not obscure.
with mcculloch v maryland the supreme court declared that states could not interfere with the workings of the federal government.
the marshall court continued to expand federal authority in subsequent cases.
in gibbons v ogden 1824 the court ruled that the state of new york did not have a right to give ogden a partner of robert fulton a monopoly to ferry service in new york harbor since the harbor connected new york and new jersey and thus involved interstate commerce which only congress could control.
later in worcester v georgia 1832 the court ruled that the state of georgia could not regulate private dealings by u s citizens within the territory controlled by the cherokee tribe since tribes had their own sovereign rights subject only to the authority of the federal government.
in these and other decisions the court affirmed what came to be known as a loose construction of the constitution which as marshall explained enabled the constitution to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs to preserve its relevance through time.
not everyone agreed with marshall s perspective and when he died in 1835 a democratic republican paper did not mourn the political doctrines of a justice who sought to strengthen government at the expense of the people nevertheless many felt that both the constitution and the rights of people were stronger for his efforts.
the politics of cotton and the missouri compromise of 1820 although missouri was too far north to be a cotton growing state its population also grew as a result of americas westward movement and by 1819 missouri applied to congress to be admitted as a new state.
a bill to authorize a state constitutional convention was introduced in congress with little fanfare early in 1819 however congressman james tallmadge jr of new york introduced an amendment to the chapter 9 new industries new politics 263 thinking historically the missouri compromise when he heard about the missouri compromise the aging thomas jefferson who had been infuriated by the tallmadge amendment because it interfered with the rights of states wrote to john holmes a massachusetts congressman i had for a long time ceased to read the newspapers or pay any attention to public affairs confident they were in good hands and content to be a passenger in our bark to the shore from which i am not distant.
but this momentous question like a fire bell in the night awakened and filled me with terror.
i considered it at once as the knell of the union.
it is hushed indeed for the moment.
but this is a reprieve only not a final sentence.
a geographical line coinciding with a marked principle moral and political once conceived and held up to the angry passions of men will never be obliterated and every new irritation will mark it deeper and deeper.
while clay was being hailed as a national hero for crafting the compromise jefferson perhaps had a better sense of what lay ahead.
the former president and slaveholder who also wrote passionately against slavery knew that in the long term no issue would so greatly divide the nation s citizens and as he grew old he saw the division become increasingly intense.
thinking critically 1 contextualization how would you characterize pro and antislavery forces in 1820.
what might explain the widespread belief that the issue of slavery had been resolved with the passage of the missouri compromise.
2 historical interpretation in hindsight it is clear that jefferson was correct and the missouri compromise was only a reprieve.
what evidence was available in 1820 to support jefferson s point of view.
what trends had already begun to emerge that would lead the intensification of the conflict over slavery in the decades to come.
mi the united states experienced one of the most contested and confusing presidential elections in its history.
for citizens of a nation that had elected james monroe almost unanimously in 1816 and 1820 the ill will of 1824 was a surprise.
in one sense the election of 1824 proceeded just as the writers of the constitution who hated the idea of political parties envisioned a contest in which members of the house with each states delegation having one vote would decide on a president from among several of the nations leading citizens who had been identified by the votes of the electoral college.
with the demise of the federalists the democratic republican party was the only party in the nation.
it had been as that partys candidate that monroe had been elected by an almost unanimous vote since the federalists did not nominate a candidate in 1820 or anytime after that.
by 1824 however the usual process in which a party caucus within congress would select a presidential nominee had broken down and three members of monroes cabinet along with the speaker of the house of representatives all sought the presidency.
a fifth candidate from the same democratic republican party senator andrew jackson the national war hero from tennessee also joined the race.
in this type of contest personal animosity and political intrigue were inevitable.
at first many thought secretary of the treasury william h crawford of georgia was the obvious choice.
crawford had stepped out of the way to support monroe s election and he and many of his supporters thought it was now his turn.
the congressional caucus that traditionally nominated presidential candidates in fact did choose crawford.
however in what was clearly a warning of trouble to come less than a fourth of the members of congress showed up to vote in the caucus.
others in congress and outside of it would find other candidates and other ways to support them.
secretary of state john quincy adams of massachusetts had a good claim to consideration.
many considered the office of secretary of state as the natural stepping stone to the presidency.
monroe had been madisons secretary of state as madison had been part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 jefferson s and jefferson had been washingtons.
in addition adams had served the nation well.
he had acquired florida for the united states arranged treaties that opened vast new lands to settlement and handled south american revolutions and potential european interference skillfully.
as a former ambassador senator son of a former president and favorite of the antislavery north adams had much going for him.
secretary of war john c calhoun from south carolina was another candidate.
calhoun had not yet become the fierce advocate of states rights that he was later.
in 1824 he was a strong nationalist.
he advocated for a strong army and for using army engineers to conduct a national survey that would lead to federally supported roads bridges and canals connecting all parts of the nation.
he also supported the bank of the united states.
calhoun initially backed adams but when he became convinced after the missouri crisis that southern and border state electors would never support a new englander his own ambition was fired up and he campaigned actively.
henry clay of kentucky also a contender was speaker of the house of representatives and an ardent nationalist.
like calhoun he supported an expansive federal government that controlled the currency through a strong national bank and that built roads and bridges as well as supported commerce.
from his political base in kentucky clay hoped to be the first president from west of the alleghenies.
he was also shrewd enough to guess that with so many candidates in the race the house of representatives which he controlled might make the final decision.
finally there was andrew jackson of tennessee.
at first jackson seemed an unlikely candidate for president.
unlike any president after washington jackson had never served in the cabinet or represented the nation abroad.
instead he was the hero of the battle of new orleans.
he had served for 1 year in the senate and in other government posts but his primary public role was as a military leader and in the 1820s the military was not always a popular institution.
his wife rachel jackson strongly opposed his seeking the presidency.
in 1822 however the tennessee legislature formally nominated jackson as a candidate for president primarily as a way to block the then frontrunner crawford.
at that point jackson probably supported adams in part because adams had supported jacksons actions in florida while crawford and clay had not.
no one including jackson counted on how popular he would be with the electorate.
when a tavern keeper in pennsylvania wrote asking whether jackson would indeed seek the presidency the canny general knowing that his response would be published replied that it was his undeviating rule neither to seek or decline public invitations to office his response seemed the height of statesmanship to a country that had seen monroes almost unanimous election in the era of good feelings replaced by a divisive contest for the presidency.
the constitution allows each state to decide how to choose presidential electors.
by 1824 most states allowed voters to select electors pledged to a specific candidate thus greatly democratizing the presidential selection process.
that electorate had changed since the constitution was adopted in 1789 since 1808 when new jersey retracted its decision to give women the right to vote only men voted.
property restrictions on voting still common when washington was elected were long gone in most states so nearly all white men could now vote and in some northern states so could free black men.
in new york city free blacks sometimes held the balance of power among various factions.
excluded from voting were women of all races most blacks including all slaves and indians.
nevertheless this broad male electorate valued widespread popularity as more important in selecting a president than the voice of a few members of the social and economic elite.
by 1824 the white male popular will was coalescing behind jackson far more than anyone expected.
in a nation increasingly divided by sectional issues a nationally respected war hero had great appeal.
in addition a fierce opponent of banks like jackson was popular with many people who were convinced at least partially rightly that the bank of the united states had brought on the panic of 1819 in places like mississippi 9 3 chapter 7.
the first bank had been chartered in 1791 for a period of 20 years.
in 1811 the jeffersonian republicans refused to extend its charter and it closed.
henceforth it seemed state banks would issue currency in the form of banknotes backed by gold or silver federal funds would be deposited in state banks and the federal government like everyone else would borrow money from these banks when needed.
then came the war of 1812 as the war of 1812 threatened to bankrupt the country some of the nations richest men led by john jacob astor met with treasury secretary albert gallatin and offered to loan the nation the funds it needed if the bank of the united states were rechartered.
they believed that only a national bank could build long term prosperity and ensure that their loan would be repaid.
as a result a charter for a second bank of the united states passed congress in 1816 the madison monroe and john quincy adams administrations were strong advocates for a unified national market economy that could foster prosperity and stability and they had used the bank to support that economy.
jackson wanted prosperity but he disagreed about the governments role in the nations economy.
the second bank of the united states was never without enemies.
the constitution never mentioned a bank and strict constructionists who thought the government 2i crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 10 1 should limit its role to things specifically included in the constitution always opposed it.
the bank was also seen by many as a way to expand the power of the commercial elite based in new york and philadelphia and thus was seen as an enemy by farmers whether they lived on small out of the way farms in the still very rural country or on the bourgeoning plantations of the cotton growing south.
in the opinion of many farmers whether small or large scale jackson was the defender of their interests against threatening commercial elites.
particularly since the supreme courts ruling on mcculloch v maryland that congress had the right to charter a bank if it thought it was in the national interest popular support for the bank had weakened see chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 281 by the time jackson became president political cartoons were becoming popular including this one that shows jackson using his order to withdraw government funds to topple the pillars of the bank as nicholas biddle the bank s devil president and investors run.
in november 1832 jackson defeated clay 219 electoral votes to 49 congress refused to override the presidents veto.
biddle still tried to rally support in congress.
he made arguments offered congressmen loans and ensured that the banks lead attorney was elected to congress from philadelphia.
when massachusetts senator daniel webster complained that his annual retainer from the bank had not been refreshed as usual biddle promised quick action.
biddle also loosened credit across the country ensuring short term prosperity but provoking an eventual reckoning.
he was desperate to save his bank.
jackson then made his move.
he ordered his treasury secretary to remove federal deposits from the bank and place them in 23 state banks that he selected banks that were quickly called jacksons pet banks by his opponents.
the move was meant to destroy the second bank of the united states.
but the law said that federal funds could be withdrawn only if there was clear evidence that the deposits were not secure.
even jacksons handpicked auditors could find no such evidence.
when treasury secretary mclane refused the presidents order to move the funds jackson promoted him to secretary of state.
when another treasury secretary also refused jackson fired him.
finally jacksons third treasury secretary roger b taney who also had doubts about the legality of removing federal funds hit on a compromise.
he would not actually remove federal deposits from the bank but he would do something just as effective to undermine the bank.
going forward taney regularly paid the governments bills with funds from the accounts that the government had in the bank of the united states but he stopped depositing new federal revenue in the bank.
instead the governments income went to the state banks.
it was a mortal blow.
the federal governments accounts slowly shrunk to zero and the second bank of the united states was dead though it took a few years to die.
led by clay the senate censured the president saying he had assumed upon himself authority and power not conferred by the constitution and laws but the censure did not hurt jackson or save the bank.
biddles politically motivated loans and payments sapped support for the bank.
the second bank of the united states became a wholly private bank and soon went bankrupt.
the combination of inflation caused by biddles too easy credit and the loss of a national bank that could stabilize the currency caused financial distress.
by 1837 just after jackson left office the nation experienced another financial panic and there was no national entity to help stabilize the economy.
nevertheless efforts to revive the bank failed.
for decades all of the paper currency in circulation would be issued by state banks some of less than solid credit.
only in 1863 during the civil war did the u s government again issue paper money and not until the creation of the federal reserve bank in 1913 did the nation again have a central bank to regulate the economy.
the tariff the union and the nullification crisis the battle over the tariff began as a modest disagreement over federal tax policy.
before it ended that battle was the greatest constitutional crisis the nation faced between the adoption of the constitution in 1789 and the civil war in 1861 to a degree it was a personal battle between two proud and stubborn men andrew jackson and john c calhoun.
in another sense it was a battle about the fundamental nature of the u s government.
andrew jackson vs john c calhoun john c calhoun of south carolina had been elected vice president when john quincy adams won the presidency in 1824 irt iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 10 1 and he was reelected to that office in 1828 to serve with jackson.
because separate ballots were cast for presidential and vice presidential candidates after the passage of the twelfth amendment in 1804 and before the rise of party nominating conventions in 1832 no one thought it strange that two leaders as hostile to each other as adams and jackson would have the same vice president.
as a congressman and as secretary of war under president james monroe calhoun had been a nationalist who favored internal improvements as much as henry clay or john quincy adams.
he sought a strong national government and had supported the bank of the united states.
although his views differed from jacksons on some issues everyone expected calhoun and jackson as proslavery southerners to have a close partnership.
it was not to be.
one of the first wedges between them was purely social.
jacksons secretary of war john eaton had married the recently widowed margaret oneale timberlake but rumors swirled that she was a widow only because her first husband a naval officer had committed suicide when he learned of her long adulterous relationship with eaton.
jackson who had been deeply hurt by attacks on his own marriage defended the eatons.
others in washington led by mrs calhoun snubbed peggy eaton.
when emily donelson jacksons official white house hostess joined with mrs calhoun jackson temporarily banished her from the white house.
he never forgave the calhouns.
another reason for the growing split between jackson and calhoun centered on the fact that calhouns political beliefs were changing.
by 1828 calhoun who had previously advocated for a strong federal role in the life of the nation far stronger than anything jackson ever advocated was becoming the nations strongest defender of states rights against federal authority.
this new stance may have reflected an honest change of heart but it also served a political purpose.
regardless it guaranteed a clash with jackson since no matter how much jackson might have favored states rights in the past he would not tolerate any challenge to his authority as president.
many of the leaders in south carolina calhouns home state were becoming very fearful of the federal government and south carolina was developing the strongest anti federal stance in the union.
the south carolina radicals as they were called dominated state government.
they advocated the right of states to declare any federal law null and void or even to secede from the union.
the reason was clear south carolinians feared for the future of slavery more than people in any other state.
most residents of south carolina 54 percent were enslaved people of african descent.
in some rice growing regions of the state that figure was closer to 90 percent.
a wealthy but deeply fearful white elite governed these slaves and depended on their labor to generate continuing wealth.
in 1827 a pamphlet called the crisis or essays on the usurpations of the federal government argued that federal tariffs internal improvements and other federal activities were all means to enable the national government if it chose to abolish slavery.
as word spread that parliament was about to abolish slavery throughout the british empire in the 1830s the fear grew that congress might try to do the same.
calhoun had to decide whether he was with his states planter elite or against them.
he might have dreamed about becoming president someday but in the meantime he would have to win elections in south carolina.
he made his choice.
nullification and the future of the republic in 1828 calhoun wrote a pamphlet arguing that a state could declare a tariff or any other federal law null and void.
calhoun claimed that since state by state conventions had ratified the constitution state conventions not the supreme court had the authority to decide what was constitutional.
in his view once a state convention declared a federal law void other states would have to weigh in and only a new amendment to the constitution could force the law on the dissenting state.
calhoun did not advocate secession as many of the south carolina radicals did.
instead he hoped nullification in response to a tariff or to restrictions on slavery would make secession unnecessary.
he was thus more moderate than many south carolinians but that moderation would not continue to be the case.
j 10 2 i chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 1831 1854 the changing face of the american people in the 1840s and 1850s slavery in the united states 1840s and 1850s new strength for american women chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 1861 1865 fort sumter to antietam 1861 1862 the road to emancipation the home front shortages opposition riots and battles from gettysburg to appomattox and beyond chapter 15 reconstruction 1865 1877 federal reconstruction policy the impact of reconstruction terror apathy and the creation of the segregated south 12 1831 1854 chapter 9.
for enslaved people and those who claimed to own them life in a slave society was a different experience at different points in history.
slavery was always harsh and dehumanizing but it was harsh in different ways at different times.
after the end of the war of 1812 southern planters experienced new economic benefits from slavery benefits that grew with each decade as the worlds cotton market exploded and slave labor as well as developments in technology and transportation made it possible and profitable for american slave grown cotton to satisfy the market.
since most cotton was produced by slave labor the new demand for cotton greatly increased the value of individual slaves.
thus just as slavery was dying out in the north for both economic and ethical reasons the new cotton economy of the south made slavery far more profitable than ever before.
the result 38 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 was a kind of industrialized agriculture that by the 1840s produced 60 percent of the world s cotton and made the south and particularly some elite southerners extremely wealthy.
with the increase in profits and wealth many slaveholders developed what they claimed was a new ethical rationale for slavery and challenged their critics head on see map 12 2.
slaves and slave masters as cotton prices kept increasing in the 1830s and especially in the 1840s and 1850s close to a million slaves were moved from the coast where many had cultivated tobacco indigo and other crops to new cotton states where they had to learn the different and difficult work of tending cotton.
yet even as slavery was becoming more profitable northern public opinion was turning against it.
more people were joining what had been a small group of abolitionists in viewing human bondage as a terrible wrong and a stain on the honor of a nation dedicated to human freedom.
with slavery disappearing in the north northern abolitionists got an increasingly responsive hearing from their neighbors.
other northerners who had fewer moral qualms about slavery saw slaves as competitors for scarce jobs and they too joined the opposition to slavery.
in 1840 antislavery forces created the liberty party and nominated james g birney for president and in 1848 the short lived antislavery free soil party nominated former president martin van buren as its candidate.
neither party campaigned for outright abolition only for an end to extending slavery to new areas of the country.
nor did either party win any electoral votes though 12 1 12 2 12 3 slavery.
in the 30 years before the civil war slavery became strongest in the cotton ll states of the deen south for an individual slave the further north one was the better one s chances ere to connect to the underground railroad but slaves from every part of the south made their way north freedom.
chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 14 1 14 2 14 3 14 4 they could attack philadelphia or washington as a well fed well organized army of conquest.
the north could not continue the war if its capital and major cities were under rebel control.
long before any battles took place pennsylvania residents knew one was coming.
while people living in many parts of the south had already experienced 2 years of war such fears were new north of the mason dixon line.
philip schaff a theologian and historian teaching at mercersburg seminary in pennsylvania remembered that trying times did not bring out the best in frightened and confused people.
they turned on their neighbors because of pro or antiwar politics or over squabbles about what to hide and where to hide it.
when the rebel army did arrive mercersburg was luckier than some towns at least for its white citizens.
general lee ordered that no private property shall be injured or destroyed schaff described the first confederate officer he met as intelligent and courteous but full of hatred for the yankees not all the confederates who followed were as polite.
mercersburg had a large free black population and they suffered far worse than whites.
schaff said that some of the troops went on a regular slave hunt which presented the worst spectacle i ever saw in this war when white households hid black friends the invading troops proclaimed first that they would burn down every house which harbored a fugitive slave and they considered all blacks to be fugitive slaves.
schaff was terrified that his servant eliza and her son would be found.
they escaped but other blacks in the town were caught and sold into slavery.
for blacks and whites southern pennsylvania in 1863 was every bit as much a war zone as virginia or the mississippi river valley had been in 1862 lincoln and meade ordered the army of the potomac to stop lees advance at all cost.
the northern and southern armies found each other near the town of gettysburg pennsylvania.
on july 1 confederate forces drove union troops out of the town and onto cemetery hill.
the next morning lee ordered a major attack but the union army held its ground.
after another major charge directly at the heart of the union lines on july 3 known as pickett s charge for the officer commanding the lead unit it became clear to lee that despite terrible losses the union forces now reinforced could not be dislodged.
of the 14 000 soldiers that pickett led in the assault only half returned.
confederate general longstreet spoke of the battle of gettysburg as hopeless slaughter one of the saddest days of my life in the 3 days at gettysburg in the days after the battle of gettysburg bodies littered the battlefield.
photographs brought the high cost of war home to people north and south.
402 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 1 51 000 soldiers were killed or wounded 23 000 from the north and 28 000 from the south.
on july 4 lee began a painful retreat back to virginia.
the confederate army would never again be a major presence in the north.
lincoln however was furious that meade like mcclellan did not pursue the retreating confederates.
while news was arriving in washington that the confederate forces had been turned back word also came of a second northern victory.
unable to defeat the confederate garrison at vicksburg in 1862 grant surrounded the city and starved it.
after holding on for a year on july 4 1863 the confederate forces at vicksburg surrendered.
watching the union army march into vicksburg a local resident wrote what a contrast these stalwart well fed men were to the worn men in gray who were being blindly dashed against this embodiment of modern power the entire mississippi river was now under union control.
the confederacy had been cut in half.
lincoln made grant general in chief of all union armies.
but it would be another hard year before there was another northern victory like gettysburg or vicksburg and 2 years before the war ended.
the terrible cost of war in early 1864 grant took direct command in the east and marched into virginia to attack lee.
he quickly stalled.
in early may 1864 at the battle of the wilderness southern forces mounted a furious attack with high casualties.
neither side won the battle of the wilderness but unlike his predecessors grant pursued the confederate forces 14j p i j 14 2.
143 14 4 american voices cornelia hancock letters of cornelia hancock july 7 1863 s a young woman from a quaker family in new jersey cornelia hancock was originally rejected for service by the union army s superintendent of female nurses dorothea dix.
hancock responded by making her way on her own to the field hospital set up in the days immediately after the battle of gettysburg and once there was quickly put to work.
her letter home was written just 3 days after the battle ended.
gettysburg pa july 7th 1863 wall street half past two o clock october 13 1857 by james h cafferty and charles g rosenberg dear cousin i am very tired tonight have been on the field all day went to the 3rd division 2nd army corps.
i suppose there are about five hundred wounded belonging to it there are no words in the english language to express the sufferings i witnessed today.
the men lie on the ground their clothes have been cut off them to dress their wounds they are half naked have nothing but hardtack to eat only as sanitary commissions christian associations and so forth give them.
i was the first woman who reached the 2nd corps after the three days fight at gettysburg.
i was in the corps all day not another woman within a half mile to give you some idea of the extent and numbers of the sounds four surgeons none of whom were idle fifteen minutes of time were busy all day amputating legs and arms.
i gave to every man that had a leg or arm off a gill of wine to every wounded in the third division one glass of lemonade some bread and preserves and tobacco.
i feel very thankful that this was a successful battle the spirit of the men is so high that many of the poor fellows said today what is an arm or leg to whipping lee out of penn.
i would get on first rate if they would not ask me to write to their wives that i cannot do without crying which is not pleasant to either party.
i do not mind the sight of blood have seen limbs taken off and was not sick at all.
it is a very beautiful rolling country here under favorable circumstances i should think healthy but now for five miles around there is an awful smell of putrefaction.
women are needed here very badly anyone who is willing to go to field hospitals.
cornelia source henrietta stratton jaquette editor south after gettysburg letters of cornelia hancock 1863 1868 new york crowell 1956 pp.
16 19 reprinted in p.
robert d marcus david burner anthony marcus america firsthand readings from settlement to reconstruction sixth edition volume one boston bedford st.
martin s 2004 p 288 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what language does hancock use to make the hospital come alive for those who are reading her letter.
2 historical interpretation what assumptions about women of the civil war era is hancock challenging.
what assumptions might she be reinforcing.
chapter 15 reconstruction a school operated by the freedman s bureau in richmond virginia was shown in this september 1866 issue of frank leslie s illustrated newspaper.
to teach here by 1870 several thousand teachers whites and blacks northern immigrants and veterans of the confederate army were teaching in schools for former slaves.
although a majority stayed for only a year or two some found their lifes work in these schools.
many newly free african americans welcomed northern white teachers for the long term but they also wanted teachers from their own communities.
the freedmens bureau and northern missionary groups helped in founding black colleges in the south including atlanta fisk hampton and tugaloo which were specifically designed to train black teachers often in a short course that lasted 1 or 2 years.
ihe results of the new efforts at teacher preparation were impressive and as early as 1869 the bureau reported that of the 3 000 teachers for the freedmen the majority were now african american.
the reconstruction act of 1867 also fostered the growth of southern schooling.
the 1867 act required states of the former confederacy to call state conventions to rewrite their state constitutions and the new constitutions were expected to include support for public education.
later even as state after state returned to white rule the public school system remained.
in black reconstruction in america w e b.
du bois a renowned african american activist wrote public education for all at public expense was in the south a negro idea the reality of sharecropping for many newly freed slaves another issue was as important as the vote or education land.
in virginia a freedman told a union army officer that if the army had a right to take away the master s slaves then they had the right to take masters land too.
434 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 in alabama a state convention delegate insisted the property which they hold was nearly all earned by the sweat of our brows those closest to the land who had worked it for no pay valued land and the promise of land ownership.
land provided independent economic opportunity on which freedom rested.
when shermans army arrived in savannah georgia in december 1864 the army of 60 000 troops was accompanied by some 20 000 former slaves.
sherman met with local blacks in savannah.
garrison frazier a leader of that group made it clear what they wanted freedom and land which meant placing us where we could reap the fruit of our own labor four days later shermans special field order no.
15 provided for 40 acre parcels of land for black families which was to be taken from the plantations of owners in active rebellion on the sea islands and coastal areas in georgia and later in south carolina once his army got there.
sherman also offered army mules that were no longer needed.
thus 40 acres and a mule became the symbol of freedom to many and by june 1865 40 000 newly freed people were settled on sherman land in the former confederacy.
shermans order did not make it clear whether the land grant was temporary or permanent but the link of freedom and land was permanent in the minds of many.
president johnson wasted no time ending the redistribution of land after taking office.
he ordered an end to the 40 acres and a mule policy.
as head of the freedmans bureau general o o howard had expanded shermans original south carolina plan instructing his agents to set aside 40 acre tracts for individual.
15 3 thinking historically john w alvord s first report to the freedmen s bureau 1866 john w alvord was an unusually perceptive observer who was in charge of setting up schools for the freedmen s bureau.
in his first report to the bureau in washington dc in 1866 alvord noted somewhat to his surprise that there were often black initiated schools already in operation when he arrived to open schools.
thus he wrote in his first report throughout the entire south an effort is being made by the colored people to educate themselves in the absence of other teaching they are determined to be self taught and everywhere some elementary text book or the fragment of one may be seen in the hands of negroes native schools are making their appearance through the interior of the entire country.
a more detailed reading of the report makes it clear that alvord was surprised first by the commitment of the newly freed people to education second by their sense of initiative in launching their own schools even before any federal or missionary teachers arrived and third by the sense of self respect and self determination that those running the schools were maintaining.
source john w alvord inspector s report of schools and finances.
u s bureau of refugees freedmen and abandoned lands.
washington d c u s government printing office 1866 pp.
9 10 cited in james anderson the education of blacks in the south i860 1935 chapel hill university of north carolina press 1988 pp.
6 7 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what does alvord s surprise at finding native schools say about the way african americans were perceived.
2 historical interpretation how do you account for the determination to be self taught and to develop their own schools by people who only a year before had been enslaved by others and who many portrayed as passive.
chapter 15 chapter 16 conflict in the west 459 dawes act an 1887 law terminating tribal ownership of most reservation land and allocating some parcels to individual indians while the remainder was opened for white settlement.
into white society or as the president asked cannot the indian be made a useful and productive member of society by proper teaching and treatment.
since most of the indians did not want to become useful and productive members of white society grants policy may have been doomed from the beginning but he tried to find a humane solution to the clash of quite different cultures in the american west.
when grant announced his peace policy he said ihe building of rail roads and the access thereby given to all the agricultural and mineral regions of the country is rapidly bringing civilized settlements into contact with all the tribes of indians 1 see no remedy for this except in placing all the indians on large reservations and giving them absolute protection there.
grant then appointed a member of the seneca tribe ely s parker as the first native american commissioner of indian affairs the first nonwhite to hold a high government position.
grant also turned to christian missionaries not the army or the indian office to take the lead in managing reservation affairs.
he declared the reservations off limits to the army even troops who were chasing indians with whom they had been in battle.
ihe missionaries people like the quaker lawrie tatum who was appointed to lead the comanche and kiowa reservation tried to make the peace policy work.
but government supplies were slow in coming and often of shoddy workmanship.
many indians resisted the confinement of reservation life.
the army was frustrated by the rule that they could not follow indians into the reservation asylum even as they were expected to police the non indian territories.
general sheridan condemned the peace policy saying if a white man commits murder or robs we hang him or send him to the penitentiary if an indian does the same we have been in the habit of giving him more blankets the indians seeing through the references to peace considered the whites as thieves who were stealing their land.
although the indian peace policy remained in force the army simply ignored it.
shermans defeat of the comanches in 1874 75 was in violation of the policy that army units could not enter reservations but the general was praised not reprimanded.
within a year after custers 1876 defeat the army had subdued nearly all of the sioux.
crazy horse one of the sioux who was at the little big horn the day custer died became an army scout and was killed at an army post in september 1877 sitting bull was arrested in 1881 after returning from exile in canada.
he toured briefly with buffalo bill codys wild west show in the 1880s and then retired to the standing rock reservation where as the ghost dance movement grew he was killed in a standoff with other sioux sent by the army to arrest him.
but the grant peace policy had unofficially died long before the old chief met his end.
within a decade of the last major indian wars in the 1870s and the settlement of most western indians on reservations the u s government again began to change policy.
by the 1880s reformers in and out of government were concluding that the assimilation of indians into white society a goal many shared would not happen as long as they maintained their ancient ways on reservations.
if the key to indian survival was for them to become independent farmers who attended churches and schools just as whites did then why reformers asked should they live on reservations.
why not give them all the benefits of the homestead act and allow indians like whites to gain free title to their own 160 acre farm and american citizenship.
in response to these arguments congress passed the general allotment act known as the dawes act for its prime sponsor massachusetts senator henry l dawes in 1887 ihe dawes act divided the reservations into 160 acre tracts to be assigned to each family.
after a 25 year waiting period indian families could sell the land like their white neighbors.
indians who took possession of a homestead also became u s citizens.
at first glance the dawes act might seem like an enlightened piece of legislation and at least some of its sponsors certainly believed that it was.
the dawes act had other provisions however that led to negative results.
indian culture was tribal and communal and hunting was a major activity however the dawes act pushed indians to be farmers and to join an individualistic culture that many found to be quite alien.
beyond that the most immediate impact of the act 460 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 was that after each family on a reservation was allotted its 160 acres all surplus land could then be sold by the government to white families.
later after the 25 year waiting period indian families sometimes sold their land giving them a profit but alienating them from their tribe.
a few tribes the navajos and the senecas were able to avoid implementation of the dawes act and retain communal ownership of their reservations.
but for many the act was an economic and cultural disaster.
in 1881 155 million acres were set aside as reservations belonging to indian tribes.
as a result of the dawes act indians controlled only 78 million acres by 1900 while the dawes act broke up tribal lands other federal perspectives undercut indian culture.
few white authorities believed that the first amendment protections of religious freedom applied to indian religion especially because indian religion and indian warfare were often linked.
it was not until 1978 that congress declared traditional indian religions to have first amendment rights.
sending indian young people to special schools was also seen by officials as one of the surest ways of implementing grants promise to favor any course towards them which tends to their civilization and ultimate citizenship in 1875 the army ordered 72 indian prisoners among them cheyenne arapahos kiowas comanches and caddos moved from fort sill in indian territory to a new federal prison in st augustine florida.
lieutenant richard henry pratt a civil war veteran who was put in charge of the prisoners decided to create a model indian school.
he hired sarah mather from mt.
holyoke college and the two began what they believed was an essential mission to teach the prisoners american style dress the english language and protestant christianity.
ihe isolation of the prisoner students made the process easier.
soaring eagle a cheyenne warrior said it is good to go to church when i go home i hope to sit down and sing gods hymns of course soaring eagle and the other prisoners knew that about the only chance they had to actually go home was to comply with the schools policies.
pratt and mathers experiment drew widespread praise.
they were authorized to expand their efforts and open the carlisle indian school in old army barracks in carlisle pennsylvania.
twenty five indian boarding schools eventually both catholic and protestant were built on the carlisle model between 1879 and 1902 using federal tax dollars these schools taught religion western customs and values to their indian students.
indian students resisted the goal of the boarding schools to transform them though such resistance was harshly punished.
francis la flesche an omaha who attended a presbyterian mission school in the 1860s reported that he and his friends spoke english during the day but at night when the missionaries were gone they continued to tell each other the omaha stories and speak the omaha language.
carlisle indian school a boarding school for native american children opened in carlisle pennsylvania to teach white ways and separate indian children from tribal culture.
m t 16 2 i quick review how did actions after the civil war in particular reassigning u s army units to the west and offering land for white settlement through the homestead act irrevocably change life for indians in the west.
the impact of the transcontinental railroad 1869 16j analyze the building of transcontinental railroads and its impact on the nation especially the west.
when he proposed his indian peace policy in december 1869 grant said that it was needed because t he building of rail roads is rapidly bringing civilized settlements into contact with all the tribes of indians only 7 months earlier at promontory point utah leland stanford governor of california and president of the central pacific railroad and t c durant vice president of the union pacific railroad had driven the last spike made of california gold to connect the first rail line that spanned the north american continent.
the dream of a transcontinental railroad gained widespread support in the 1850s.
an army survey in 1853 offered four possible routes across the country variously ending in transcontinental railroad the union pacific rail line from california and the central pacific line connected with chicago and other eastern cities it was the first rail line to allow train travel all across the united states.
chapter 16 conflict in the west 471 successfully growing crops in these new areas required discovering which ones thrived best.
while corn grew well in the eastern united states the hot temperatures and the lack of water made it hard to grow in much of the west.
mennonite settlers brought russian hard winter wheat with them and in kansas and the surrounding golden belt this wheat became the staple crop by the 1880s.
in other areas spring wheat did better while in the high plains sorghum crops resisted drought well.
experimentation luck and watching what worked for the neighbors all were essential to the success of farming in areas never before farmed.
farming was not for the poorest people.
it cost money to start a farm even the most modest homestead.
an 1862 farm publication estimated that the cost of starting a farm was 968.
homesteaders had to cover expenses in getting a family to a new place as well as in breaking the sod clearing forest building fences buying farm implements purchasing livestock and seed and building a house.
nevertheless there were thousands eventually hundreds of thousands of american families who saved or borrowed funds and began the farms that fed much of the world and settled much of the north american continent.
mining and miners the gold rush to california was the first rush of people to seek wealth in the minerals of the west but it was far from the only mineral rush.
as early as 1859 henry comstock found silver along the carson river in nevada and thousands of california miners rushed east into nevada to seek new opportunities for wealth.
comstock himself sold his claim but corporate interests made fortunes in nevada.
in 1874 thousands of miners many fresh from the now played out california goldfields and the nevada silver mines made their way to the black hills of south dakota.
the land was part of the sioux reservation but neither the u s army nor the sioux were able to stop many of the more than 15 000 prospectors who had come for gold.
some of them got rich many of them died in the effort and all of them helped launch some of the most intense of the plains indian wars.
mining and the quest for mineral wealth continued to lead to fortunes and to death in the west.
in 1882 a poor irish immigrant marcus daly persuaded california investors to back his claim to a silver mine near butte montana.
very little silver was ever found at the anaconda mine but it turned out to be one of the richest deposits of copper in the world making millions for daley his backers and the anaconda copper company.
others found mining wealth in gold silver copper and lead mines in idaho montana colorado and as far away as arizona and alaska.
the mineral wealth of the west seemed endless and many from around the world sought to find it though only a very few gained any real wealth.
seemingly overnight new towns emerged wherever there was mining for copper silver and gold including carson city nevada deadwood south dakota and anaconda montana.
like the cattle towns these overwhelmingly male mining towns made up of transients could be violent places where the smallest disagreement could erupt into violence.
in addition ethnic rivalries often divided the miners.
as in californias gold fields chinese miners were soon driven out of most mining operations in spite of the fact that chinese immigrants were 10 percent of montanas population and 25 percent of idahos in the 1870s.
when not driven out the chinese were forced to take low level jobs working water cannons or doing laundry for other miners.
miners of european origin also drove mexican american miners out of the fields.
mining was male work and typically did not lead to a settled life.
in 1860 the mining camps of virginia city and gold hill nevada reported a population of 2 300 men and 30 women.
the towns also reflected the transient nature of the population.
in 1879 leadville colorado had four banks four churches and 120 saloons plus a fair share of brothels.
while some mining towns later became important commercial centers many soon became empty ghost towns once the mining played out.
most prospectors sought wealth from their individual discoveries but most of the money in mining was made by large corporations like the anaconda copper company that could afford expensive mining equipment to extract deeply buried ore work in the mines dangerous.
jobs were often divided by ethnicity with chinese and 72 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 latino miners given the least skilled and lowest paying jobs and miners from europe getting the better paying positions.
nevertheless with little attention to safety all of the miners faced explosions floods cave ins and asphyxiation from poisonous gasses.
only the emergence of new unions among the miners began to address the dangers if not the ethnic divides in the 1890s see chapter 18 protested against the poverty and corruption that was part chapter traces the reasons so many americans were angry in the years between 1877 and 1914 and the results of that anger in reshaping the political and cultural life of the nation.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change coxey s army with their supporters marched though towns from ohio to washington dc on their way to make their demands of congress.
almost immediately after its founding the american railway union won a strike against the great northern railroad in 1894 it looked like a new force was emerging.
but then debs found himself pulled into a strike he did not want and the early successes of the american railway union turned to failure when the new union was involved in another strike at the pullman palace car company.
george pullman did not operate a railway he made railway cars the very best railway cars anywhere in the united states.
pullman cars were elegant sleeping cars that cost four times as much as other railway cars and that allowed travelers who could afford the accommodations to cross the country in comfort.
having designed and manufactured the cars pullman leased the cars and their staff to various rail lines that attached them to regular trains.
both pullman and the lines profited handsomely from the exchange.
to keep his employees out of industrial strife pullman built his own town pullman illinois 12 miles outside of chicago.
in pullman 8 000 workers and their families lived in 1 400 houses that they rented from the company.
they were provided with schools an athletic club free lectures a local theater and health care.
the housing at pullman was substantially better than housing available to most other industrial workers but the rents were high and the rules strict.
pullman did not allow alcohol and he had spotters who kept an eye on the behavior and home life of his employees.
facing the panic of 1893 pullman thought that the only prudent thing was to lay off some workers and cut wages for the rest.
he did not however reduce rents in pullman since he also expected the town to pay its own way.
nevertheless in spite of the depressed economy the pullman company paid its standard dividends to its shareholders.
in response the workers went on strike.
ninety percent of the residents of pullman did not show up for work.
they called on debs and the american railway union for support.
debs told the pullman workers that the midst of a depression was a terrible time to call a strike and urged them to postpone.
they refused and debs felt bound to support them.
the american railway union refused to handle any train that had a pullman car attached.
by june rail traffic through chicago had stopped.
the union took special 528 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 care to keep the mail trains running so there would be no reason for federal intervention but the federal government intervened anyway.
the cleveland administration obtained an injunction ordering the strikers back to work and when they refused cleveland ordered 14 000 federal troops to chicago to end the strike.
when the army arrived in chicago there was a riot and 34 people were killed.
federal authorities not only ended the strike but also arrested debs and disbanded the union.
ihe strike and the jail term transformed debs.
he went to jail a charismatic labor leader.
he came out convinced that the american economic system was permanently stacked against workers and their unions and that the only way to bring about change was political.
he supported the populist movement in the 1896 election but then founded the socialist party in the united states.
the socialists advocated government ownership of the nations major industries and a mandate for higher salaries for workers.
in the national elections of 1904 through 1920 except 1916 debs ran for president as the partys candidate winning hundreds of thousands of votes and giving himself a platform to advocate for a completely different economic system.
miners and their unions the steel that was transforming america required two key ingredients iron ore and coal to fuel the smelting process that turned iron into steel.
coal also heated most of the nations cities and coal fired generators produced much of the nations electricity.
these two ingredients had to be mined from deep in the earth as did several other resources of great importance to the united states.
gold and silver were still the most valued forms of exchange.
lead pipes provided water to most houses.
bringing these resources to the industrial process required the backbreaking and dangerous work of miners.
as the united states industrialized the need for mines and miners grew exponentially however since every dollar paid to a miner increased the cost of finished products or reduced the profits of those who owned the manufacturing process mine owners were determined to keep the pay of miners as low as possible recruiting new immigrants who found themselves with few options.
18 1 18 j 18 3 of the pullman strike.
chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 539 leader in the investigative field.
investigative journalists writing with the conviction that if people knew more of what was wrong in society they would act to change it played a key role in the progressive movement.
ihe january 1903 issue of mcclure s included articles by ida m tarbell as part of her continuing analysis of john d rockefeller and the standard oil company later published as the history of the standard oil company in 1904 ray stannard baker s report of visiting striking coal miners and their families and the report by lincoln steffens on ihe shame of minneapolis about the trial of the infamous four term mayor of minneapolis who got rich from payments from opium joints unlicensed saloons known as blind pigs and disorderly houses of prostitution.
issue after issue of mcclure s cosmopolitan and daily newspapers were forcing cities to clean up corruption compelling sometimes reluctant legislators to enact new restrictions on monopolies and helping political reformers gain office.
in 1906 a young reporter named upton sinclair took a job in chicagos slaughterhouses to report from the inside on the meatpacking industry.
he found a world where workers suffered terrible injury animals suffered inhumane treatment and unsanitary conditions poisoned the meat consumed by americans.
when sinclairs expose the jungle was published in 1906 the public response was immediate.
consumption of meat fell precipitously and within months congress passed the federal meat inspection act and the pure food and drug act regulating the meat industry as well as the food and drug industries.
while sinclairs main goal had been to draw attention to inhumane working conditions the primary result of his efforts was sanitary regulation of meatpacking plants.
as sinclair reflected years later i aimed at the publics heart and by accident i hit it in the stomach nevertheless the passage of reform legislation within months of a sinclairs book showed the power of such reporting and at the same time raised journalism to new heights as a respectable profession.
quick review which was more important to launching the progressive movement the theory behind it or the identification of specific problems.
the transformation of the cities analyze the changes in urban life that inspired progressive reforms and the impact of those reforms on cities.
the united states grew from a little under 40 million people in 1870 to just over 75 million people in 1900 for comparison the 2010 census showed the united states at over 300 million people.
perhaps one third of the growth between 1870 and 1910 was due to immigration and two thirds to a high birth rate.
while the population almost doubled it also became concentrated in cities.
many of the nations cities were much larger and more densely populated in 1900 than they had been in 1870 when the majority of people still lived on farms and in rural communities.
in 1870 the united states had only seven cities with over 250 000 people and none yet held a million people.
thirty years later three cities had passed the 1 million mark new york with 3 4 million chicago with 1 7 million and philadelphia with 1 3 million.
ihere were also dozens of large cities scattered among most of the states and territories of the union.
americans were adjusting to urban life and the adjustment was not always easy.
the rise of machine politics and the progressive response as cities grew a new kind of urban politics took root in the united states shaped by the fact that cities were the major points of entry for new immigrants to the nation.
many immigrants desperately needed services especially help with a job.
some took quickly to city political life finding in politics a way to gain social respectability.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 nowhere was the mix of urban growth immigration and the need for new services greater than in new york city.
within that mix in new york a new kind of political organization the political machine was created.
in political machines constituents supported a candidate in return for anticipated favors which would be repaid when that candidate was elected.
new yorks democratic political machine was known as tammany hall named for the building where it first met.
tammany effectively ruled new york for most of the years from the 1850s to the 1930s.
many other urban political machines were often associated with irish political leaders but tammany predated the irish influence.
in fact gaining access to tammany was part of the irish rise to power in new york city.
the most famous or infamous of early tammany bosses was william m boss tweed who led tammany in the 1860s and 1870s.
tweed was a protestant of english background.
after holding the office of alderman city council member and then being elected to congress tweed turned to where he saw the real power in tammany.
in 1863 at the age of 40 tweed became the chief of tammany.
he made sure one of his close allies abraham oakley was elected mayor while he stayed in the background and kept control of the political process.
tweed became immensely wealthy as he and his tammany associates benefited from some said stole from development projects like the tweed courthouse in lower manhattan now the home of the citys school department and riverside park built over the new york central railroad tracks beautiful municipal improvements that provided jobs but cost many times what they should have with large kickbacks going to the chosen developers and to tweed himself.
tweed and the new york political bosses who came after him robbed the city shamelessly by one estimate taking 45 million dollars 1 billion in current dollars.
at the same time the political machine made sure that the citys poor or more specifically those among the citys poor who supported them on election day got jobs when they needed them.
when necessary tammany created more jobs than the city needed tammany hall new york city s democratic party organization dating from well before the civil war that evolved into a powerful political machine after 1860 using patronage and bribes to maintain control of the city administration.
political cartoons like this one showing a corrupt political boss handing out special privileges and demanding votes in return did much to turn public opinion against machine rule in politics.
chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 561 1.
19 2 federal trade commission government agency established in 1914 19 j t0 provjc e regulatory oversight of business activity.
19 4 standard oil monopoly.
perhaps most important the clayton act exempted labor unions and farmer cooperatives from the definition of a combination in restraint of trade a charge that had been used in federal court cases against unions since eugene debs was sent to jail the 1890s.
although the bill did not give unions everything they wanted samuel gompers declared it to be the magna carta of labor union organizing.
separate legislation also strengthened the investigative powers of the interstate commerce commission and created a new federal trade commission with a specific if somewhat vague mandate to limit the growth and power of monopolies.
while wilson delivered quickly on some of his reformist campaign pledges he deeply disappointed other followers.
when the house passed legislation outlawing child labor in february 1915 wilson did nothing and the bill died in the senate.
only much later in his presidency did he support effective child labor legislation.
he also disappointed farmers a key democratic constituency when he quietly allowed a plan for rural credits to help farmers with mortgages to die in congressional conference committee.
african americans were greatly disappointed with wilson.
booker t washington had a long standing link to the republican party but during the 1912 campaign younger blacks including african episcopal zion bishop alexander walters and w e b.
du bois endorsed wilson.
it was a significant departure from the african american republican party alliance that had existed since reconstruction.
perhaps these leaders argued this virginia born and georgia reared intellectual could finally break the hold of segregationists on the democratic party.
during the campaign wilson was happy to receive their support but once in office wilson spoke only vaguely of a federal commission to investigate race relations in the united states and allowed his cabinet to set policy that did not support the african american cause.
citing what they said was white anger at racial mingling especially in southern post offices post master general albert s burleson and secretary of the treasury william gibbs mcadoo ordered the segregation of offices rest rooms and eating facilities at the post office treasury department and bureau of printing and engraving.
federal employees who had long worked in racially integrated settings were now segregated by race.
the democratic majority in congress allowed segregationist senators like james k vardaman of mississippi to block black appointments to federal jobs that previous republican presidents had provided.
the black press attacked wilson for the segregation policy and the lack of federal appointments.
wilsons most pointed confrontation about his racial policies was with the african american editor william monroe trotter of boston.
in november of 1913 trotter met with the president to lay out a long list of specific concerns about segregation in the federal service and the lack of african americans being hired in the government.
wilson responded blandly saying now mistakes have probably been made but those mistakes can be corrected a year later trotter led another delegation to the white house and received another round of bland vagueness.
trotter lost his temper saying we are here as full fledged american citizens and reminded wilson of the support he had received from african americans.
wilson in turn lost his temper telling trotter you are an american citizen but you are the only american citizen that has ever come into this office who has talked to me with such a tone the president insisted that trotter be excluded from any future meeting but there would be few future meetings with african americans with or without trotter.
wilsons reputation in the african american community was further tarnished when in early 1915 he allowed one of the first full length motion pictures d w griffiths birth of a nation to be shown at the white house.
the national association for the advancement of colored people was actively protesting the film which though a masterpiece of cinematography was also a glorification of the ku klux kian.
wilson did not endorse the film but the president also refused to announce his nonendorsement.
later wilson signed a letter prepared by his personal secretary saying that the president was entirely unaware of the character of the play before it was presented and power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 part vi becoming an industrial world has at no time expressed his approbation of it nevertheless the film incident along with the segregation of the federal work force seriously undermined wilsons reputation among african americans.
when wilson became president his agenda focused exclusively on domestic policy.
in his first year in office with the underwood tariff the clayton anti trust act as well as the creation of the federal reserve system and the federal trade commission he had extraordinary success.
a little more than a year after the inauguration however a political assassination in the far off town of sarajevo bosnia began a chain of events that would change the presidents and the nations focus in succeeding years.
after 1914 international matters far more than his domestic agenda dominated his administration.
indeed the assassination in the austrian empire in june 1914 can be seen as the ending of the progressive era.
in the new era discussed in the next chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 1890 1919 continuing expansion the splendid little war with spain cuba puerto rico and the philippines 1898 foreign policy foreign adventures 1900 1914 the united states and the great war chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 57 new states as of 1921 border of german empire in 1914 border of austrian hungarian empire in 1914 border of russian empire in 1914 border of ottoman empire in 1914 new boundaries as a result of postwar treaties boundaries as of 1914 atlantic ocean map 20 3 europe and the middle east before and during world war i this map shows the areas dominated by the austria hungarian and ottoman empires both of which would disappear at the end of world war i also shown is the area in northern france where the greatest fighting of the war took place.
to great britain to france to belgium to denmark to romania to greece to italy the warfare on land and on the oceans around europe cut into u s trade hurting wheat farmers and cotton growers who could not get their goods to european markets.
britain began to place large orders for farm products and for munitions while using its powerful navy to maintain a blockade of the central powers.
war torn britain needed money to buy these things but when j p morgan began to float large loans secretary of state bryan imposed a ban on loans to belligerents seeking the true spirit of strict neutrality.
bryans ban hurt u s commerce and britain and france claimed it was prejudicial toward them so bryan and wilson announced that commercial credit could be extended to the allies.
no one understood the difference between commercial credit and loans but the distinction allowed the european allied powers to get the goods they wanted u s farmers and manufacturers to profit and everyone to pretend that neutrality was still maintained.
the wilson administration had to steer a difficult course while facing considerable internal pressures.
former president roosevelt urged massive buildup of the army 580 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 and navy as well as a military draft all in the name of preparedness for an eventual war on the side of the british and french.
from roosevelts perspective wilson was dangerously passive.
in contrast progressive senator robert la follette of wisconsin and other politicians especially those from states with large german populations led a peace movement fearing that wilson was edging toward war.
jane addams led a large womans movement for peace.
many union leaders saw the war as a battle between european capitalists in which the working class should not be involved.
anarchists and socialists condemned the war.
between 1914 and 1916 in spite of roosevelts best efforts to build support for preparedness and war most americans in and out of office favored keeping as far distant from europes problems as possible.
of the many diplomatic tensions that the war in europe created by far the greatest had to do with the german use of a new kind of sea power the submarine or u boat.
britain s navy ruled the waves but german u boats could glide under the waves and strike at ships bringing supplies to britain and france.
on february 4 1915 the german admiralty announced that the waters around britain were a war zone and its submarines would freely attack any ship bringing supplies to britain.
wilson and bryan sent a formal diplomatic note that sinking ships without warning was an act so unprecedented in naval warfare that the united states would hold them to a strict accountability for such acts no one defined what strict accountability meant.
somehow submarine warfare having a ship struck by a torpedo seemingly out of nowhere terrified people in a way that direct ship to ship combat did not.
submarine warfare also threatened the profitable u s trade with britain.
for wilson it also raised the issue of basic rights of u s citizens as neutrals to travel freely.
on the last point the president and his secretary of state differed strongly.
bryan asked whether an american citizen can by putting his business above his regard for his country assume for his own advantage unnecessary risk and thus involve his country in international complications for wilson the freedom of neutrals to travel was in the interests of mankind and protecting the rights of neutrals under international law was a national duty.
in march 1915 a submarine sank a small british passenger ship the falaba and an american citizen was killed.
then on may 7 1915 a submarine sank the british liner lusitania the grandest and fastest ocean liner then in service.
the lusitania sank in 18 minutes and 1 198 people were killed including 127 american citizens.
the united states demanded an apology from germany.
when bryan suggested also issuing a formal warning to american citizens not to travel on ships belonging to countries that were at war wilson refused.
in response to the american note the german government sent secret orders to its submarine captains to avoid large passenger liners but their official word to the united states was evasive.
wilson promised that if germany would give up submarine warfare he would also press britain to end the blockade of goods flowing to germany and austria but he also prepared a second note to germany saying that the sinking of lusitania involved principles of humanity bryan argued for protesting the british blockade and for linking the second note to a policy that would bar passenger ships from carrying munitions the lusitania may well have been carrying munitions in addition to passengers.
wilson thought that bryans plan would undermine the needed message of protest.
bryan resigned rather than sign the second lusitania note.
he told the president that he was risking war by creating a situation where a foolish move by the german government could drag the united states into a war and that he could do more for peace building public opinion outside the administration than within.
bryan s departure was a sad parting between two people who had come to like and admire each other but who deeply believed in different courses of action.
robert lansing became acting secretary and signed the note.
congress debated but did not pass a law barring americans from travel on belligerent ships.
sinkings and diplomatic notes continued as did american domestic politics and new developments in woodrow wilson s personal life.
especially before the united states entered world war i songs like.
didn t raise my boy to be a soldier were popular among many who did not want to see young american men caught up in the fighting.
chapter 20 foreign policy and war in a progressive era 585 i 20 4 schenck v united states the first of several decisions by the u s supreme court upholding the sedition and espionage acts.
knowing that the americans were coming the british and french launched a major offensive in the summer of 1917 as with previous efforts the offensive was turned back and the terrible losses led to mutinies throughout the french army.
the allied armies seemed to be losing the will to fight.
on germanys eastern front the bolshevik revolution in russia in november 1917 led to a new government that wanted nothing to do with the war.
the bolsheviks signed the treaty of brest litovsk which ended the war between germany and russia on german terms the most important term of all being that germany could now focus exclusively on the western front and attack france in the spring of 1918 the treaty did not come in time to save germany however.
by 1918 850 000 fresh u s troops had arrived and they quickly went into combat while the german troops were exhausted by 4 years of war.
for the german soldiers the fact that they were facing so many well armed fresh troops undermined morale as much as any specific american victories though those victories were not without importance.
at chateau thierry in june of 1918 u s forces helped stop a german offensive toward paris.
by that fall the americans were part of an allied effort that had driven the german army out of france and back inside germany.
the end was becoming clear.
an armistice was signed and on november 11 1918 at 11 00 a m the guns of europe fell silent.
peace talks and the failure of the treaty of versailles no one knows exactly how many were killed and wounded in world war i or how many more died of disease and exposure.
by some estimates as many as 65 million men fought of whom 8 million were killed.
in europe hardly a family escaped losing american voices mathew chopin advancing over the top and carrying wounded comrade under shell fire 1918 m ms soldiers began arriving in france in the summer of 1918 and were quickly moved to the front lines.
while presidents and generals planned those doing the actual fighting recent arrivals to war from farms and crowded city neighborhoods told their own stories of fighting fear bravery and sorrow including this one recorded by mathew chopin while still in france waiting for a ship home in early 1919 at early dawn we continued advancing over the top through clouds of gas and smoke under rain of machine gun bullets shrapnel and steel.
the huns as most americans called the germans during the war were shelling heavily the edge of the roadside.
it was freezing cold we were out of water and had just a small ration of salmon and hard tack.
completely exhausted and thirsting for a drink i remember grabbing a canteen from a passing artillery caisson to soothe my parched lips when the explosion of a shell sent over deadly gas getting four of our men.
we got down in a valley for awhile during a machine gun barrage and then up again firing away at the enemy as fast as our automatics could work so many of our men were getting wounded and as the litter bearer was killed while going out under fire for wounded my sergeant sent me with another man to replace him.
it was a dangerous situation going over rounds of hell as we had to go up and get them under machine gun and rifle fire we began picking up the wounded as fast as they came and bandaging those in need of first aid.
it was a heartrending sight that weakened the strongest for everywhere were wounded and lifeless forms some all torn to pieces their limbs and heads entirely severed from their bodies.
i remember making a trip about a mile under heavy gun fire to get a wounded stretcher bearer whose partner had been killed.
he was a game little yank yet a pitiful sight with his side all ripped open by shrapnel.
as i laid him gently on the stretcher i still remember his last uttered words oh god if i could only live to die at home.
source mathew chopin through the valley of death 1919 from louisiana doughboy index htm and cited in p scott corbett and ronald c naugle life liberty and the pursuit of happiness documents in american history volume ii 1861 to present boston mcgraw hill 2004 pp.
109 109 thinking critically 1 analysis what impression of the fighting do you get from chopin s description.
2 historical interpretation what light does chopin s account shed on the impact of new military technology on the fighting during world war i.
588 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 the peace talks at versailles brought together a wide range of world leaders but were dominated by the leaders of great britain france and the united states.
someone and for a generation young women outnumbered young men by significant numbers.
ships were sunk villages and towns destroyed national economies wrecked.
while some including wilson wanted to use the end of the war to secure a just and lasting peace others wanted vengeance and still others wanted to forget all about war and simply have a good time in a life that they knew could be cut all too short.
amid all these conflicting political and emotional crosscurrents leaders of the victorious nations met in paris at the beginning of 1919 to write a peace treaty.
woodrow wilson who had broken precedent early in his term by speaking directly to congress broke precedent again when the war ended.
he sailed for paris to personally lead the american delegation at the paris peace talks.
no american president had ever left the united states while in office and some even wondered whether it was constitutional to do so.
wilson waived the concerns aside.
modern communications would allow him to remain in close touch with washington while he was across the atlantic.
the british french and italian prime ministers were all going to be present and wilson had no intention of handing the american role off to anyone else.
when the president and mrs wilson arrived in brest france on december 13 1918 they were greeted as heroes and they continued to be honored as they toured france britain and italy.
a banner on the champs elysees in paris announced honor to wilson the just and an american newspaper reporter wrote no one ever had such cheers it must have been a satisfying moment for the war weary president.
for wilson one ominous cloud over the negotiations was the fact that republicans had made substantial gains in the congressional elections of november 1918 in spite of his impassioned appeal to the voters to keep the democrats in charge while he negotiated a treaty.
then while he was in france in january 1919 wilson received a telegram that his arch rival theodore roosevelt had died.
a reporter said he thought he saw a look of pity and then a smile of triumph on the presidents face though wilson was far too diplomatic to say anything.
when the paris peace talks convened at the old royal palace of versailles wilson thought he was in a very strong bargaining position given the role of u s resources and troops in bringing the war to a successful conclusion for the allies.
his counterparts thought differently.
georges clemenceau the tough 77 year old french premier wanted vengeance for frances terrible losses and british prime minister david lloyd george though more moderate than clemenceau harbored nothing like wilsons generous spirit.
france and britain had lost 10 to 20 times as many soldiers as the united states most of the battles had been fought in france and neither leader nor their followers were in any mood to be generous.
the losers germany austria and the ottoman empire were excluded from the conference.
the new communist government of russia which had signed its own separate treaty with germany in early 1918 was also excluded from the peace conference and wilson sent troops to try and support the overthrow of the communist government which would lead to long term tension between russia and the united states.
since 1916 wilson had been telling his fellow americans what he wanted from a peace conference.
he insisted the traditional u s isolationism could not continue and the nation must be willing to become a partner in any feasible association of nations to maintain the peace in october just before the presidential election he told an audience in omaha nebraska we are part of the world and in january 1917 he told the senate that the united states wanted peace without victory his goal was to avoid future wars based on the covenant of a new international organization that would ensure that no such catastrophe shall ever overwhelm us again.
chapter review how was u s foreign policy between 1898 and 1918 different from that of the pre civil war period.
594 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontei 611 legion in uniform and a delegation of 200 women of the black cross nurses marching in a show of strength and pride.
garvey created a shipping company the black star line to carry passengers and freight between the united states the islands of the caribbean and africa.
this crown jewel of garveys economic development plan was launched in 1920 and eventually owned a number of ships.
it was also garveys downfall.
selling stock at 5 per share garvey eventually collected over 750 000 perhaps much more.
but whether through mismanagement or corruption or both the line floundered.
the black star line was attacked by blacks as well as whites.
in december 1920 w e b.
du bois published an indictment of the black star line.
the finances of the black star line collapsed and with it the rest of garvey s u s based efforts.
he was arrested for fraud convicted and sentenced to 5 years in federal prison in 1923 and began serving his term in the atlanta federal penitentiary in february 1925 in november 1927 president calvin coolidge commuted garveys sentence but had him deported to jamaica.
garvey continued to build the uni a in jamaica and traveled through much of the world but his influence though significant declined in the united states.
quick review how did changes in american culture reflect the postwar desire for fun and leisure.
when was that not the cause of change.
the 1920s the conflicts about american ideals 21 3 explain the elements of discrimination hardship and fundamentalism that also shaped american life in the 1920s.
while the 1920s are often remembered as the jazz age the decade of prohibition speakeasies new automobiles flappers and parties large numbers of americans lived quite different lives.
for many the crime and the drinking were an evil to be shunned.
some who refused to violate the prohibition laws lived quiet and law abiding lives others joined organizations that were determined to enforce prohibition not always by lawful means.
growing confidence and hope among african americans particularly threatened white southerners and long simmering tensions heated dangerously.
despite the relative prosperity many people on farms and in the poor neighborhoods of big cities still lived lives of desperate poverty.
in addition many native born americans came to distrust and fear immigrants or those who were different and the teaching of evolution threatened the very fabric of faith for others.
these conflicts challenged core american ideals on many levels and reactions ranged from quiet frustration to vocal defiance.
the rise of the ku klux kian in the 1920s as prohibition came into force the ku klux kian was also revived as a defender of prohibition as well as an opponent of immigration rights for african americans and anything that undermined the dominance of white native born protestants in the nations life.
the original kian had been one of several white terrorist organizations that opposed reconstruction after the civil war killing blacks and their white supporters and burning black schools and churches.
because of prosecution by the grant administration the reconstruction era kian virtually disappeared in the 1870s.
in 1915 a georgian william joseph simmons inspired by nostalgia for a bygone era recreated the kian.
during its first few years simmonss kian was an insignificant organization of a few hundred members.
then in the early 1920s a texas dentist hiram wesley evans pushed simmons aside and turned the kian into a hugely successful hate organization aimed at african americans immigrants catholics jews 612 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 rx b f f m jm.
the ku klux kian staged massive rallies and demonstrations such as this one in washington dc in 1925 and anyone who challenged the prohibition laws.
under evanss leadership the kian increased from a few hundred to as many as 5 million members including a female auxiliary that became the sepa rate women of the ku klux kian wkkk.
as the kian struck fear into many it enriched a few leaders who controlled access to everything from membership dues to kian robes and parapher nalia which had to be ordered directly from the national headquarters.
the kian slogan was one flag one school one bible it advocated for strict enforcement of prohibition and ironically some thought a cabinet level department of education that would ensure that all american children were taught klan defined patriotism or 100 americanism it gave flags and bibles to public schools while demanding the firing of catholic and jewish teachers.
the kian sought to require every student to attend public schools and in oregon got the state to outlaw private and parochial schools though the law was overturned by the u s supreme court before it took effect.
most people understood that the kian also had another agenda maintaining rigid racial segregation and by using terror if need be keeping african americans from asserting the right to vote or getting ahead economically.
if a black man was accused of flirting with a white woman he might expect a whipping or worse from robed kian visitors.
if the kian discovered an interracial couple they attacked them.
if a black did not want to sell land at a price offered by a kian member he or she might expect a lashing until agreeing to sell.
in 1920 nathan taylor an african american attorney in mississippi who previously had been protected by white attorneys was abducted by the kian and taken out to the middle of the mississippi river and warned that one way or another he was to leave the state.
preferring to leave alive taylor moved to chicago.
the kian often with the women of the kian in the lead launched boycotts of stores owned by blacks catholics or jewish people.
kian publications condemned the foreign influence of the catholic church and reprinted articles from henry fords fiercely anti semitic dearborn independent about what they called the money grasping jews the kians constitution defined a goal to unite white male persons native born gentile citizens of the united states of america who owe no allegiance of any nature to any foreign government nation institution sect ruler person or people to shield the sanctity of the home and the chastity of womanhood to maintain forever white supremacy.
the kian provided entertainment in isolated small towns where there was not much to do.
a hundred thousand people attended a kian rally on july 4 1923 in kokomo indiana which featured music and food.
almost as many attended a speech by imperial wizard evans at ku klux kian day at the texas state fair in dallas that fall.
the kian was especially strong in the midwest and the south but there was kian activity from maine to california.
a number of groups from the catholic knights of columbus to the african american press to the new and specifically the anti kian american unity league aul began to challenge the kian.
where the kian spoke of pure americanism the aul spoke of true americanism in some places pitched battles erupted between chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontented time zl dayton and the nation got quite a show.
clarence darrow the best known lawyer in the country volunteered to join the aclu team.
former presidential candidate william jennings bryan volunteered for the prosecution.
every major newspaper in the country covered the trial.
most people thought darrow got the better of bryan in the arguments but on the facts scopes was clearly guilty.
scopes admitted he had violated the law and he was found guilty and fined 100 though the tennessee supreme court threw the case out on a technicality to avoid appeal to the u s supreme court which the aclu wanted.
cautious textbook publishers changed their books.
in future editions a civic biology stopped calling darwin the grand old man of biology and instead simply said that he was a leading biologist evolution which in the earlier editions had been a wonderful discovery now became merely darwins interpretation of the way in which all life changes only in the late 1950s would a full discussion of evolution return to high school textbooks.
quick review to what extent were the racism anti immigration efforts and fundamentalism of the 1920s the result of changes throughout the united states.
harding coolidge and hoover national politics and policies in the 1920s 21 4 analyze the political and policy developments of the decade.
washington conference a conference called by the united states in 1921 that led to the adoption of the five powers treaty in 1922 in an ultimately ineffective effort to limit the growth of the world s navies and thus preserve peace.
three republican presidents led the united states during the 1920s.
the election of warren harding in november of 1920 was almost a foregone conclusion given the general disenchantment with woodrow wilsons policies the war and the league of nations.
a politician who promised to return the nation to normalcy was just what people wanted.
harding and his running mate massachusetts governor calvin coolidge defeated the democratic nominee ohio governor james cox and his running mate the young franklin roosevelt by 16 million to 9 million popular votes.
in what was his last race the socialist party candidate eugene v debs polled close to a million votes while still in prison for violating the world war i sedition laws.
late in 1921 harding commuted his sentence and debs was freed.
although harding was remembered mostly for the scandals of his administration he also made some very strong appointments.
three months after coming to office he appointed former president william howard taft to the job taft had always wanted chief justice of the supreme court where taft served until 1930 charles evans hughes the 1916 republican presidential candidate became secretary of state.
knowing that there was no chance of u s participation in the league of nations but wanting to foster peace in the postwar world hughes called the washington conference in 1921 to try to end the competition among the united states britain and japan to build up their navies.
to the surprise of many the result of the conference the five powers treaty of february 1922 slowed the worldwide navy build up and established limits on battleships battle cruisers and aircraft carriers in a ratio of 5 each for the united states and britain 3 each for japan and 1 75 each for france and italy.
no limits were set for other types of ships.
in 1922 hughes also ended the longstanding u s occupation of the dominican republic.
harding also appointed andrew mellon one of the wealthiest people in the united states to serve as secretary of the treasury.
mellon who served through the harding coolidge and hoover administrations ensured that there was a close and comfortable relationship between government and business.
he cut government spending cut taxes and retired half of the world war i debt while in office.
he was often hailed as the greatest secretary of the treasury ever until the coming of the great depression raised serious questions about his policies.
herbert hoover perhaps the most liberal 620 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 member of the cabinet served as secretary of commerce for harding and coolidge encouraging cooperation between businesses to stabilize industrial production and the economy.
harding died suddenly in august 1923 probably the result of a heart attack.
his wifes refusal to allow an autopsy led to rumors that he was poisoned or committed suicide though there was never any evidence for either.
his death came just as the tea pot dome scandal was about to come to light.
he was reported to have asked herbert hoover what a president should do whose friends had betrayed him harding was deeply mourned but as the scandals of the harding administration surfaced his reputation was tarnished before the year was out.
fortunately for the republican party hardings vice president the stern and distant calvin coolidge had no connection to the scandals and quickly took steps to investigate them.
news of hardings death reached the vice president while he was vacationing with his father in a rustic vermont farmhouse.
since the house had no electricity colonel john coolidge administered the presidential oath of office to his son by the light of a kerosene lamp a reassuring image that perfectly fit the tone of austerity and adherence to old time values that the new president wanted to set.
more important to coolidges success the economic downturn of 1921 had eased and by 1923 many americans were experiencing an economic boom known as the coolidge prosperity to no ones surprise coolidge a man of so few words he came to be known as silent cal was nominated for a full term by the republican party in the summer of 1924 the democratic party was deeply divided between a southern and western wing that was primarily white protestant rural and supportive of prohibition and a northern wing that though also very white included many catholics and jews and was highly urban as well as strongly anti prohibition.
the kian was a force at the summer nominating convention where their opposition to a catholic candidate who wanted to repeal prohibition made itself felt.
the two leading contenders for the nomination included former treasury secretary william g mcadoo a dry who favored prohibition and was supported by the southern and western wing of the party and new york governor al smith a catholic and a wet staunch opponent of prohibition.
they battled for 103 ballots before the delegates turned to the west virginia lawyer and former congressman john davis in an exhausted compromise.
others disgusted with both parties rebuilt the old progressive party of 1912 and nominated wisconsin s popular progressive senator robert la follette for president.
coolidges victory in the 1924 elections was as decisive as harding s had been in 1920 he won 54 percent of the total with only 28 8 percent for the democrats and 16 6 percent for the la follette progressives.
except for wisconsin which went for la follette coolidge carried every state outside of the then solidly democratic south.
the coolidge administration took some important steps in foreign policy.
just before he took office as coolidges vice president charles g dawes negotiated the so called dawes plan to help ameliorate the german financial crisis brought on by the huge reparations payments to britain and france.
in 1925 coolidge appointed frank kellogg as secretary of state.
two years later in 1927 french foreign minister aristide briand proposed a joint u s french alliance but kellogg turned the conversation to a multilateral treaty.
the kellogg briand pact outlawing war was signed in paris in aw gneher.
will the brakes hold.
as this cartoon shows the tea pot dome scandal that came to light in 1923 soon after president harding s death threatened to steamroll over many leaders of the republican party.
however the fact that the new republican president calvin coolidge had nothing to do with it allowed party leaders to distance themselves from the scandal and in the end have an easy road to the white house in the november 1924 elections.
the kellogg briand pact 1928 international treaty that denounced aggression and war but lacked provisions.
enforcement.
chapter review the prelude the red summer of 1919 21 1 explain how events at the end of world war i shaped the decade that followed.
review questions 1 cause and effect what factors contributed to the red summer of 1919.
2 contextualization how did issues and tensions emerging from world war i create the anger and violence of 1919.
21 2 the 1920s the exuberance of prosperity analyze how prohibition and other developments of the 1920s reshaped american culture.
review questions 3 construct an argument defend or refute the following statement if it were not for american participation in world war i prohibition would never have been enacted 4 historical interpretation what light does the teapot dome scandal shed on the nature of republican government in the 1920s.
5 comparison compare and contrast the domestic ideal of womanhood of the late 1800s with the new woman epitomized by the flappers of the 1920s.
what was new about the new woman.
21 3 the 1920s the conflicts about american ideals explain the elements of discrimination hardship and fundamentalism that also shaped american life in the 1920s.
review questions 6 comparison compare and contrast the ku klux kian of the 1860s and 1870s with the kian of the 1920s.
how did the new kian differ from the original kian.
7 synthesis how did anti immigrant sentiment shape the culture of the 1920s.
harding coolidge and hoover national politics and policies in the 1920s 21 4 analyze the political and policy developments of the decade.
review questions 8 constructing an argument what accounts for the republican dominance of national politics in the 1920s.
9 synthesis what connections can you make between the election of 1928 and the general social and cultural trends of the 1920s.
624 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 living in hard times 22 1929 1939 during the great depression lines of unemployed impoverished workers seeking food and shelter could be seen in cities and towns across the united states.
in late october 1929 the value of shares sold on the new york stock exchange known as wall street collapsed.
prices kept dropping for the next 3 years in a dizzying decline in which paper wealth simply evaporated.
for most americans the stock market crash seemed irrelevant at first.
for industrial workers who rarely owned stock the value of shares in the enterprises where they worked was not important but the subsequent drop in industrial jobs as production of automobiles radios appliances and clothing dried up was all too real.
for many farmers in the deep south and those trying to get by farming small mountainous farms in appalachia the depression had come much earlier beginning with the drop in agricultural prices in 1920 see chapter 22 living in h 51 chapter 23 living in a woj 671 world war ii in europe 1811 axis powers bill areas under axis control may 1941 bb allied powers i i neutral axis forces allied forces u s s r allied forces u s and british major battles map 23 4 the war in europe.
early in the war nazi forces had attacked france and then the soviet union but as the tide of war turned soviet forces moved across much of eastern europe and into germany itself while u s and british forces attacked nazi forces in north africa italy and finally france and germany.
672 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 while the red army rolled west from russia into poland and eventually germany and while american and british forces won battles in north africa and italy american pilots joined their british counterparts in what became round the clock bombing of germany.
the british had begun bombing german military targets first in france and then as the planes got better in the ruhr valley of germany itself.
precision bombing in real wartime conditions was exceedingly difficult so the british simply tried to destroy the morale of the german civilians especially industrial workers by bombing wherever they could what some called terror bombing.
when the americans joined the war they initially found the terror bombing to be abhorrent but they worked out a compromise the british would bomb at night bombing wherever they could and the americans with more sophisticated equipment could bomb specified targets during the day.
the first u s bombers began their attacks in august 1942 and by january 1943 hundreds of u s bombers began penetrating german airspace hitting industrial targets like the german city of bremen.
the losses of pilots and crews were staggering.
six hundred americans were killed in the summer of 1943 16 percent of those who flew missions.
one pilot remembered his terror when being attacked by german messerschmitt 109s the plane shook with the chatter of our guns as other planes were hit we had to fly through their debris when a plane blew up we saw their parts all over the sky.
we smashed into some of the pieces.
one plane hit a body which tumbled out of a plane ahead.
a crewman went out the front hatch of a plane and hit the tail assembly of his own plane.
his body turned over and over like a bean bag tossed into air.
and still the crews kept flying.
in november 1943 president roosevelt left the united states for a second time flying to cairo egypt for a third meeting with prime minister churchill and then on to tehran iran for his first meeting with stalin which churchill and the nominal chinese leader chiang kai shek also attended.
fdr was intrigued to meet stalin in person.
at cairo fdr also tried to persuade churchill that britain must renounce its colonies in india burma malaya and hong kong and promise them independence after the war as the united states was doing with the philippine islands.
churchill was a great wartime leader in britain but he was equally a lifelong british imperialist and he was not about to be persuaded.
the tehran conference included discussions of the war in china.
in addition stalin kept up the pressure for the united states and britain to invade france as quickly as possible and promised to join the war against japan once the war in europe was won.
the conference was also a test of the personal chemistry between stalin and fdr.
although the u s president was confident of his own skill in persuading people he confessed i couldnt get any personal connection with stalin u s ambassador to russia averell harriman described stalin as someone of high intelligence with a fantastic grasp of detail and shrewdness stalin harriman said was better informed than roosevelt more realistic than churchill in some ways the most effective of the war leaders.
at the same time he was of course a murderous tyrant stalin wanted an absolute promise that the united states and britain would start the invasion of germany code named operation overlord in the spring of 1944 and he wanted to make sure that others knew as he had told josef tito who was leading a communist uprising behind german lines in yugoslavia whoever occupies a territory also imposes his own social system.
the red army stalin assured everyone would not pull back from the lands it was seizing from germany.
operation overlord was set for may 1 1944 in the meantime u s and british planes kept bombing germany and germany occupied france 6 000 bombing runs during 1 week alone in february 1944 to make it difficult for german forces to prepare for an invasion that they knew was coming.
although roosevelt had become convinced as early as 1942 that the nazis were killing lews the planes did not bomb the nazi death camps or the rail lines to auschwitz.
u s planners simply could not bring themselves to believe that anything like the scale of the holocaust was happening in spite of the fact that by 1944 they had clear evidence 211 232 233 23 4 operation overlord u s and british invasion of france in june 1944 during world war ii.
chapter 24 the world the war created public demonstration of a new international harvester cotton picking machine.
he described the scene an estimated 2 500 to 3 000 people swarmed over the plantation on that one day 800 to 1 000 automobiles leaving their tracks and scars throughout the property the machine that the visitors had come to see changed the face of the south and changed the lives of the nations african americans.
the bright red picker looked like a tractor with a large metal basket on the top.
as it drove down a row of cotton the spindles mounted on the front rotated and stripped the cotton off the plants and then suctioned the cotton up to a basket.
the picker could pick a thousand pounds of cotton in an hour a good worker only 20 pounds.
hopson said it cost 5 26 for a machine to pick a bale of cotton.
a sharecropper cost 39 41 per bale.
he wrote the introduction of the cotton harvester may have been comparable to the unveiling of eli whitneys first hand operated cotton gin hopson was thinking of the machines impact on his profits.
but like whitneys invention a century and a half earlier the machines largest impact was on men and women of african descent.
whitneys cotton gin made slavery profitable.
international harvesters cotton picking machine made the sharecropping that had replaced slavery obsolete.
a wave of 1 5 million african americans had moved north between 1910 and 1940 but 5 million followed between 1940 and 1960 as people whose lives were centered in the communities churches and culture of the rigidly segregated south moved north they now lived in quite different communities with changing norms.
racial discrimination generally seen as a southern issue until world war ii became a national one.
nevertheless opportunities in the north were better than those offered by sharecropping and the newcomers created their own jobs and a new urban culture.
housing in the north was even more segregated than in the south.
while the federal housing authority dropped explicit racial rules by the 1940s its handbook still said if a neighborhood is to retain stability it is necessary that all properties shall continue to be occupied by the same social class in reality that wording meant dont give mortgages to black families in white neighborhoods the white rush to segregated suburbs opened up new urban housing for blacks.
unscrupulous real estate agents made large profits while engaging in blockbusting in older neighborhoods convincing frightened white homeowners to sell quickly and cheaply.
from boston to los angeles whole city blocks went on the market at the same time transferring the majority of homes from white to black hands in short order.
changes in the racial makeup of urban neighborhoods happened at the same time as cash strapped cities cut back on municipal services and many banks dramatically reduced the availability of mortgages and loans for home improvements.
the creation of the white suburbs and the vastly expanded urban black ghettos went hand in hand in the 1950s.
moving from the south to an unfamiliar north could be painful for african americans.
in the last train north clifton taulbert described the longing for things left behind there were no chinaberry trees.
no pecan trees never again would i pick dew berries or hear the familiar laughter from the field truck.
this was my world now this strange new family and their cramped quarters over the tiny grocery store they grandly called the confectionary nevertheless they kept coming through the 1940s and 1950s.
as a migrant from tennessee to milwaukee said every train every bus they were coming many who arrived were disillusioned.
when harvey clark who originally hailed from mississippi tried to move his family from a crowded apartment in south chicago to a larger one just across the city line in cicero he was greeted by a mob and a police chief who told him to get out of cicero the chief told the agent who arranged the apartment dont come back in town or youll get a bullet through 692 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 you the white mayor of dearborn michigan told alabamas montgomery advertiser that negroes cant get in here.
every time we hear of a negro moving in we respond quicker than you do to a fire.
as detroit became a majority black city its suburb of dearborn remained 99 percent white.
black migrants also found new freedoms and opportunities in the north.
ida mae brandon gladney who had never been able to vote in mississippi cast her first vote for franklin roosevelt in chicago in 1940.
the black vote in chicago carried the state of illinois and thus the electoral college for roosevelt in that election.
robert joseph pershing foster a physician in louisiana established a new practice in the rapidly expanding black community of los angeles in 1954 and 1955 ihe several million other people making the move from the states of the old confederacy to new york chicago los angeles and a hundred other cities in the north and west each had his or her own tale of the transformations taking place in every region of the country.
latino migrations from puerto rico and mexico as they had in the 1920s african american artists embraced urban life and the new growing black communities of the north few more enthusiastically than musicians like charlie parker and miles davis shown here performing in new york city in 1947 while the great migration of african americans from the rural south to the urban north and west was occurring migrations of latino people were happening at the same time.
ihe united states had won control of puerto rico in 1898 and puerto ricans had long been american citizens.
after world war ii more of these spanish speaking citizens began moving from puerto rico to the u s mainland especially new york city.
east harlem long an italian neighborhood in new york city quickly became mostly puerto rican.
piri thomas was born in new york in 1928 and described the racial discrimination faced by a young adult in spanish harlem in the 1950s in his 1967 memoir aptly named down these mean streets.
in addition the u s population included about 1 2 million americans of mexican background and this group also grew rapidly after world war ii.
in the southwest the bracero helping hands in spanish began during world war ii to allow mexican farm workers temporary entry into the united states to work in the agricultural fields that other americans had left for war industries or for the military.
the entry program was expanded after the war and between 1948 and 1964 almost 5 million braceros were brought to the united states.
although they were expected to return to mexico when the work was done not all did and they along with others who walked across the hot deserts and the border expanded the countrys mexican american population creating a large group some of whom remained under constant threat of deportation.
in southern california growth led to new militancy in the mexican american community.
in santa ana mexican american parents hired an attorney and sued the board of education over school segregation.
in 1946 the courts issued a permanent injunction against this segregation and later the federal appeals court directed a federal grand jury to consider an indictment against the santa ana board.
in los angeles with the largest mexican american population the community service organization began to fight for political rights in 1947 and was successful in electing edward roybal to the los angeles city council in 1949 the first time since 1881 that someone of mexican descent had served on that body.
in 1962 roybal was elected to the u s congress.
other mexican american organizations sprang up across the southwest supporting a successful mine workers strike in new mexico in 1950 1952 and building a solid base before the civil rights movements of the later 1950s while also supporting a small but growing middle class latino community in california and texas.
demonstrate an understanding of how different aspects of the 1950s from the seeming complacency of eisenhower s time to the growing civil rights movement reshaped the united states.
eisenhower s america america s world explain the continuation of the cold war under a new republican administration.
a culture on the move explain the impact of cultural and technological changes on the country.
race and civil rights analyze the growth and impact of the civil rights movement between 1954 and 1965.
25 1 25 2 25 3 chapter 25 compla lange 731 race and civil rights 25 3 analyze the growth and impact of the civil rights movement between 1954 and 1965.
25 3 segregation economic marginalization and political disenfranchisement were reality for most african americans in the 1950s as they had been since the collapse of reconstruction in the 1870s and 1880s see chapter of the naacp.
he worked as a porter on the railroad and was vice president of the alabama branch of the brotherhood of sleeping car porters the most powerful black led union in the united states.
he had been one of the planners for the 1941 march on washington.
nixon asked clifford and virginia durr montgomery whites who were civil rights activists to join him and the three went to the montgomery jail to sign the bond for rosa parks release.
within a few hours parks was free and at home.
early in that evening the matter could have ended.
the court would probably have let parks off with a small fine and the segregated world of montgomery could have returned to normal.
but as nixon and the durrs talked with rosa parks her husband and her mother the question arose was this incident the test case they had all been waiting for.
in brown v board of education the year before the supreme court had ruled that segregated schools were illegal.
but what about transportation.
if she were willing if she could overcome her husband raymonds fear that the white folks will kill you rosa there could not be a better person than rosa parks for the test case they all sought.
parks had a long history as a civil rights activist.
she first tried to register to vote in 1943 when only a very tiny percentage of alabama blacks voted.
she was told she did not pass the literacy test.
the same thing happened in 1944 in 1945 she hand copied every question on the literacy test while she was taking it in an obvious first step toward a legal challenge.
apparently the authorities wanted to avoid a legal challenge more than they wanted to avoid her vote.
she received her registration in the mail and began voting in alabama elections in 1946 in the summer of 1955 parks attended a desegregation workshop at highlander.
i was forty two years old and it was one of the few times in my life up to that point when i did not feel any hostility from white people parks said.
given her background many have wondered whether parkss action on the bus had been planned.
she insisted it had not.
but her life had prepared her for what happened.
a few months later parks said there had to be a stopping place and this seemed to have been the place for me to stop being pushed around and to find out what human rights i had if any parks nixon and the durrs retained a young african american lawyer fred gray as her attorney.
nixon began calling the local ministers.
the new minister at dexter avenue baptist church martin luther king jr was third on his list.
among the people gray called that evening was jo ann gibson robinson a professor at montgomerys all black alabama state college and a leader in the black women s political caucus wpc in montgomery who remembered telephones jangled people congregated on street corners and in homes and talked but a numbing helplessness seemed to paralyze everyone without consulting other leaders robinson and the wpc decided to call a boycott of the montgomery buses when chapter 25 chapter 23.
the immigration act of 1965 abolished the old quotas though it hardly made immigration easy.
the legislation held the total number of immigrants at 290 000 the number who were expected annually under the old law but established priorities for education and skills rather than national origin.
the law also provided an important loophole allowing immigration above the new quota for close relatives of u s citizens including foreigners who married a citizen.
although little change was expected when the legislation was signed the new immigration law represented the beginning of a significant new era of immigration one that matched and then exceeded the number of immigrants who came to the united states from 1890 to 1920 the fourth major piece of legislation that congress enacted in 1965 was the voting rights act.
as 1965 began johnson did not have additional civil rights legislation on his agenda.
the civil rights act of 1964 was the most significant congressional intervention in civil rights since reconstruction.
johnson wanted to focus in 1965 on other aspects of his great society and did not relish another round of conflict with richard russell and other southern senators.
civil rights leaders however did not mean to take a back seat to anyone elses agenda.
martin luther king jr decided to create a national confrontation around the right to vote see chapter 27 rights reaction and limits 7 map 27 1 support and opposition to the era.
although the majority of state legislatures voted to approve the proposed equal rights amendment to the constitution the amendment fell three states short of the required three fourth s approval.
after the goldwater defeat a new opportunity opened for her.
in december 1971 schlafly was invited to a debate in connecticut.
she wanted to focus on national defense but was told that the focus would be the equal rights amendment that was being debated at that time in the u s senate.
schlafly had no opinion of the amendment but agreed to read up on it before coming to connecticut.
she did and the result was her decision to make opposition to the era her prime focus.
in 1972 as congress was voting on the era schlafly wrote whats wrong with equal rights for women and then launched the stop era initiative.
schlafly pulled in women whom she knew from anticommunist organizing.
by early 1973 stop era had chapter 27 rights reactl imits 803 carter s greatest triumph was presiding over a new peace treaty between anwar al sadat of egypt and menachem begin of israel.
iranian hostage crisis the invasion of the american embassy in iran by revolutionary guards who then took 66 hostages holding them from november 1979 until january 1981 carters worse foreign policy disaster however was with iran.
in january 1979 the government of the shah of iran who had been installed by a u s backed coup in the 1950s was overthrown.
ayatollah ruhollah khomeini the exiled leader of the muslim radicals returned to iran and created an islamic republic with a government that was based on religious law and that gave religious leaders like khomeini ultimate authority.
when in october the ailing shah was admitted to the united states for medical treatment khomeini and his followers were furious.
on november 4 1979 a mob stormed the u s embassy in tehran taking 66 americans hostage.
the iranian hostage crisis became the dominant event of carters last year in office.
the government froze iranian assets in the united states expanded the pressure on iran and tried every way possible to negotiate the release of the american hostages.
in april 1980 feeling that negotiations were a failure carter approved an attack on iran to rescue the hostages.
the attack was a failure as a sandstorm and hydraulic problems disabled some of the helicopters and another crashed into a cargo plane.
eight americans were killed but none got close to the hostages.
secretary of state cyrus vance resigned in protest.
later that year after iraq attacked iran the iranian government agreed to negotiate but the process was slow.
only on the day carter left office in january 1981 and after reagan had taken the oath of office were the hostages released.
the coming of ronald reagan carters problems with the economy energy and hostages formed the backdrop to the 1980 election campaign.
within the democratic party there was great unease with the president.
his cautious economic policies and determination to balance the federal budget alienated liberals.
his go it alone style alienated congress.
massachusetts senator edward ted kennedy challenged carter in the primaries.
public opinion polls showed a two to one preference for kennedy last of the charismatic kennedy brothers over carter.
but kennedy never seemed able to articulate the reasons he was challenging 804 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 carter.
and for all of his popularity memories persisted of the time in 1969 when kennedy had driven a car off a bridge near chappaquiddick on marthas vineyard and left a young woman mary jo kopechne to drown.
in the end carter defeated kennedy for the nomination.
kennedy supported carter in the general election but the wounds of a tough primary fight remained.
carter stayed close to the white house and focused on the hostage crisis.
the president who once prided himself on his openness and accessibility now adopted a rose garden strategy leaving his office only rarely even to campaign.
the republicans entered the campaign with great confidence.
the contest for the nomination quickly came down to one between former california governor and movie actor ronald reagan and former cia director and u s ambassador to china george h w.
bush fought a tough campaign calling reagans economic plan voodoo economics but reagan was hugely popular with conservatives who were known as the republican base he was also an effective and articulate campaigner and easily won the nomination.
reagan named bush as his running mate.
conservatives who had felt marginalized since barry goldwaters loss in 1964 believed that their day had come.
reagan was an effective campaigner impressing many with his sunny optimism.
in the one presidential debate that was held reagan scored points with his poise and his response there you go again to a carter critique.
reagan won in a landslide.
the republicans gained 34 seats in the house though it still had a democratic majority but they took over the senate with a 53 to 47 majority that included the defeat of democratic stalwarts frank church of idaho and george mcgovern of south dakota.
the democratic speaker of the house tip oneill said of the election a tidal wave hit us bill moyers who had served in the johnson administration said we didnt elect this guy reagan because he knows how many barrels of oil are in alaska.
we elected him because we want to feel good the 1980s and the time of the reagan revolution would be a very different one than the decade that had just ended.
quick review what could ford and carter have done to be more effective during their terms in office.
blindfolded american hostages are paraded outside the u s embassy in teheran by their militant captors after iranian students stormed the embassy in november 1979 sixty americans and 40 nationals from other countries were taken by the students and held captive inside the embassy.
conclusion public discourse in the united states which had been heated in the 1960s became even more divisive and angry after 1969 in the 1970s new civil rights movements emerged as women gays and lesbians latinos asians and american indians began to demand equality and fair treatment.
against this expanding civil rights backdrop a new conservative ideology surfaced focusing on religion morality and culture.
compared with the 1950s and 1960s the 1970s ushered in an economic downturn that undercut the security of many americans.
the 1970s also gave rise to political turmoil as one president was forced to resign in disgrace and two others lost their bids for reelection.
the new civil rights movements of the 1970s resulted in advancements for many segments of the american population.
women achieved significant legislative and judicial victories which allowed them to improve both their working conditions and their social status.
filipino and mexican american farm workers successfully bargained for recognition of a union in california.
american indians staged protests at alcatraz wounded knee and the offices of the bureau of indian affairs achieving modest gains with respect to civil rights and tribal autonomy.
gay and lesbian americans began to step out of the closet and the modern gay rights movement was born.
at the same time traditional conservatives were bewildered and angered by the chapter 28 the reagan revolution 813 morning again in america the campaign slogan of ronald reagan s reelection effort in 1984 president ronald reagan looks to his left as a secret service agent places a hand on his shoulder and pushes the president into his limousine after he was shot leaving a washington hotel march 30 1981 reagan also benefited from an upsurge of popular patriotism that he had helped to foster.
the space shuttle program had been years in the making since the days when americans worried about sputnik and soviet leadership in space but reagan benefit ted from the good will when the first space shuttle was successfully launched in april 1981 reagans tough line with the soviet union pleased anti communists and the fact that at the end of his first term he was the first president since herbert hoover never to have met with a soviet leader did not worry them.
in june 1984 reagan traveled to france for the 40th anniversary of the d day landing that ended world war ii.
in a series of events carefully scripted by his communications director michael deaver he led a series of jubilant and patriotism filled celebrations honoring veterans and american power.
later that summer the olympics were held in los angeles and reagan led the celebrations emphasizing how far the country had come since the boycott of the games in moscow only 4 years before.
reagans wealthy supporters also gave him a huge financial edge over mondale.
perhaps most of all reagans own sunny disposition made people like him.
his tv ads reinforced reagans message that it was morning again in america.
his optimism was on full display when on march 30 1981 reagan was shot while leaving a speaking event.
his press secretary james brady was severely wounded and permanently disabled.
few knew at the time how seriously the president had been wounded when a bullet lodged in his left lung and he bled heavily.
but just before entering surgery reagan looked at his wife nancy and said honey i forgot to duck and then asked the surgeons please tell me youre all republicans that sort of pluck made him popular even with people who disagreed with his policies.
in addition his speaking style was extraordinary.
his many years as an actor paid off.
his friends called him the great communicator and even his toughest opponents admired him.
the democratic speaker of the house tip oneill who tangled with reagan on many occasions said of him he may not be much of a debater but with a prepared text hes the best public speaker ive ever seen im beginning to think that in this regard he dwarfs both roosevelt and kennedy in the november 1984 vote reagan carried every state except mondales home state of minnesota and the district of columbia and won almost 60 percent of the popular vote.
while republicans continued to control the senate 53 to 46 the democrats controlled the house 252 to 182 a year after the election a group of democrats including representative richard gephardt of missouri and governor bill clinton of arkansas organized the democratic leadership council.
these new democrats argued that there was more to the election than reagans personal popularity and that the democratic party was not going to win elections until it moved closer to the conservative mainstream.
the creation of the democratic leadership council was high tribute to the conservative shift in american opinion that constituted the heart of the reagan revolution and signaled a move away from traditional new deal democratic values that included significant government services especially for those in need and support for labor unions.
as reagan entered his second term people expected a repeat of the first.
reagans top priority remained reducing taxes and in the mid 1980s many democrats agreed.
a bipartisan coalition passed the tax reform act of 1986 that cut the number of tax brackets from 14 to two with tax rates of 15 and 28 percent respectively while closing many tax loopholes.
led by the president who had begun his term cutting the tax rate for the wealthiest americans from 70 to 50 percent the government had now cut it to 28 percent.
after the 1986 tax bill passed reagan devoted more and more of his time to foreign policy.
he continued to appoint conservative judges and to support deregulation and the shrinking of the federal government but he did not present major domestic policy initiatives in his last 2 years in office.
reagan had come to office a devout cold warrior.
but before he left office he presided over the greatest change in u s soviet relationships since franklin roosevelt had granted official u s recognition to the soviet union in the 1930s.
814 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 tothe present expanding the cold war from star wars to iran contra when ronald reagan became president in january 1981 he had virtually no foreign policy experience.
he was more sophisticated as a politician than many of his detractors and some of his supporters admitted.
nevertheless he had not spent much time outside of the united states and did not know much about foreign policy.
he was served by a series of weak national security advisors as well as two secretaries of state two secretaries of defense and a strong director of central intelligence william casey all of whom disliked each other intensely kept major developments secret from each other and at times implemented contradictory policies.
first lady nancy reagan also took an active role in policy discussions especially when she feared that conservative ideologues were taking her husband in an unnecessarily hard line direction.
it was not an administrative structure leading to crisp and clear decision making.
however in the midst of apparent chaos reagan himself appeared to have been a far stronger leader than perceived one who determined the main aspects of his foreign policy even as he left the details of implementation to others.
28 1 m2 efforts to undermine communism reagan had several deeply held beliefs that would drive his foreign policy.
his fierce anticommunism which first developed when he battled with perceived communists in the film industry in the 1940s was reinforced by his religious faith which was offended by communist atheism.
his ability to articulate that passionate stance against communism had been honed through his speaking career for ge and as governor.
he saw communism as he once said as the focus of evil in the modern world and the united states as the exceptional carrier of goodness the shining city on a hill he disliked the longstanding policy of containment that had been at the core of american foreign policy from truman to carter.
he did not want merely to contain communism where it was.
he wanted to undermine existing communist governments.
despite that fierce anticommunism however reagan had a far greater horror of nuclear war than some of his fellow conservatives.
his firm belief was that a nuclear war could never be won and must never be fought during his first term he never trusted the soviets enough to engage in serious negotiations but he was determined to avoid nuclear war.
during his first term reagan was harshly critical of the soviet union.
in a 1983 speech to christian evangelicals reagan referred to the soviet union as the evil empire a year later in august 1984 thinking that the microphone was turned off reagan said my fellow americans i am pleased to tell you today that ive signed legislation that will outlaw russia forever.
we begin bombing in five minutes it was a joke but the soviets found it frightening.
reagan also ordered a massive arms buildup.
worried about u s vulnerability and believing that any negotiations needed to be from a position of strength reagan supported annual increases in the military budget between 1981 and 1986 he arranged the deployment of new intermediate range missiles in europe in 1983 and resisted serious talks with soviet leaders.
reagans goal of undermining communism where it already existed led also to other steps.
in 1981 as protest movements spread in poland and the polish communist government instituted martial law reagan imposed sanctions on poland and on the soviet union an end to landing rights in the united states for the russian airline aeroflot a ban on the sale of equipment for a soviet natural gas pipeline and at the petty level termination of the special parking privileges of soviet ambassador anatoly dobrynin in the state department garage.
the administration secretly fun neled some 20 million to solidarity the polish protest movement through the vatican bank with the approval of polish pope john paul ii.
in march 1983 reagan against the almost unanimous advice of his foreign policy team who seldom agreed on anything announced that the united states was going to develop a strategic defense initiative sdi.
as the president described it sdi would use u s technological know how to create a series of space stations armed with lasers the evil empire a phrase that reagan used for the soviet union in particular and all communist countries in general.
strategic defense initiative president reagan s program to defend the united states with sophisticated technologies also known as star wars.
chapter 28 the reagan rj 28 1 283 283 before reagan left moscow the united states and soviet union had essentially normalized their relationship.
for all intents and purposes the cold war was over.
the strained election of 1988 as a candidate in the republican primaries in 1980 george bush had called ronald reagans economic plans voodoo economics.
while democrats had a field day with the term once he became reagans vice president bush was a loyal member of the reagan team so loyal that some thought he had disappeared but those who thought that way underestimated him considerably.
george herbert walker bush was a child of privilege.
his father was a successful banker and republican senator from connecticut.
bush attended private schools and expected to attend yale when world war ii intervened.
while ronald reagan made war movies in hollywood for the government bush flew more than 50 combat missions in the south pacific and was shot down twice.
after the war he married barbara pierce attended yale and then moved to texas to make his fortune in the oil business.
he served two terms in the house of representatives from houston.
he was defeated when he ran for the senate in 1970 but was subsequently appointed head of the republican party nominal u s ambassador to china after the nixon trip and head of the cia for gerald ford.
the conservative wing of the republican party never trusted bush especially after his voodoo economic remarks but also because of his lack of enthusiasm for their social issues.
disappointed that reagan had not done more to support the social issues that were near and dear to them some conservatives thought that the 1988 election was their chance.
and democrats convinced that reagan was more personally popular than his programs believed that the end of his second term would be their chance to retake the white house.
neither challenge succeeded.
in the republican party the conservative but genial kansas senator robert dole challenged the vice president.
and pat robertson the extremely conservative religious broadcaster and head of the christian broadcasting network who had strongly supported ronald reagan now resigned his ordination as a baptist minister and campaigned for the nomination.
robertson felt that it was time to take the religious rights social and cultural issues into a presidential campaign.
while bush won the nomination on the first ballot he embraced many of doles and robertsons issues invited a conservative indiana senator j danforth quayle whom many considered to be a lightweight to be his running mate and made a speech he would later regret telling the republican convention read my lips.
no new taxes sensing possible victory many democrats sought the nomination.
colorado senator gary hart an initial front runner was forced out of the race after he was photographed on the yacht monkey business with the model donna rice not his wife sitting on his lap.
the nomination battle came down to a contest between the reverend jesse jackson a longtime civil rights leader and massachusetts governor michael dukakis.
jackson was extremely popular in some circles and reviled in others.
he was the first african american candidate to win presidential primaries in southern states winning five.
but in the end dukakis won the democratic nomination.
he summed up his campaign when he told the democratic convention this election is not about ideology its about competence dukakis entered the fall campaign with a 17 point lead in the polls a sign that people were ready for a change but the lead quickly evaporated in what turned into a very nasty battle.
dukakis s focus on competence did not make for an inspiring campaign.
822 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present explore the reagan revolution on myhistorylab how did the reagan revolution of the shape american politics.
in the presidential election of 1980 republican ronald reagan won a landslide victory over jimmy carter.
economic stagnation and foreign policy difficulties had marked the previous years while reagan promised smaller government at home and stronger government abroad.
in 1984 reagan won an even more impressive victory over democratic candidate walter mondale.
one reason for these landslide victories was that a group of traditionally democratic voters white socially conservative blue collar workers changed party affiliation during the reagan years and voted republican.
reagan s supply side economic policy which included limited government deregulation and tax breaks for middle class and wealthy americans brought economic prosperity but did not change the duress many suffered as other market forces saw the country move from an back.
taking advantage of a troubled economy and national mood former california governor and actor ronald reagan won the elections of 1980 and 1984 for the republican party based on the bringing america back message.
industrial to a service economy.
abroad the cold war began to end during reagan s second administration with the weakening of the soviet union and the erosion of communist control in its warsaw pact allies.
presidential election electoral results 1980 election reagan republican carter democrat 1984 election reagan republican mondale democrat.
489 electoral votes 49 electoral votes 525 electoral votes 13 electoral votes key questions use myhistorylab explorer to answer these questions cause how did support for republican and democratic presidential candidates change in the elections from 1976 1988.
chart these trends to consider their causation.
analysis where did the incidence of poverty stay high.
map the regions where economic difficulties remained prevalent.
response how did the soviet union s collapse redraw the map of europe and central asia.
explore the unfolding of the end of the cold war.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the changes in the united states as the threat of communism ended new foreign problems arose and new economic and technological issues shaped the country.
learning objectives the bush administration 1989 1993 explain the new world order that george bush described.
the clinton presidency analyze the impact of the clinton presidency and the clinton gingrich conflict on the country.
technology dominates an era analyze the changes in technology and their impact on u s culture.
on inauguration day january 20 1989 as ronald reagan left the white house the nation was prosperous his loyal vice president was replacing him and perhaps even more significant the long cold war with the soviet union seemed to be coming to an end.
george h w.
bush would lead the nation in a very different international context than any predecessor since world war ii.
in april 1989 just after bushs inauguration the communist government of poland with gorbachevs permission legalized the prodemocracy solidarity and agreed to free elections.
in june for the first time in history a communist government was voted out of office and yielded power peacefully to its non communist successor.
that fall hungary followed the same course and ousted its communist government.
demonstrations in east germany led to a change in leadership and on november 9 the berlin wall that had divided the city and europe for almost 30 years came down.
with the fall of the berlin wall berliners who had never met each other embraced and celebrated.
leaders of east and west germany talked of unification which came 2 years later.
in december czechoslovakia inaugurated a non communist government.
what had begun as a conversation between two leaders in a house in iceland in 1986 had become by 1989 what the new president called a new world order the end of the cold war drastically changed u s foreign policy and allowed 838 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present significant dates at the berlin wall which had divided the city for almost 30 years people from east and west greeted each other and celebrated a new freedom.
1989 1991 1993 29 1 29 1 people to see the world differently.
tracing the changes in u s foreign policy and politics in the post cold war world as well as the domestic changes especially those brought about by technology in the decade after the cold war ended is the focus of this chapter 29 a new world order 861 internet the system of interconnected computers and servers that allows the exchange of e mail posting of websites and other means of instant communication.
world wide web since 1991 a protocol for information use on the internet.
862 part ix certainty uncertainty and new computers to share information seek information and combine information in heretofore unimaginable ways.
those connections were made possible by the development of the internet a massive network of smaller networks joined together.
actually many separate developments created the internet.
president kennedy and his secretary of defense robert mcnamara were preoccupied with the question of how the president could maintain communication with the nations far flung military installations if a nuclear war actually happened.
without communication the threat of massive retaliation in the case of a nuclear attack was a fiction.
in the 1960s however government planners knew that a nuclear blast would cripple existing radio communications and knock out the nations highly centralized telephone network.
to solve the problem the pentagon turned to researchers at the rand corporation and a rand employee paul baran led the team that would solve the problem.
a decade later on august 27 1976 in the parking lot of zotts beer garden near stanford university a team of stanford researchers sent a message from a computer in a van to another computer they had placed inside the bar.
the message was received and the first data transmission had taken place over a network.
further developments led to a much more sophisticated system.
a next crucial step in connecting computers was the development of the world wide web which was achieved by tim berners lee.
berners lee was an english physicist working at the international physics lab in switzerland known as cern where he noted that the various scientists from different countries could not share information from computer to computer.
he wanted to solve that problem.
his goal was to find a way to connect computers and share information lots of information.
in 1990 berners lee found a way to create a common system so the information within files could easily be shared from computer to computer.
he created a language for formatting files in hypertext so they could be read in the same way by the sending and receiving computers and he called the language hypertext markup language or html.
in addition he developed a method of moving files of information which he called the world wide web although in the beginning it connected only the computers within the laboratories at cern.
by the end of 1990 the world wide web was up and running within the small research community at cern.
by august 1991 it was being made available at select internet sites around the world and by 1992 it was being used by more and more people who were creating their own websites to send and receive hypertext information through the internet.
in the early 1990s the was still primitive but many also saw it as revolutionary.
berners lee made another crucial decision.
although he could have gotten rich off of his invention he insisted that the world wide web would be free.
on april 30 1993 cern announced that anyone anywhere in the world could use the web without payment of royalties or legal constraints.
the information superhighway as tennessee senator al gore would call it was launched.
gore did not invent the internet but he did coin the term information superhighway in 1990 and sponsored legislation to support it in congress.
people needed the right software on their own computers to connect to the world wide web.
one of the earliest softwares and the first to be available at no cost was produced by marc andreesen a 21 year old computer science major at the university of illinois.
in january 1993 he posted an announcement that said by the power vested in me by nobody in particular alpha beta version of 0 5 of ncsas motif based information system and world wide web browser x mosaic is hereby released cheers marc andreesen then moved to california and was recruited by venture capitalist jim clark to develop a more sophisticated connection system and in october 1994 netscape was launched as a browser.
soon thousands of people in the united states and around the world were connecting to the internet for the first time using netscape navigator to get to the netscape home page and from there to the world.
other systems america online aol and yahoo soon followed.
before long bill gates was leading beginnings 1980 to the present microsoft in the development and distribution of its own web browser.
by 1998 over 45 million people quite a jump from 15 000 in 1990 were connected to the world wide web.
people could shop do research listen to music or tour the world without leaving the comfort of their own homes.
e mail messages began replacing telephone calls and office memos in the late 1990s.
ray tomlinson a researcher working at the defense department inaugurated the use of as the core of an e mail address.
in the 1990s people embraced the opportunity to send and receive messages at times of their own convenience rather than to have to answer the telephone.
with the growth of television in the 1950s some had worried that the printed word was in decline.
after 2000 the reliance on text certainly saw a resurgence even if in abbreviated form as e mail messages replaced telephone calls as the prime source of communication among americans.
the bubble and its eventual burst if y2k illustrated the degree to which almost every aspect of society had become dependent on computer technology by 2000 the bursting of the bubble illustrated how easy it was to inflate the value of every computer related enterprise.
just as the world of electronic communications was being born in the 1990s many people decided that the key to making a fortune was investing in the enterprise.
as had happened many times before see chapter is on the decade and more after that tragic day during which public and personal events were shadowed by what came to be called simply 9 11.
the impact of september 11 2001 analyze the impact of 9 11 on the nation and presidency of george bush and the impact of bush administration policies around the world.
in the first moments and hours after the horrific crashes no one knew what to make of the attack on the world trade center and pentagon.
on first hearing the news on radio or tv most people had the same reaction as florence engoran who worked in the south tower of the world trade center.
when she arrived at her office on the 55th floor someone said a small plane hit the other building she remembered i wasnt especially upset by the news and tended to agree with her coworker who said oh just sit down lets keep working.
we have to get out some focus reports within minutes however as she saw flames and heard another crash engoran realized that something much more serious was happening.
although she was 5 months pregnant engoran headed for the stairs and walked down the 55 flights.
before she made it to the bottom the lights were off and the stairwell was filled with dust but she made it.
most of those working in the buildings made it out.
but many did not.
handicapped people who could not walk down the stairs were stuck.
people on the higher floors could not get past the fires.
some 78 police officers and 400 firefighters who had responded to the emergencies remained in the buildings trying to evacuate people when the structures collapsed.
it all happened very fast.
at 9 58 a m just 1 hour after the crash the south tower of the world trade center collapsed floor by floor showering a wide area with rubble.
thirty minutes later the north tower also collapsed.
what had been two of the tallest buildings in the world that morning were now simply a giant hole in the ground.
the worst violence on united states soil since the civil war had just taken place.
nearly 3 000 people died 246 passengers on the planes 2 600 at the world trade center including workers in the two towers police and fire rescue workers and a few unlucky passersby and 125 people at the pentagon.
the fear loss anger and fortitude generated from that day would shape a new reality for the nation.
at 9 30 a m the federal aviation administration grounded all flights within the united states.
for the week that followed the skies would be clear of everything but high flying military planes.
airports would be eerily quiet.
at a little after 1 00 p m that tuesday president bush just 9 months into his first term addressed the nation 868 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present the twisted ruins of the world trade center in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 from an air force base in louisiana telling people that massive security measures were in effect and that the united states would hunt down and punish those responsible for these cowardly acts though at that point no one was quite sure who they were.
at 8 30 p m president bush spoke to the nation for a second time this time from the oval office asking for prayers for the families and friends of the victims and again promising retaliatory action.
ground zero was still a mass of burning rubble and would be for weeks.
the pentagon fire was contained but not under control.
the nation tried to make sense of what had happened.
finding the terrorists al qaeda the taliban afghanistan in the initial confusion of the morning of september 11 no one was quite sure who was behind the attack.
by early afternoon george tenet the director of the cia informed president bush that while the agency was still investigating all the evidence pointed to an attack by al qaeda ordered by its leader osama bin laden.
by late that evening when the president met with what he then called his war council they all agreed that plans needed to be developed to punish not only the perpetrators of the 9 11 attack but any who harbored them.
on september 20 president bush spoke to a joint session of congress.
he said tonight we are a country awakened to danger he said of the government of afghanistan that they will hand over the terrorists or they will share their fate and he told the rest of the world either you are with us or you are with the terrorists there would be no neutrals in the war on terror.
the president said that the war was with terrorists not with islam.
he insisted the enemy of america is not our many muslim friends.
it is not our many arab friends.
our enemy is a radical network of terrorists and every government that supports them nevertheless the militant tone of the speech while reassuring some worried many.
in the immediate aftermath of the attacks international support and sympathy for the united states was high.
even nations long hostile to the united states such as syria were expressing support.
but with bush s response some of the support began to fade.
9 11 attack the attack of september 11 2001 on the world trade center and the pentagon organized by al qaeda.
chapter 30 entering a new time 887 health care reform the top priority of the obama administration to provide universal health care for all americans.
had fought a civil war and witnessed a long civil rights movement over issues of race had just elected its first african american president.
it was an historic moment.
now people were about to see what sort of change barack obama had been talking about.
in november 2008 barack obama was elected president of the united states a time of celebration for many.
obama s agenda stimulus and a health plan president elect obama asked his former opponent hillary clinton to serve as his secretary of state.
she was reluctant to leave the independence of the senate but obama pressed and clinton took the job.
obama told clinton ihe economy is a much bigger mess than imagined and he needed a very strong secretary of state to run foreign policy.
he knew that while the bailout of the banks had been a first step much more needed to be done.
nevertheless economic experts political leaders and average voters all disagreed sharply about what should be done.
obama was famous for his use of a blackberry and an iphone during his senate career and his presidential campaign.
bemoaning the need to give up his iphone for security reasons once elected president obama continued to use a blackberry as well as his personal twitter account his macbook pro and an ipad2.
the world of high technology arrived in the white house in january 2009 immediately on taking office in january 2009 obama proposed the american recovery and reinvestment act and it passed within weeks.
the act pumped money into the economy providing funds for road improvements railroads and unemployment benefits.
the recovery and reinvestment act was standard economics an effort to prime the pump and get the economy moving by spending funds so employment would rise private spending would pick up and the government could step back.
unfortunately for obama the emergency spending piled further debts on top of those already in place and many began to worry about the cost.
while the administration struggled with the economy obama also moved quickly to implement what he hoped would be his signature initiative health care for all americans.
from harry truman on every democratic administration sought to implement health care reform but every effort had failed.
obama wanted to be the democrat who accomplished what others had failed.
after a long and bitter fight he was able to sign the patient protection and affordable care act on march 23 2010 unlike the stimulus legislation however health care was a long fight filled with compromises.
it dominated the congress that came to office with obama.
from the beginning the republican minority was dedicated to defeating the measure.
the senate rule that a filibuster could stop all legislation unless 60 senators voted to close debate provided effective leverage for republicans and democrats.
the senate included only 60 democrats so every one of them could demand special consideration and exemptions and many did before the final vote.
the result was that the historic health care legislation passed only after a political process that discouraged almost everyone.
the new law required every american to have health insurance prohibited insurance companies from excluding anyone including those with preexisting conditions provided government subsidies for those who have trouble buying insurance and penalized employers not offering health insurance.
a number of state attorneys general challenged the legislation in court but in the spring of 2012 the u s supreme court in a split decision upheld the law.
surprising its supporters the law ended up being a political liability for a democratic president and his party in the midterm elections of 2010 and the presidential election of 2012.
888 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present the rise of the tea party occupy wall street and divided government in part because of anger at the health care legislation in part because of fears about the growing national debt and in part because of a long standing bias among americans against big government the huge plurality with which obama came to office started to evaporate rapidly.
on january 19 2010 just a year after obamas inauguration the growing voter anger became apparent to the nation particularly after one of the icons of american liberalism massachusetts senator edward m kennedy died of a brain tumor in august 2009 kennedy had served in the u s senate since 1962 the fourth longest senate career in u s history.
a special election was called to fill kennedys unexpired term and almost everyone assumed that whoever received the democratic nomination would get the job.
but a little known republican state senator scott brown campaigned hard telling people it s not kennedy s seat its the peoples seat and promising to be the crucial 40th vote to sustain a filibuster in the senate against the health care legislation.
brown won easily telling his cheering supporters on election night what ive heard again and again on the campaign trail is that our political leaders have grown aloof from the people impatient with dissent and comfortable in the back room making deals although brown was not able to stop the passage of the health care law his election was a sign that something was shifting in american politics.
it was not the first such sign.
only weeks after obamas inauguration protests were springing up in many different places.
in seattle a 29 year old woman keli carender organized a small protest rally about the spending whether it was bushs tarp or obamas stimulus.
carender told a small crowd that i started thinking what are we getting ourselves into.
it didnt make sense to me to be spending all this money when we dont have it then a little while later on february 19 2009 a financial news commentator rick santelli said that obamas stimulus efforts were promoting bad behavior if they bailed out the losers who had taken out larger mortgages than they could afford.
santelli said were thinking of having a chicago tea party in july and the name took hold.
in september 2010 between 70 000 and 90 000 demonstrators converged on the mall in washington dc to protest the health care legislation and government spending.
some wore tricolor hats to symbolize their link to the original boston tea party.
some carried signs that said thank you glenn beck referring to the conservative television commentator who railed against the obama administration.
some alluding to fears that the health care legislation would limit treatments carried signs that said pull the plug on obama not grandma the national tea party coalition tried to coordinate efforts.
the republican vice presidential nominee from 2008 sarah palin adopted the tea party platform and spoke at its rallies.
nevertheless the movement was distrustful of self proclaimed leaders.
different groups in different places did as they pleased.
tea party candidates challenged republicans in primary elections all through 2009 and 2010 and sometimes defeated long standing republican moderates.
in november 2010 with solid tea party support republicans took control of the house of representatives and made gains in the senate.
but the tea party candidates were of a different sort than the older republicans not only more conservative but also far less willing to compromise.
the tea party was fueled by fear about the debt uncertainty about the economy and anger at big institutions most of all the federal government but also corporations and universities.
many in the tea party argued that the federal government should do no more than what was specifically authorized in the constitution and almost all of its members were generally distrustful of government programs especially those coming from the federal government and those designed to help the poor or minority groups.
it quickly became clear that the tea party was not going away even though its membership might be filled with internal contradictions.
tea party members disliked government but wanted their social security checks to arrive on time they hated the new health care but loved their medicare cards.
when the outgoing congress repealed tea party a protest group whose members sometimes modeled themselves on the tea party of the american revolution and objected to the rising federal debt obamacare and most government regulation.

chapter 1 the first americans how did the first americans adapt to their environments.
1 1 introduction as a cold winter wind howls outside the children huddle under thick fur blankets.
they listen to their grandmothers soothing voice.
in the beginning there was the great spirit grandmother begins who ruled over a world of sky and water then the great spirit says grandmother created land plants and animals.
finally from living wood the great spirit carved people for the new world.
these abenaki a buh nah key children of new england are learning how their people began.
most groups have beliefs about where they came from.
you may have heard stories about how your own relatives first arrived in the united states.
but do you know where your ancestors were living 10 000 years ago.
only if you are american indian did you have relatives in the united states that long ago.
europeans and other groups did not start arriving in north america until a little more than 500 years ago.
for thousands of years the first americans had the american continents to themselves.
in this chapter you will learn about these resourceful people and the creative ways they adapted to their environments.
even today scientists are still trying to find out more about the first americans.
these early people left few written records so researchers study other items they left behind.
not much has survived except for a few animal and human bones some stone and metal tools and bits of pottery.
like detectives scientists sift through these clues trying to imagine how these people lived and how their lives changed over time.
they come up with ideas about the many ways in which american indians adapted to their physical surroundings.
when scientists find a new object they try to figure out whether it supports their current ideas or suggests new ones.
in your lifetime we will probably learn much more about how the first americans adapted to their environments and may revise many of our conclusions.
the anasazi indians of the southwestern united states made pottery such as this pitcher from clay and other materials.
the anasazi indians adapted to their environment by building homes in the stone cliffs of the u s southwest.
the first americans 5 migrate to move from one place and establish a home in a new place.
a move of a large number of people is called a migration and the people who move are called migrants.
scientists believe thatthe first americans migrated from siberia to alaska across a land bridge called beringia.
these people were following mammoths and other animals that moved east in search of grazing land.
1 2 migration routes of the first americans scientists believe that the first americans migrated on foot from siberia in asia to present day alaska.
today a strip of ocean called the bering strait separates alaska and asia.
but there was a time when a land bridge connected them.
across a land bridge about 30 000 years ago the most recent ice age began.
as temperatures fell much of earth was covered by glaciers sheets of ice up to a mile thick.
with water locked up in the glaciers the level of the oceans dropped 200 feet.
this exposed a wide bridge of land between asia and north america that scientists call beringia bear in jee uh.
in the summer beringias grasslands attracted large asian mammals such as mammoths which are long haired cousins of the elephant.
over thousands of years the animals slowly spread eastward.
generations of siberian hunter families followed.
armed with only stone tipped spears they killed these huge powerful animals for food.
eventually perhaps between 10 000 and 20 000 years ago some of the hunters reached america.
other migrants may have traveled along the coast of beringia by boat to catch fish seals and other marine mammals.
migrating east and south once in america hunters followed the animals south where spring brought fresh grasses.
then about 10 000 years ago earth warmed again.
as the glaciers melted and the oceans rose the land bridge disappeared.
mammoths and other tra migration routes of the first americans siberia 120e 135e 150e 165e 180 165w 1 ditional prey began to die off perhaps from disease overhunting or the change in climate.
the descendents of siberian hunters then had to find new sources of food and new materials for clothing and shelter.
so these people now known to us as american indians became hunter gatherers catching smaller animals fishing more and collecting edible plants and seeds.
over thousands of years they spread across the two american continents from the pacific to the atlantic and from alaska all the way to the tip of south america.
6 chapter summary in this chapter 4 life in the colonies what was life really like in the colonies.
4 1 introduction in 1723 a tired teenager stepped off a boat onto a wharf in philadelphia.
he was an odd looking sight.
not having luggage he had stuffed his pockets with extra clothes.
the young man followed a group of clean dressed people into a quaker meetinghouse where he soon fell asleep.
the sleeping teenager with the lumpy clothes was benjamin franklin.
he had recently run away from his brother jamess print shop in boston.
when he was 12 franklin had signed a contract to work for his brother for nine years.
but after enduring jamess nasty temper for five years franklin packed his pockets and left.
in philadelphia franklin quickly found work as a printers assistant.
within a few years he had saved enough money to open his own print shop.
his first success was a newspaper called the pennsylvania gazette.
in 1732 readers of the gazette saw an advertisement for poor richard s almanac.
an almanac is a book published annually that contains weather predictions planting advice for farmers and information on other useful subjects.
according to the ad poor richard s almanac was written by richard saunders and printed by b franklin.
nobody knew then that author and printer were the same person.
franklin also printed proverbs or wise sayings in his almanacs.
some like these are still remembered today a penny saved is a penny earned.
early to bed early to rise makes a man healthy wealthy and wise.
fish and visitors smell in three days.
poor richard s almanac sold so well that franklin was able to retire at age 42 a man of many talents he spent the rest of his long life as a scientist inventor political leader diplomat and national postmaster.
franklins rise from penniless runaway to wealthy printer was one of many colonial success stories.
in this chapter 4 4 3 life in cities in 1750 one colonist out of 20 lived in a city.
compared to the quiet farm life cities were exciting places.
the heart of the city was the waterfront.
there ships brought news from england as well as eagerly awaited items such as paint carpets furniture and books.
just beyond the docks a marketplace bustled with fishers selling their catch and farmers selling fresh eggs milk and cheese.
close by were taverns where food and drink were served.
people gathered there to exchange gossip and news from other colonies.
the nearby streets were lined with shops.
sparks flew from the blacksmiths block as he hammered iron into tools.
shoemakers clockmakers silversmiths tailors and other craftspeople turned out goods based on the latest designs from england.
there were barbers to cut colonists hair and wigmakers to make it look long again.
cities were noisy smelly places.
church bells rang out several times a day.
carts clattered loudly over streets paved with round cobblestones.
the air was filled with the stench of rotting garbage and open sewers but the colonists were used to it.
animals ran loose in the street.
during hot weather clouds of flies and mosquitoes swarmed about.
city homes were close together on winding streets.
most were built of wood with thatched roofs like the houses the colonists had left behind in europe.
their windows were small because glass was costly.
for lighting colonists used torches made of pine that burned l.
colonial cities were very small by today s standards.
philadelphia pictured below and boston the two largest cities had fewer than 20 000 people in 1700 brightly when they were wedged between hearthstones in the fireplace.
colonists also burned grease in metal containers called betty lamps and made candles scented with bayberries.
with torches and candles lighting homes fire was a constant danger.
colonists kept fire buckets hanging by their front doors.
when a fire broke out the whole town helped to put it out.
grabbing their buckets colonists formed a double line from the fire to a river pond or well.
they passed the buckets full of water from hand to hand up one line to the fire.
then the empty buckets went back down the opposite line to be refilled.
life in the colonies 67 rights powers or privileges that belong to people as citizens and that cannot or should not be taken away by the government magna carta an agreement made in 1215 listing the rights granted by king john to all free men of the kingdom parliament the lawmaking body of england consisting of representatives from throughout the kingdom english bill of rights an act passed by parliament in 1689 that limited the monarchs power by giving certain powers to parliament and listing specific rights of the citizens 4 4 rights of colonists colonists in america saw themselves as english citizens.
they expected the same rights that citizens enjoyed in england.
the most important of these was the right to have a voice in their government.
magna carta the english people had won the right to participate in their government only after a long struggle.
a key victory in this struggle came in 1215 when king john agreed to sign magna carta or great charter this agreement established the idea that the power of the monarch or ruler was limited.
not even the king was above the law.
the next major victory was the founding of parliament in 1265 parliament was made up of representatives from across england.
over time it became a lawmaking body with the power to approve laws and taxes proposed by the king or queen.
in 1685 james the duke of york became king james ii.
the king did not want to share power with an elected assembly in new york.
nor did he want to share power with an elected parliament in england.
when he tried to rule without parliament james was forced off his throne.
this change in power which took place without bloodshed is known as the glorious revolution.
the english bill of rights in 1689 parliament offered the crown to prince william of orange and his wife mary.
in exchange they had to agree to an act or law known as the english bill of rights.
this act said that the power to make laws and impose taxes belonged to the peoples elected representatives in parliament and to no one else.
it also included a bill or list of rights that belonged to the people.
among these were the right to petition the king request him to change something and the right to trial by jury.
english colonists saw the glorious revolution as a victory not only for parliament but for their colonial assemblies as well.
they wanted to choose the people who made their laws and set their taxes.
after all this was a cherished right of all english citizens.
t newyork colonists established assemblies to pre mote citizen rights.
the english traditio of self government thrived in all 13 colonies.
here we see a depiction of the first colonial assembly of virginia in 161.
crime and punishment each colonial assembly passed its own laws defining crimes and punishments.
however most crimes were treated similarly in all the colonies.
certain very serious crimes could be punished by death.
these included murder treason acts of disloyalty toward the government and piracy robbery at sea.
puritans in new england added other crimes to this list based on their understanding of gods law in the bible.
in new england colonists could be put to death for denying the true god or for striking or cursing their parents.
crimes such as theft forgery and highway robbery carried harsh punishments in every colony.
for these crimes people might be jailed whipped or branded with hot irons.
lesser crimes such as drunkenness and breaking the sabbath working or traveling on sunday were punished with fines short jail terms or public humiliation.
a colonist caught breaking the sabbath for example might be locked in the town stocks.
the stocks were a heavy wooden frame with holes for a persons neck wrists and ankles.
lawbreakers were locked for hours in this device in a public place where others could ridicule them.
no group had firmer ideas about right and wrong than new englands puritans.
the puritans required everyone to attend church on sundays.
they also forbade anyone to work or play on that day.
the puritans wrote their sunday laws in books with blue paper bindings.
for this reason these rules came to be known as blue laws.
some blue laws persist to this day.
in connecticut for example it is still illegal for stores to sell alcohol on sundays.
the puritans were constantly on the watch for signs of satan believed to be an evil angel who rebelled against god.
satan was thought to work through witches.
in 1692 fear of witchcraft overtook residents of salem massachusetts when several girls were seen acting strangely in church.
the girls accused their neighbors of being witches and putting spells on them.
nineteen accused witches were put to death during the salem witch trials before calm was restored and the townspeople realized that the girls accusations were untrue.
courts like the one pictured here were important to social life in the colonies.
this painting depicts a woman being tried for witchcraft in salem massachusetts in 1692 h i i 68 chapter you read about various aspects of life in the american colonies during the early 1700s.
farms and cities the colonists developed an economy based on farming commerce and crafts.
farm families produced most of what they needed for themselves.
in the villages and cities many trades and crafts developed.
rights of colonists american colonists expected to enjoy all the rights of english citizens especially the right to have a voice in their own government.
colonial assemblies defined crimes and punishments.
punishments were often harsh but for most of the 1700s the colonists were content to be ruled by english laws.
life for african americans enslaved african americans had almost no rights or even hope for liberty.
after being brought to america in chains they faced a life of forced obedience and toil.
religion religion was very important to the colonists.
the great awakening revived religious feeling and helped spread the idea that all people are equal.
education most colonial children received little education except in new england.
instead they were expected to contribute to the work of the farm or home.
family and leisure most colonial families were large.
they often included many relatives in addition to parents and their children.
much of colonial life was hard work but colonists also found time to enjoy sports and games.
this panorama of philadelphia in 1702 reveals a number of aspects of colonial life.
government buildings colonial homes roads and ships are all evident in the painting.
life in the colonies 75 reading further churches often in the center of town were central to colonial life.
here churchgoers sing as they waitto enter their church.
a great awakening in the 1730s and 1740s the great awakening shook up the english colonies.
this religious movement caused an outpouring of christian faith.
it also prompted new ways of thinking about the church and society.
as a result it helped lay the foundations for political changes to come.
nathan cole was working on his farm on the morning of october 23 1740 when he heard the news.
george whitefield was coming.
a famous preacher whitefield was known for his powerful sermons.
he had traveled all over the colonies drawing huge crowds wherever he went.
now he was in connecticut.
in fact he was preaching in nearby middletown that very morning.
cole knew he had to move fast.
i dropped my tool.
and ran to my pasture for my horse with all my might fearing that i should be too late to hear him.
i brought my horse home and soon mounted and took my wife up and went forward as fast as i thought the horse could bear.
and when we came within about half a mile i from the main road i saw before me a cloud or fog rising.
i first thought it came from the great river but as i came nearer i heard a noise something like a low rumbling thunder and presently found it was the noise of horses feet coming down the road and this cloud was a cloud of dust.
as i drew nearer it seemed like a steady stream of horses and their riders.
every horse seemed to go with all his might to carry his rider to hear news from heaven for the saving of souls.
nathan cole in george leon walker some aspects of religious life in new england 1897 thousands of people were rushing to middletown to hear white field speak.
i saw no man at work in his field cole wrote but all seemed to be gone when cole and his wife reached the town they found a large crowd gathered there.
the mood was electric as they waited for whitefield to appear.
what was behind all this excitement.
why would a preachers arrival cause a commotion like that of a rock star or a hollywood celebrity today.
in fact whitefield was a superstar of his time.
he was the most amous gure in a religious revival that was sweeping the colonies eop e were seeking a deep spiritual experience and a direct connec n o o.
they found that connection in preachers like whitefield 76 chapter 5.
described what it was like to face the colonists fury that day.
whoever looks upon them as an irregular mob the officer said will find himself much mistaken indeed since the french and indian war the british had been mistaken about the colonists again and again.
their biggest mistake was in thinking that ordinary people farmers merchants workers and housewives would not fight for the rights that they held dear.
at lexington and concord americans proved they were not only willing to fight for their rights.
they were even willing to die for them.
chapter 7 the impact of the american revolution the american revolution had a major impact in other parts of the world.
in europe it thrilled liberals who dreamed of creating their own democracies.
the american example was especially influential in france which soon had its own revolution.
as one frenchman wrote they americans are the hope of the human race they may well become its model indeed in the 1800s that model would help inspire revolts against european rule in south america.
j chapter you will read about the new nation s shaky start under the articles of confederation.
you will also learn how madison and other leaders met in 1787 to revise the articles and ended up compromising to form a more perfect union.
the granger collection newyork because of his important role in the creation of the document that would give the new nation a plan for government james madison is known as the father of the constitution.
the constitution was signed in philadelphia on september 17 1787 creating the constitution 145 articles of confederation the first written plan of government for the united states.
a confederation is an association of states that cooperate for a common purpose.
northwest territory a region of the united states bounded by the ohio and mississippi rivers and the great lakes.
the region was given to the united states by the treaty of paris in 1783 northwest ordinance a law passed by congress in 1787 that specified how western lands would be governed the land ordinance of 1785 organized the northwest territory into townships the northwest ordinance of 1787 set rules for how western lands would be governed.
within a half century of its passage enough people had settled in the northwest territory to create five new states.
8 2 early quarrels and accomplishments even before the american revolution was over the states began quarreling among themselves.
many of their quarrels were about taxes on goods that crossed state borders.
new york for example taxed firewood from connecticut and cabbages from new jersey.
the states also disagreed over boundaries.
the inability of congress to end such disagreements was one of the key weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
developing western lands congress did get the states to agree on one important issue how to develop the western lands acquired in the treaty of paris.
at that time there was no orderly way to divide up and sell these lands.
settlers walked into the wilderness and claimed the land they liked.
disputes over who owned what clogged the courts.
to end this confusion congress passed the land ordinance of 1785 under this law western lands were divided into six mile squares called townships.
each township was then divided into 36 sections of 640 acres each.
one section of each township was set aside to support the townships public schools.
the other sections were to be sold to settlers.
surveyors proceeded to lay out townships in the ohio valley then known as the northwest territory.
by 1787 the government was ready to sell sections to settlers.
this raised the question of how these areas should be governed.
were they to be u s colonies or new states.
the northwest ordinance congress answered this question in the northwest ordinance of 1787 this law divided the northwest territory into smaller territories each governed by a territorial governor.
as soon as a territory had 5 000 free adult males it could elect its own legislature or lawmaking body.
when the population reached 60 000 a territory could apply to congress to become a state.
the northwest territory and the land ordinance survey system 1785 each township is 6 miles by 6 miles and contains 36 sections.
400 miles illinois indiana ohio hk ivii 118181 18161 118031 s u y atde area 1785 7 ky va x nc.
a xi ociai 0 200 400 kilometers albers equal area projection j 46 chapter 8 creating the constitution 159 reading further the scholarly james madison finished college in two years and then studied law.
by the time he arrived atthe constitutional convention he was experienced in state and national politics.
james madison and the long hot summer of 1787 james madison is often called the father of the constitution.
although many people had a hand in shaping the constitution most scholars agree that madison was the main driving force behind the document s creation.
it was a process that took more than 100 days of complex negotiation and compromise.
even so it did not turn out quite as madison had wanted.
in the first week of may 1787 james madison stood alone in the east room of the pennsylvania state house.
within a few weeks many of the nations political leaders would gather there.
although few of them knew it at the time their task would be to create a new plan of government for the united states.
madison knew it though and he wanted to be ready.
madison had thought long and hard about the great challenges facing the nation.
under the articles of confederation the united states was floundering.
madison believed that a stronger national government was needed to keep the country on course.
other leaders also agreed on the need for reform.
however many of them had fears of a strong central government.
madison would have to work hard to change those ideas.
madison had arrived early in philadelphia to prepare for the convention.
he had checked in to one of the citys finest boarding houses run by mrs mary house.
soon most of his fellow delegates from virginia would be there also.
that would give them a chance to make plans before the convention began.
unfortunately it was not a fine time to be in philadelphia.
it had been a wet and rainy spring.
now as summer neared it was becoming increasingly hot and humid.
to make matters worse the city was plagued with dense clouds of black flies.
residents had to sleep with their windows closed or be tormented by swarms of buzzing biting insects.
shutting their windows however meant they had to spend their nights sweltering in the heat.
madison had bigger concerns though.
as he looked around the east room of the state house he imagined the events that would soon unfold there.
the room was large with a 20 foot high ceiling and tall windows.
but it would be crowded once all the delegates were seated.
madison decided to sit up front where he could get a clear view of the proceedings.
he planned to take notes and wanted to be able to see and hear everything that took place at the convention.
er 8 madison leads the way madison was 36 years old at the time of the convention.
he was a small man just five and a half feet tall with pale skin and thinning hair.
he typically dressed in black.
he was shy and spoke in a soft voice that was often hard to hear.
nevertheless he had great energy.
he walked with a bounce in his step and could get by on just a few hours of sleep a night.
although he rarely showed personal warmth or charm he was a brilliant conversationalist who knew how to win others to his side.
madison was well prepared to play a leading role at the convention.
he had spent several years as a member of congress.
he had studied the writings of great political thinkers and understood how political systems worked.
he had also helped write the virginia constitution of 1776 this document established a state government with separation of powers and a two house legislature.
it was an important model of democratic government.
madison would bring all this past experience to bear at the convention.
over the next two weeks the other delegates began to arrive.
they were all wealthy educated white men.
most were lawyers or large land owners.
there were no workers or tradesmen.
there were also no women african americans or american indians.
the delegates took rooms at various boarding houses and inns.
one of these inns the indian queen was the largest in the city.
soon it would be filled with leaders from around the nation.
here they would gather to eat drink and swap stories.
it was a center of social activity during the convention.
by mid may most of the virginia delegation had arrived.
this group included three major political figures george washington george mason and edmund randolph.
these men met with madison late into the night.
together they came up with a plan for a new government a set of 15 proposals now known as the virginia plan.
this plan embodied madisons ideas on the kind of government the nation needed.
with a population of more than 40 000 in 1787 philadelphia was the nation s largest city.
it was filled with inns and taverns like the city tavern the unofficial meeting place forthe convention.
now called independence hall this philadelphia building is the birthplace of our nation s independence.
the declaration of independence was signed here in 1776 the articles of confederation were adopted here in 1781 and the u s constitution was created here in 1787 the convention begins on may 14 the convention was due to begin but many delegates had still not arrived.
travel was difficult in those days.
the roads were bad and coaches often got stuck in the mud or broke an axle.
a trip that normally took a week might take much longer because of problems on the road.
finally on may 25 the convention got underway.
for the next four months the delegates would gather in the east room to debate the issues.
to maintain secrecy they agreed to bolt the doors and shut the windows.
as the summer wore on the heat increased.
many of the men wore wigs and wool suits and with the doors and windows closed the room was stifling.
in this hothouse atmosphere arguments were often intense.
through it all madison sat at his table near the front scribbling away at his notes.
in the evening he took these notes back to his room and laboriously copied them out word for word.
it was an ordeal that almost killed him he said.
but he was determined to keep a complete and accurate record of the convention.
debating the virginia plan from the start the convention focused much of its attention on the virginia plan.
on may 29 edmund randolph presented the various points of the plan.
the next day he summed up its main idea in a bold proposal that a national government ought to be established consisting of a supreme legislative executive judiciary amazingly randolph s proposal was approved with little debate.
madison had j 62 chapter 10 fourth amendment searches and seizures the fourth amendment protects people and their belongings from unreasonable searches and seizures a seizure is the act of forcibly taking control of a person or property.
before arresting a person or searching someones home police must show a judge that there is good reason for such action.
the judge then issues a warrant that says exactly who will be arrested or what will be searched.
nowhere in the fourth amendment however does it say that a warrant is required for every government search.
many supreme court cases have held that warrants are not always necessary.
but there must be probable cause or a strong reason for the search.
the fourth amendment also does not define unreasonable search the supreme court provided a definition in 1967 when it held that the search must respect an individuals right to privacy police must follow careful guidelines in searches and seizures of private property.
10 5 legal rights and protections the next four amendments lay out the rights and protections that apply to people who are accused of crimes or are involved in other legal disputes.
fifth amendment legal rights the fifth amendment is the longest amendment in the bill of rights.
it lists five important rights of citizens involved with the justice system.
first this amendment gives people who are accused of serious crimes the right to a grand jury hearing.
a grand jury is a group of citizens who hear the governments evidence and decide whether a trial is justified.
if so the grand jury issues an indictment or formal charge.
if not the accused person is released.
second the amendment protects citizens from double jeopardy.
jeopardy means risk.
this protection ensures that a person who is tried for a crime and found not guilty cannot be tried again for that same crime.
third the amendment prohibits self incrimination.
this means that police cannot force people to say things that might be used against them in a trial.
today police are required to remind people of their right to remain silent before they start to question them.
they must also warn people that anything they do say can be used against them at a trial.
this reminder is known as the miranda warning after the case in which the supreme court defined this requirement.
warrant an order from a judge that authorizes police or other officials to take a certain action such as searching someones property double jeopardy putting a person on trial more than once for the same crime self incrimination giving testimony that can be used against oneself the bill of rights 189 due process the concept that the government must follow clear rules and act reasonably as it carries out the law defendant a person who is required to defend himself or herself in a legal action.
an example is an accused person who is put on trial for a crime.
the protection against self incrimination also applies to a defendant testifying in court.
defendants may refuse to answer questions that might damage their case.
this refusal is called taking the fifth.
next the fifth amendment says that a person cannot be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law the government must follow clear rules and act reasonably as it carries out the law.
this concept is known as due process.
for example the supreme court has held that every person should be presumed innocent until proven guilty.
in addition the government must prove its case against a defendant beyond a reasonable doubt finally the fifth amendment says that the government cannot take someones private property for public use without just compensation just compensation means that the government must pay a fair price when it takes over a persons property for purposes such as building roads or parks.
sixth amendment criminal trial rights the sixth amendment lists a number of rights that are designed to provide accused persons with fair trials.
it begins with the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury the right to a speedy trial means that people cannot be kept in jail for long periods before being judged at a trial.
speedy trials also ensure that witnesses testify while their memories of events are still fresh.
public means that trials may not be held in secret.
citizens have a right to attend trials to make sure that justice is being done.
an accused person also has the right to be judged by a jury of people who live in his or her area.
the jury must be impartial which means that jurors are not prejudiced influenced against the defendant.
courts have also said that prosecutors cannot exclude potential jurors based on their race or gender.
monica goodling was an official in the administration of president george w bush.
in 2007 she took the fifth amendmentto avoid testifying before congress about the dismissal of several u s attorneys until she was granted immunity.
390 chapter 13 in both subject matter and style writers like these encouraged the growth of a national identity.
in particular they promoted the myth of rugged individualism that for many people at home and abroad best characterized the united states.
chapter 14 andrew jackson and the growth of american democracy 263 sequoyah sih kwol uh developed an 86 letter alphabetfor the cherokee language.
the alphabet contained both roman letters and symbols sequoyah created.
even though these indians developed what many whites considered an advanced civilization wealthy planters and poor settlers were determined to force them out and seize their lands.
rather than wait for the bank to die when its charter ran out jackson decided to starve it to death.
in 1833 he ordered the secretary of the treasury to remove all federal deposits from the bank and put the money in state banks.
jacksons enemies called these banks pet banks because the presidents supporters ran them.
delegations of business owners begged jackson not to kill the bank.
jackson refused.
abolishing the bank he believed was a victory for economic democracy.
14 7 jackson s indian policy as a frontier settler andrew jackson had little sympathy for american indians.
during his presidency it became national policy to remove indians who remained in the east by force.
white settlers had come into conflict with indians ever since colonial days.
after independence the new national government tried to settle these conflicts through treaties.
typically the treaties drew boundaries between areas claimed for settlers and areas that the government promised to let the indians have forever.
in exchange for giving up their old lands indians were promised food supplies and money.
despite the treaties american indians continued to be pushed off their land.
by the time jackson became president only 125 000 indians still lived east of the mississippi river.
war and disease had greatly reduced the number of indians in the east.
other indians had sold their lands for pennies an acre and moved west of the mississippi.
jackson was determined to remove the remaining indians to a new indian territory in the west.
most of the eastern indians lived in the south.
they belonged to five groups called tribes by whites the creek cherokee chickasaw choctaw and seminole.
hoping to remain in their homelands these indians had adopted many white ways.
most had given up hunting to become farmers.
many had learned to read and write.
the cherokee had their own written language a newspaper and a constitution modeled on the u s constitution.
whites called these indians the five civilized tribes while the five civilized tribes may have hoped to live in peace with their neighbors many whites did not share this goal.
as cotton growing spread westward wealthy planters and poor settlers alike looked greedily at indian homelands.
the indians they decided had to go.
the indian removal act in 1830 urged on by president jackson congress passed the indian removal act.
this law allowed the president to make treaties in which american indians in the east traded their lands for new territory on the great plains.
the law did not say chapter summary in this chapter you will learn about eight groups of people who turned their faces to the west in the first half of the 1800s.
you will learn about their motives for heading west the hardships they faced and the legacies they left behind.
westward bound settlers had to cross mountains deserts and wide open spaces in their questfor new opportunities.
westward the course of empire takes its way painted in 1861 by emanuel gottlieb leutze life in the west 297 this painting shows members of the lewis and clark expedition at three forks montana.
the woman is sacagawea.
to her right are meriwether lewis william clark and clark s slave york.
16 2 the explorers in the early 1800s a number of expeditions set out from the united states to explore the west.
the most famous was the lewis and clark expedition which was ordered by president thomas jefferson.
the major motive behind the expedition was to make friendly contact with indian groups that might be interested in trade.
a second motive was to find the northwest passage a water route across north america that explorers had been seeking ever since columbus reached the americas.
with the purchase of louisiana from france in 1803 the expedition gained a third motive finding out just what the united states had bought.
lewis and clark expedition a journey made from 1804 to 1806 by meriwether lewis and william clark to explore the territory gained in the louisiana purchase up the missouri river in may 1804 the 45 member expedition left st louis missouri in three boats.
jeffersons private secretary meriwether lewis and his friend william clark led the expedition.
its members included soldiers frontiersmen and an african american slave named york who worked for clark.
was hard going from the first day.
rowing upstream against the missouri rivers strong current left the explorers hands blistered and eir muscles sore.
mosquitoes feasted on their sunburned faces.
by summer the explorers had reached indian country.
most t enca ind ans welcomed the strangers and york fascinated the w t a 1 ad never seen a black man before.
again and again wrote clark m his journal york allowed his skin to be rubbed with a wet finger prove that he was a.
what c exp ers lmade camp for the winter near a mandan village in x dako a a frc ch ppw joined then named pc u o wife a shoshone shuh show nee wo amedsacagawea sah kuh jh wee uh as ind an t hj pp fro her people by another when sholxx shc wou d ranslak fm hw 8 chapter 17 17 3 cattle ranching cattle ranching in the west was built on traditions brought north from mexico.
spanish colonists imported the first cattle to the americas.
the animals adapted well to the dry conditions of mexico and the american southwest.
in time millions of spanish cattle ran wild in texas and california.
spanish cattle were thin wiry creatures with long wide spreading horns.
they moved quickly and were dangerous.
californios mexicanos in california often found themselves dodging behind trees or diving into ditches to escape the charge of an angry longhorn.
with cattle so abundant californios and tejanos found ranching to be a good business.
so did the americans who learned the cattle business from mexican rancheros or ranchers.
the rancho western cattle ranching was nothing like dairy farming in the east.
eastern dairy farms were small family businesses that produced mostly milk butter and cheese.
by comparison western ranchos were huge.
in the arid southwest large grants of land were needed to provide enough food and water for cattle herds.
instead of dairy products the main products of ranchos were meat hides and tallow fat.
ranch life followed traditions that had been developed in spain and perfected in mexico.
rancheros spent most of their day on horseback overseeing their land and herds.
caring for the cattle was the work of hired vaqueros vah kair ohs or cowboys.
the roundup among the vaqueros most important jobs were the rodeo or roundup and branding.
branding or using a hot iron to burn a mark into the hide of cattle was essential because herds belonging to different owners mixed together on unfenced grasslands.
to avoid conflicts every owner had to mark his cattle with a distinctive brand.
during the rodeo vaqueros drove unbranded calves to a roundup area.
there the calves were branded with the brand their mothers bore.
as americans took up ranching they adopted the rancheros practice of branding cattle.
along with cowboys and the roundup cattle brands are still part of ranch life in the west.
during the rodeo vaqueros drove unmarked cattle to special roundup areas.
there the animals were branded with a rancho s distinctive identification mark.
branding was necessary because cattle belonging to different owners grazed on the same land.
the vaquero s sombrero shaded him from the sun.
his neckerchief when worn over his mouth protected him from dust.
his high heeled pointed boots kept him secure in the stirrups of his saddle.
17 4 the cowboy hollywood movies make it seem that nothing is more american than the western cowboy.
cowboys however learned their job from the mexican vaquero.
across the southwest vaqueros were admired for their skill at riding roping and handling cattle.
american cowboys adopted the vaqueros clothes and gear as well as much of their language.
cowboy clothes and gear from head to toe cowboys dressed in clothing borrowed from the vaqueros.
for example the cowboys ten gallon hats which shaded their eyes and sometimes served as a water pail or a pillow came from the vaqueros wide brimmed sombreros sohm brer ohs.
the leather chaps that protected the cowboyslegs from cacti and sagebrush were modeled on the vaqueros chaparreras chap ar rehr ahs.
the high heeled pointed toe boots that slipped so easily into the cowboys stirrups were based on the vaqueros botas bo tas.
even the poncho that protected cowboys from cold and rain was borrowed from the vaqueros.
mexicanos also invented the western or cowboy saddle with its useful horn.
the saddles brought to america from europe did not have horns.
when a vaquero on a european saddle roped a steer he had to tie his rope to the horses tail to keep it anchored.
this method was hard on both the horse and the rider.
by adding a horn to the saddle vaqueros made their job easier and their horses job as well.
cowboys borrowed another essential piece of gear from the vaqueros la riata la ree ah tah or the lariat.
vaqueros were masters of the art of throwing a 60 foot rope great distances with amazing accuracy.
this skill was especially useful for roping calves during a roundup.
in a remarkable display of roping skill a vaquero named jose romero once roped a full grown eagle right out of the sky.
cowboy lingo american cowboys borrowed or adapted many ranching words from the vaqueros as well.
the terms bronco stampede corral lasso burro buckaroo and vamoose all come from spanish mexican words.
so do mesa canyon mesquite chaparral and other terms used to describe the southwestern landscape.
the cowboy slang word for jail hoosegow came from the spanish juzgado hooz ga doh.
and of course the terms ranch and rancher came from rancho and ranchero.
320 chapter 17 17 5 sheep raising in new mexico the most important industry was sheep raising.
from the founding of the territory up to the mexican cession sheep fed clothed and supported spanish and mexican settlers.
the spanish brought a long tradition of sheep raising to the americas.
two kinds of sheep were raised in spain the merinos meh ree nohs with their fine wool and the churros chur rohs with their coarse wool.
the spanish brought the scrawny churro to new mexico and for good reason.
this tough little sheep knew how to survive in a dry environment like that of the southwest.
the spanish sheep raising system when americans came to new mexico they did not think of sheep raising as a business.
in the east a farmer might raise a few sheep as a sideline but not large herds.
once they saw the spanish sheep raising system in new mexico however some americans changed their minds.
under the spanish system sheep raising was a large and well organized business.
the spanish governor of new mexico for example once owned 2 million sheep and employed 2 700 workers.
at the top of this business stood the patron pah trohn or owner of the herds.
below him were several layers of managers.
these supervisors and range bosses spent their days on horseback checking range conditions and the health of the sheep.
the lowest level worker was the pastor pahs tohr or herder.
each pastor was responsible for 1 500 to 2 000 sheep.
a pastor stayed with his flock night and day slowly guiding it from place to place so that the sheep could graze as they moved.
during spring lambing season the pastor assisted with difficult births cared for orphaned lambs and helped the newborns survive.
one pastor described this busy time as a month long hell of worry and toil americans adopt the spanish system americans soon adopted the spanish system as their own.
large scale sheep raising spread from new mexico across the southwest.
in california the churro was crossed with the merino to produce a sheep with far better wool.
as a result between 1862 and 1880 u s wool production soared from 5 million to 22 million pounds a year.
sheep raising was the most important industry in new mexico when the territory belonged to mexico.
an owner of a sheep ranch might have over a million sheep.
mexicano contributions to the southwest 321 the mexicanos introduced a system of irrigation that allowed settlers in the southwest to turn deserts into productive fertile fields.
irrigation a system for bringing water to farmland by artificial means such as using a dam to trap water and ditches to channel it to fields 17 6 irrigated farming americans coming to the southwest knew as little about irrigated farming as they did about mining cattle ranching and sheep raising.
in the east enough rain fell year round to water a farmers crops.
irrigation was unnecessary and unknown.
but in the southwest where six months could go by with no rain irrigation was essential.
mexicano settlers in the southwest brought with them irrigation techniques that had been developed centuries earlier in spain and north africa.
they borrowed other techniques from the pueblo indians of new mexico.
when the settlers first arrived the pueblos were irrigating from 15 000 to 25 000 acres of cropland in the arid rio grande valley.
the mexican system of irrigation bringing water to fields involved an enormous amount of work.
first farmers had to redirect water from local streams to their fields.
they began by building a dam of rocks earth and brush across the stream.
the water that backed up behind the dam was brought to the fields by irrigation ditches.
to keep from wasting this precious water mexicanos carefully leveled their fields.
then they divided the fields into squares.
each square was marked off by a wall of earth high enough to hold in water.
when one square had been soaked with water farmers made a hole in its wall.
the water then flowed to the next square.
the farmers continued in this way until the entire field was soaked.
this method of irrigation was known as the mexican system.
w k uaoivei using crops introduced by mexicano the mexican system of irrigation american settlers turned the so west into americas fruit basket among the many fruits brougl mexicanos to the southwest were grapes dates olives apples wal pears plums peaches apricots and quinces.
mexicano settlers brought the first citrus fruits lemons limes and oranges to the gion.
many of these fruits were unknown in the east where the cli was too cold for them to grow.
but they thrived in sunny arizona 3 california.
with the help of mexicano farmworkers american transformed dry deserts into irrigated fruit orchards and citrus grc 322 er 17 xj l food in 1835 william heath davis became one of the first americans to settle in california.
there he got his first taste of mexican food.
davis later wrote of the californios their tables were frugally simply furnished the food clean and inviting consisting mainly of good beef broiled on an iron rod or steaks with onions also mutton sheep chicken eggs.
the bread was tortillas sometimes made with yeast.
beans were a staple dish.
their meat stews were excellent when not too highly seasoned with red pepper.
davis may not have known it but the food he was enjoying in california brought together the best of two worlds.
a food revolution the spanish conquest of mexico in 1521 began one of the great food revolutions in history.
the spanish came to mexico in search of gold but the greatest treasures they found were indian foods unknown in europe.
these foods included corn tomatoes chocolate peanuts vanilla beans squash avocados coconuts sunflower seeds and chili peppers.
the spanish shipped these new foods back to spain.
from there they spread throughout europe greatly expanding peoples food choices.
in turn the spanish brought the foods of europe to mexico.
they introduced meats such as pork beef lamb chicken and goat.
they brought nuts and grains such as almonds walnuts rice wheat and barley.
they planted fruits and vegetables such as apples oranges grapes olives lettuce carrots sugarcane and potatoes which they discovered in peru.
and they introduced herbs and spices such as cinnamon parsley coriander oregano and black pepper.
corn a food of the native indians was a staple in the mexicano diet.
here a mexicano woman is grinding corn that she will use to make a flat corn bread called tortillas.
a new style of cooking mexican cooks combined these foods of diverse origins to create a rich and flavorful style of cooking that was neither indian nor spanish.
it was distinctly mexican.
as americans settled the southwest they were introduced to mexican food.
many of them liked the new tastes and they borrowed recipes from mexicano cooks.
in texas the mingling of mexican and american dishes resulted in a style of cooking known as tex mex.
across america a spicy stew of beef and beans known simply as chili became as american as apple pie.
mexicano contributions to the southwest 323 17 8 architecture throughout the southwest the mexicano contribution to architecture is easy to see.
many buildings can be found with the thick walls red tile roofs rounded arches and courtyards that are typical of spanish architecture.
spanish style architecture took root in mexico during the colonial period.
mexican settlers brought their knowledge of this tradition to the southwest.
their missions homes and other structures were simple and attractive.
they were ideally suited to the hot dry climate of the southwest.
rounded arches thick walls and adobe buildings since wood was scarce in the southwest mexica red tile roofs are characteristics of nos used adobe ah doh beh bricks as their main building material.
spanish style architecture.
adobe is a mixture of earth grass and water that is shaped into bricks and baked in the sun.
mexicanos covered their adobe homes with colorful red clay tiles.
besides being attractive and fireproof a tile roof kept the adobe walls from being washed away during heavy rains.
many adobe buildings featured patios and verandas.
a patio is a roofless inner courtyard often located at the center of a home.
a veranda is a roofed porch or balcony extending along the outside of a building.
patios and verandas allowed mexicanos to spend much of their time outdoors while still protected from the hot sun and dry desert winds.
newcomers adopt the spanish style americans moving to the southwest quickly saw the advantages of building with adobe.
because of their thick walls adobe structures stayed cooler in summer and warmer in winter than the wood buildings that americans from the east were used to.
adobe structures could also be easily constructed from locally available materials.
american settlers used adobe to build not only homes but also courthouses trading posts post offices and other buildings.
later builders adapted spanish architecture to new materials such as concrete and stucco.
by the 1930s nearly a million spanish style homes had been built in california.
who would live in a structure of wood and brick if they could get a palace of mud wrote an admiring easterner.
the adobes make the most picturesque and comfortable homes and harmonize with the whole nature of the landscape chapter 18 william lloyd garrison above left published a newspaper called the liberator s the 1830s.
his newspaper called for not only an end to slavery but full equality for african americans.
the abolition movement gained public attention through garrison s articles.
braving the disapproval of many northerners garrison demanded the immediate freeing of all slaves.
1 will be as harsh as truth he wrote.
i will not retreat a single inch and i will be heard angry proslavery groups destroyed garrison s printing press and burned his house.
frederick douglass speaks out one day gar rison heard an escaped slave frederick douglass speaking at a meeting of abolitionists.
over six feet tall douglass spoke with a voice like thunder.
when he described the cruel treatment of enslaved children people cried.
when he made fun of ministers who told slaves to love slavery people laughed.
when he finished garrison jumped up and cried shall such a man be held a slave in a christian land the crowd called out no.
no douglass quickly became a leader in the abolitionist movement.
his autobiography published in 1845 was an instant best seller.
a brilliant and independent thinker douglass eventually started his own newspaper north star.
its motto read right is of no sex truth is of no color god is the father of us all and we are all brethren brothers women get involved many women were inspired by religious reform movements to become involved in the fight against slavery.
like other abolitionists they sometimes faced violence.
when a young woman named angelina grimke spoke against slavery an anti abolition mob threw stones at her.
when she kept speaking they burned the building she was speaking in.
angelina and her sister sarah had been raised in a south carolina slaveholding family.
after traveling north and becoming quakers they saw slavery in a new way.
in the 1830s the two sisters began speaking out about the poverty and pain of slavery.
at first they spoke only to other women but soon they were addressing large groups of men and women throughout the north.
the grimkes led the way for other women to speak in public.
some abolitionists like sojourner truth were former slaves.
truth had always been strongly spiritual and had preached throughout the north at religious meetings and on street corners.
when she met douglass and garrison their enthusiasm inspired her to speak out loudly about slavery.
an outstanding speaker truth argued that god would end slavery peacefully.
abolitionists were a minority even in the north.
but their efforts and the violence directed at them helped change northerners attitudes toward slavery.
in addition the antislavery fight helped pave the way for the next great reform movement the struggle for women s rights.
frederick douglass a former slave was an important leader in the abolitionist movement.
through his writings and speeches he waged a fierce campaign against slavery.
an era of reform 345x photograph 2010 museum of fine arts bostor in this painting from about 1850 women are represented in traditional ways shy in the background or serving men.
during the mid 1800s many women began to work to change the way women were viewed.
18 6 equal rights for women women abolitionists were in a strange position.
they were trying to convince lawmakers to make slavery illegal yet they themselves could not vote or hold office.
they worked to raise money for the movement yet their fathers and husbands controlled their money and property.
they spoke out against slave beatings yet their husbands could discipline them however they wanted.
even wealthy women like the grimke sisters started to see that women and slaves had much in common.
what then can woman do for the slave asked angelina grimke when she is herself under the feet of man and shamed into silence the movement begins the organized movement for womens rights was sparked by the friendship between lucretia mott and elizabeth cady stanton.
the two women met in 1840 at the world anti slavery convention in london.
when they arrived they were outraged to discover that women were not allowed to speak at the meeting.
the men who ran the convention made women sit in the balcony behind a curtain.
the mens decision may have backfired because it was in the balcony that mott and stanton met.
at first glance the two women seemed quite different.
mott was 47 years old the mother of four children and an active reformer.
inspired by the grimke sisters and her quaker faith mott had preached against slavery in both white and black churches.
she had also helped prudence crandall try to find students for her school for black girls.
chapter 18 iiii life in harmony with nature.
he also wanted to bring different social classes together and help the working poor.
in a letter ripley expressed his goals for brook farm.
it would be a place he said to combine the thinker and the worker in the same individual to guarantee the highest mental freedom by providing all with labor adapted to their tastes and talents he said that he hoped to prepare a society of liberal intelligent and cultivated persons whose relations with each other would permit a more simple and wholesome life in ripleys vision residents at brook farm would enjoy the benefits of physical labor.
but they would also have time to take walks create art and music and converse.
it would be the perfect blend of work and play.
the community would support itself by selling goods produced on the farm.
everyone would share the profits equally.
these ideas reflected the eras reform spirit.
but they also arose from the special features of the transcendentalist movement.
tran scendentalists believed that people carried the light of god within them.
they could experi ence that light by opening up to the beauties of nature and a simpler life.
many young people at the time were also filled with the spirit of change or what they called the newness freedom was in the air.
young men grew beards and let their hair grow long.
they wore floppy hats and loose fitting clothes.
they embraced new ideas such as vegetarian diets and new ways of speaking.
this sense of freedom was reflected at brook farm.
the farm itself was set in beautiful rolling country just eight miles west of boston.
its 170 acres were dotted with woods pastures and meadows.
running through the property was a little brook that gave the farm its name.
a two story farmhouse became the principal residence.
residents called it the hive because it was the hub of activity.
there was also a large barn with stalls for cattle and horses.
brook farm was an ideal setting or a rural retreat.
gl brook farm was a pretty place that charmed nearly everyone who saw it.
a visitor painted this picture of the farm in 1848 an era of reform keeping a good balance between work and play was important at brook farm.
providing food like milk and cheese for the community was essential but so was taking time for skating and other recreation.
life on the farm everyone at brook farm was expected to work.
but they were free to choose the kind of work they did.
women could plow the fields if they wanted and men could do housework.
all labor was sacred when done for a common interest wrote one resident.
everyone was paid the same and no one worked more than ten hours a day or six days a week.
at the time that was considered a short workweek.
most residents seemed to enjoy work on the farm.
one young woman marianne dwight took special pleasure in what she called fancy work sewing caps and other clothing for sale in boston.
she believed that the money and skills gained through this work would help aid the cause of womens rights.
we may start other branches of business she wrote in a letter so that all our proceeds may be applied to the elevation of women forever how the whole aspect of society will be changed residents at the farm did more than work.
they also held dances attended concerts and lectures and performed in plays.
during the winter they enjoyed snow sports like skating and sledding.
children attended a school on the farm.
the quality of education was excellent and the school soon attracted students from the surrounding area.
the school became the farms most profitable activity.
by the summer of 1842 70 people were living at brook farm.
most were not permanent residents however.
students and other temporary lodgers lived there as well.
many visitors also came to the farm including such noted figures as the writers ralph waldo emerson and henry david thoreau.
ther visitors were less notable and some were downright odd.
ere were dreamers and schemers of all sorts one resident wrote.
ample one visitor claimed he could survive without sleep until caught snoring in the library.
another claimed to live on a diet ot raw wheat.
but he was found behind the barn one day eating table scraps set out for the chickens.
x 2 chapter 18 although visitors paid for their stay on the farm they did not contribute labor.
the farm had to add new buildings to house them.
this placed a burden on the farms finances.
the end of the dream in fact brook farms finances had never been solid.
in the beginning ripley had asked members to invest in the farm but few had done so.
he had also hoped to sell farm products but few residents had any farming experience.
furthermore the farms soils were not very good for growing crops.
as a result the farm was always short of money.
residents began to drift away from the farm.
some complained of financial difficulties.
others tired of farmwork.
even nathaniel hawthorne lost his enthusiasm for farm life.
he left after six months saying he feared his soul might perish under a dung heap concerned about the future in 1844 ripley and other residents decided to reorganize the farm.
they established a new set of principles to promote small industry and put the farm on a firmer footing.
they invited new members to join including a number of craft workers and laborers.
they also began construction of a new much larger building and bought a steam engine to power new machinery.
to pay for these improvements the farm took out new loans.
before long however tensions developed in the community.
some members insisted on holding religious services which others opposed.
also some of the new members complained of poor treatment by the original members.
creditors began to demand repayment of loans.
i difficulties were mounting when disaster struck.
on march 3 1846 a fire broke out in the new building bbs and burned it to the ground.
after that more people chose to leave the community.
the ripleys and a handful of others stayed on until the fall of 1847 then they too abandoned the farm.
despite its short history brook farm was not a total failure.
it changed the lives of many of its members and influenced various reform movements including the abolition and womens rights movements.
it also inspired many people 1 with its ideals of workplace equality and a simpler more sustainable life.
those ideals live on today.
unlike brook farm the utopian oneida community of new york developed various communal industries.
atthis sewing bee men and women make traveling bags.
from their profits the community members built a large mansion.
i l an era of reform 3e chapter 19 chapter 21 impact of the dred scott decision 1857 v fremtory tcn c nebraska 6 4 territory r new rfl xifgcf territory 120 w pacific ocean vaw u t 3 canada 500 miles minnesot territor kansas territory mo fefc free state r 1 slave state territory open to slavery mexico unorganized territory ar tx zz nc tim atlantic ocean 30 90w 80w x uj.
taneys argument went something like this.
slaves are property.
the fifth amendment to the constitution says that property cannot be taken from people without due process of law that is a proper court hearing.
taney reasoned that banning slavery in a territory is the same as taking property from slaveholders who would like to bring their slaves into that territory.
and that is unconstitutional.
rather than banning slavery he said congress has a constitutional responsibility to protect the property rights of slaveholders in a territory.
the dred scott decision delighted slaveholders.
they hoped that at lng last the issue of slavery in the territories had been settled and in their favor.
many northerners however were stunned and enraged by the courts ruling.
the new york tribune called the decision a wicked and false judgment the new york independent expressed outrage in a bold headline as a result of the dred scott decision slavery was allowed in all territories.
the decision of the supreme court is the moral assassination of a race and cannot be obeyed.
a dividing nation 41 abraham lincoln addresses an audience during one of the lincoln douglas debates.
stephen douglas is directly behind lincoln on the platform.
21 8 from compromise to crisis during the controversy over the kansas nebraska act antislavery activists formed a new political organization the republican party.
the republicans were united by their beliefs that no man can own another man.
that slavery must be prohibited in the territories that all new states must be free states.
that the rights of our colored citizen must be protected.
in 1858 republicans in illinois nominated abraham lincoln to run for the senate.
in his acceptance speech lincoln pointed out that all attempts to reach compromise on the slavery issue had failed.
quoting from the bible he warned a house divided against itself cannot stand lincoln went on i believe this government cannot endure permanently halfslave and half free.
i do not expect the union to be dissolved i do not expect the house to fall but i do expect it will cease to be divided.
it will become all one thing or all the other the lincoln douglas debates lincolns opponent in the senate race was senator stephen douglas.
the illinois senator saw no reason why the nation could not go on halfslave and half free.
when lincoln challenged him to debate the slavery issue douglas agreed.
during the lincoln douglas debates douglas argued that the dred scott decision had put the slavery issue to rest.
lincoln disagreed.
in his eyes slavery was a moral not a legal issue.
he declared the real issue in this controversy is the sentiment of one class group that looks upon the institution of slavery as a wrong and of another class that does not look upon it as a wrong lincoln lost the election.
but the debates were widely reported and they helped make him a national figure.
his argument with oug as also brought the moral issue of slavery into sharp focus.
compromises over slavery were becoming impossible.
ohn browns raid while lincoln fought to stop the spread of avery roug politics abolitionist john brown adopted a more ex reme approach.
rather than wait for congress to art brown planntj s 1 at harpnrs ferry virginia.
an arsenal is1 usp tlt ere weapons and ammunition are stored.
brown wanted to the weapons to arm slaves for a rebellion that would end slavery.
lincoln douglas debates a series of political debates between abraham lincoln and stephen douglas who were candidates in the illinois race for u s senator in which slavery was the main issue 414 chapter you learned how a series of compromises failed to keep the united states from splitting in two over the issue of slavery.
confronting the issue of slavery the issue of granting missouri statehood threatened to upset the balance of free and slave states.
northerners were concerned that if missouri entered the union as a slave state other territories would also be admitted as slave states.
southerners worried that if congress banned slavery in missouri it would try to end slavery elsewhere.
the missouri compromise in 1820 the missouri compromise resolved the issue by admitting missouri as a slave state and maine as a free state.
it also drew a line across the louisiana territory.
in the future slavery would be permitted only south of that line.
the compromise of 1850 the furor over slavery in new territories erupted again after the mexican american war.
the compromise of 1850 admitted california as a free state and allowed the new mexico and utah territories to decide whether to allow slavery.
it also ended the slave trade in washington d c and included a stronger fugitive slave law.
attitudes on both sides were hardened by harriet beecher stowes novel uncle toms cabin and the kansas nebraska act.
the dred scott decision in 1857 the supreme court issued a decision in the dred scott case african americans were not citizens and the missouri compromise was unconstitutional.
from compromise to crisis antislavery activists formed a new political party the republican party.
the party nominated abraham lincoln for the illinois senate.
slavery was the focus of debates between lincoln and opponent stephen douglas.
lincoln lost the e ection but the debates brought slavery into sharp focus.
a raid launched by abolitionist john rown raised fears of a slave rebellion.
iheelection of 1860 and secession lincoln won the presidency in 1860 soon afterward south carolina and six other southern states seceded from the union and forme e confederate states of america.
in early 1861 confederate troops fired on for.
sumter in charleston south carolina marking the beginning of the civi a dividing reading further anthony burns was 19 years old when he fled slavery in virginia.
living as a free man in boston burns was arrested tried and sent backto slavery under the fugitive slave act.
a l lli m8btiav ti the granger collection new york slavery divides boston boston was a magnet for people who opposed slavery.
the american anti slavery society was based in boston as was the abolitionist newspaper the liberator.
but the issue of slavery divided even the people of boston.
tensions in boston increased as they did in other places.
boston like the nation was splitting apart.
on june 2 1854 about 50 000 people lined the streets of boston.
hundreds more gathered on rooftops.
businesses closed.
people looked out of the windows and doorways of the buildings where they usually worked.
women dangled black shawls out of second and third story windows.
by the citys harbor black fabric covered the commonwealth building.
from its upper windows hung six american flags all draped in black.
samuel may who was born during the american revolution hung two u s flags upside down from his hardware store as a protest.
at ground level a black coffin displayed the word liberty.
then anthony burns emerged from the courthouse.
surrounded by federal marshals he was walking to the docks where he would board a ship to virginia.
burns an escaped slave was being returned to his owner.
burns had escaped from slavery in virginia by hiding in the cargo hold of a ship.
he had settled in boston just a few months earlier believing that people in the free state of massachusetts would welcome him.
now many bostonians were outraged that burns was being forced back into slavery.
massachusetts had outlawed the institution decades earlier.
many escaped slaves lived as free people in the state.
burns s three block walk to the pier was dramatic.
bostons mayor had called on the military to keep order fearing that angry crowds would use force to free burns.
each guard who walked with burns held a pistol in one hand and a sword in the other.
one woman described watching the procession from an upstairs cc ng ru e from the courthouse to the pier.
she reported e and her companions called out shame and shame in our.
e and scornful voices at the men who escorted burns.
at was going on in boston.
why was anthony burns being sent back to slavery.
7 funaftjuli this friday eti liny 26tli nt 7 oi v mernrr jwlltt br a ma w a vikgi bwt81 m h.
auvtjittsea a public meeting to protest the arres anthony burns.
thousands of burnss supporters gathered on may 26 that burns had been kidnapped by his former owner.
418 chapter 22 the siege of vicksburg the town of vicksburg was located on a bluff above a hairpin turn in the mississippi river.
the city was easy to defend and difficult to capture.
whoever held vicksburg could with a few well placed cannons control movement along the mississippi.
but even farragut had to admit with fellow officer david porter that ships cannot crawl up hills 300 feet high an army would be needed to take vicksburg.
in may 1863 general ulysses s grant battled his way to vicksburg with the needed army.
for six weeks union gunboats shelled the city from the river while grant s army bombarded it from land.
slowly but surely the union troops burrowed toward the city in trenches and tunnels.
as shells pounded the city people in vicksburg dug caves into the hillsides for protection.
to survive they ate horses mules and bread made of corn and dried peas.
it had the properties of indian rubber said one confederate soldier and was worse than leather to digest low on food and supplies vicksburg surrendered on july 4 1863 the mississippi was now a union waterway and the confederacy was cut in two.
for more than a month union forces bom barded vicksburg with an average of 2 800 shells a day.
forced to eat horses mules dogs and rats the confederates finally surrendered.
problems on the confederate home front as the war raged on life in the south became grim.
because of the blockade imported goods disappeared from stores.
what few items were available were extremely expensive.
unable to sell their tobacco and cotton to the north or to other countries farmers planted food crops instead.
still the south was often hungry.
invading union armies destroyed crops.
they also cut fail lines making it difficult to move food and supplies to southern cities and army camps.
as clothing wore out southerners made do with patches and homespun cloth.
at the beginning of the war mary boykin chesnut had written in her journal of well dressed confederate troops.
by 1863 she was writing of soldiers dressed in rags and tags.
by 1864 southerners were writing letters like this one to soldiers on the battlefront we havent got nothing in the house to eat but a little bit o meal.
i dont want to you to stop lighten them yankees but try and get off and come home and fix us all up some.
many soldiers found it hard to resist such pleas even if going home meant deserting their units.
4 i african american soldiers displayed their courage during their attack on fort wagner.
the 54th massachusetts infantry charged across 200 yards of open beach in their effort to reach the fort.
22 7 fort wagner african americans and the war early in the war abolitionists had urged congress to recruit african americans for the army.
but at first most northerners regarded the conflict as a white mans war congress finally opened the door to black recruits in 1862 about 186 000 african americans many of them former slaves enlisted in the union army.
another 30 000 african americans joined the union navy.
the massachusetts 54th regiment massachusetts was one of the first states to organize black regiments.
the most famous was the 54th massachusetts infantry commanded by colonel robert gould shaw.
two of the 54th infantry s 1 000 soldiers were sons of frederick douglass.
the men of the massachusetts 54th were paid less than white soldiers.
when the black soldiers learned this they protested the unequal treatment by refusing to accept any pay at all.
in a letter to lincoln corporal james henry gooding asked are we soldiers or are we laborers.
we have done a soldier s duty.
why can t we have a soldier s pay.
at lincoln s urging congress finally granted black soldiers equal pay.
after three months of training the massachusetts 54th was sent to south carolina to take part in an attack on fort wagner outside of charleston.
as they prepared for battle the ment of the 54th faced the usual worries of untested troops.
but they also faced the added fear that if captured they might be sold into slavery.
434 chapter you will read the rest of the story of the triangle shirtwaist factory fire.
you will also learn about both the benefits and the costs of industrialization.
this photograph taken around 1910 shows a typical workroom in a sewing factory.
firefighters could do little to stop the blaze that claimed 146 lives at the triangle shirtwaist factory fire in 1911 unsafe working conditions contributed to the high death toll the rise of industry entrepreneur a person who assembles and organizes the resources necessary to produce goods and services.
entrepreneurs are willing and able to take the risks involved in starting and managing a business.
laissez faire a theory that economies work best when there is minimal involvement from government the granger collection new york industrialization produced a wide range of affordable consumer goods.
giant catalogs like this one offered american families everything from pots and pans to pianos.
25 2 a nation transformed industrialization clearly brought benefits to some.
on march 26 1883 alva vanderbilt threw a party to show off her familys new home in new york city.
it was not just a party it was a grand ball the most dazzling social event in the citys history.
and it was not just any home.
the vanderbilts had built a mansion in the style of a european castle complete with medieval furniture tapestries and armor.
but then the vanderbilts were not just any family.
mrs vanderbilts husband was william kissam vanderbilt a railroad industrialist.
he was the grandson of cornelius vanderbilt who had made a fortune in banking and shipping.
the vanderbilt clan was one of the countrys wealthiest and most powerful families.
more than 1 200 of new yorks social elite flocked to mrs vanderbilts ball dressed in glittering costumes.
many of the guests came as kings and queens.
but mrs vanderbilts sister in law decided to be more modern.
she came dressed as the electric light.
mrs vanderbilts party reflected the way industrialization was transforming american life in the decades after the civil war.
cities like new york were booming.
entrepreneurs in banking commerce and industry were gaining enormous wealth.
technological marvels like the electric light were changing how americans lived and worked.
but as the workers in the triangle shirtwaist factory knew not everyone benefited from this progress.
the growth of big business families like the vanderbilts made huge profits from the growth of big business after the civil war.
businesses got bigger in part because of new technology and manufacturing practices.
they also grew because there was more money to invest in them.
bankers and investors were happy to provide the necessary funds in hopes of earning large returns.
some of the money that fueled industrialization came from the large scale mining of gold and silver in the west.
government policies also contributed to the boom in big business.
according to the theory of laissez faire leh say fair economies work best with minimal government involvement.
laissez faire is french for to let alone.
the idea of laissez faire was that government should not regulate the price or quality of goods the working conditions of laborers or the business practices of bankers and industrialists.
some types of government involvement protected business and industry.
federal state and local governments helped business and industry through favorable laws and subsidies such as the land grants t25a roa s and farmers.
congress passed higher and higher ese made imported goods more expensive and therefore loss competitive with those produced in the united states.
e usiness boom fed the growth of american cities.
for 100 years americans had been going west to seek their fortunes.
in 1890 the ensus ureau said that the frontier line no longer existed.
this was 490 chapter 25 lying flat on the lower wing of the 1903 wright flyer orville wright begins the first successful airplane flight in history as his brother wilbur runs alongside during takeoff.
the wright brothers designed and built the flyer out of wood and cloth.
itwas powered by a gasoline engine of the wrights own design.
air transport while henry ford was turning out cars on the assembly line brothers orville and wilbur wright were experimenting with flying.
in 1903 with his brother wilbur running alongside orville successfully piloted the first flying machine in kitty hawk north carolina.
although the flight was only 12 seconds in duration it sparked worldwide interest in flying.
by the late 1920s an industry based on air travel had emerged.
the u s postal service used planes to transport mail across the country while the military used planes for exploration and scouting.
at the same time wealthy americans took their first commercial flights across the country.
women sewed the pieces of shirtwaists together.
piles of finished blouses were then lifted to the floor above by electric freight elevators.
there two rows of workers gave the shirtwaists a final pressing.
finally shipping clerks packed the shirtwaists into boxes for shipment.
usually the factory almost ran itself.
but if a problem occurred the companys switchboard operator could reach bernstein by telephone on any of the factorys three floors.
the rise of industry corporation a business that is owned by many investors trust a group of corporations that unite in order to reduce competition and control prices in a business or an industry monopoly a company that controls all production and sales of a particular product or service in 1901 j p morgan bought carnegie s steel company and turned it into u s steel the nation s first billion dollar corporation.
25 4 the rise of big business when andrew carnegie opened his first factory in 1865 most businesses were still owned by one person or a few partners.
because the owners funds were limited businesses were small.
owners knew their employees and often treated them like family.
growth of corporations a partnership might work well for a garment or clothing factory.
but big businesses such as railroads needed much more capital money to start a business than a few partners could provide.
to raise larger sums of money entrepreneurs set up corporations.
a corporation is a business that is owned by many investors or people who help pay the businesss initial expenses.
a corporation raises funds by selling stock or shares in a business.
investors who buy the stock are known as stockholders.
in return for their investment stockholders hope to receive dividends or a share of the corporations profits.
the money invested by the stockholders is used to build the business.
to make sure their money is used properly stockholders electa board of directors.
the people on the board of directors oversee the running of the corporation.
after the civil war corporations attracted large amounts of money from investors.
by the 1880s thousands of corporations were doing business across the united states.
iiuvacicncr wii irusi a giant in the oil business john u ko efeller introduced another form of business organization thetrus a trust is a group of corporations run by a single board of directo rockefeller invested in his first oil refinery in 1862 at the age o at that time petroleum or oil found underground was just becor a valuable resource.
oil refineries purify petroleum into fuel oil.
e ing the 19th century oil was used to light homes cook food and r engines and generators.
before long many small refineries were competing fiercely in t oil business.
the amount of oil these firms produced rose and fell wildly along with prices.
rockefeller saw this as wasteful and inefl cient.
to reduce competition he did everything he could to drive 1 rivals out of business.
companies he could not destroy he bought.
li e carnegie rockefeller took control of every step of his bu ss.
he bought oil fields along with railroads pipelines and ship i rove is his own warehouses and even made his c oi barrels for storing oil products.
by 1880 rockefeller controllec 95 percent of the nations oil refining industry.
m nae hls many businesses rockefeller combined them ir e an r1 0 1 trust the trust made the oil industry more effici t ef bm as moni poly.
the trust had the power to homes andbuswh 0 496 chapter 25 when he was 15 edison learned how to run a telegraph machine.
the telegraph used bursts of electric current to send messages quickly over long distances.
edison was fascinated by the machine.
it was while trying to improve the telegraph that edison made a momentous discovery.
he developed a machine that could record and transmit the sound of a human voice.
he called it a phonograph.
it is hard to imagine today just how amazing this was.
until the phonograph people had only heard the voices of those who were physically near them.
but edison had made a machine that could record a voice.
the recording could be played when the speaker was nowhere to be seen.
it could in fact be played long after the speaker had died.
the phonograph seemed magical.
soon a promoter was traveling the country demonstrating how the phonograph worked.
audiences were thrilled.
you should hear me bring down the house by singing in the phonograph.
the effect when they hear me is stupendous but when they hear the phonograph reproducing my song with all its imperfections they endanger the walls with clamor.
edward johnson 1878 the new york sun newspaper ran this headline about edison and his phonograph on february 22 1878 a man of thirty one revolutionizing the whole world thomas edison became a celebrity.
once edison saw the publics enthusiasm he was more than happy to promote the new machine.
by mid 1878 he published a list often possible uses for the phonograph.
the list included recording books music and lectures.
edison also thought the phonograph could be used to teach languages and write letters.
today we use recordings for all those purposes and many more that even edison could never have dreamed up.
the phonograph amazed people around the world.
in this advertisement a smiling uncle sam shows off one of the cylinders used to play recorded sound.
within aboutten years after its invention the phonograph had become a commercial product.
forthe first time people could listen and dance to recorded music.
genius is one percent inspiration and ninety nine percent perspiration edison was fond of saying.
his adoring public loved both images inspired genius and hardworking inventor.
in his lab in menlo park new jersey edison worked with assistants for two years to create a successful electric light.
electricity and the lightbulb edison is most famous today for inventing the electric lightbulb.
in fact other inventors had been working on lightbulbs for 50 years.
but it was edison who solved the problem that had plagued them all how to make a bulb that would burn for more than just a few minutes.
a lightbulb works by electric current moving through a filament thread.
when the filament gets hot it gives off light.
other inventors knew this but they had not been able to figure out what kind of filament to use.
after years of trying to use platinum edison switched to carbon.
a carbon coated thread did the trick.
it would not melt or catch fire and it could produce light for hours.
in october 1879 the new york herald poetically described the light emitted by edison s bulb.
it was like the mellow sunset of an italian autumn a little globe of sunshine a veritable aladdins lamp reporter marshall fox gushed.
better yet it stayed lit for 13 and a half hours.
previous bulbs had lit up for only a few minutes.
a full year before he so impressed the new york herald edison had announced that making a lightbulb was so simple that everybody will wonder why they have never thought of it unfortunately it was not so simple.
when edison made that statement he was still strug g ing to get his electric lightbulb to work.
but he was happy to keep i c interested with promises that the light from his bulb would last almost forever at the same time that edison was working on the lightbulb he k m workin8 on a way to distribute electricity.
he planned to a pwer plant on pearl street in lower manhattan.
the power plan would ugh the whole neighborhood.
rc lafur car treet p ant was finished edison had a private outfit h 1 lam vanderbilt son of the railroad tycoon wanted to electrical use.
flfth avenue with electricity.
so edison had an the livhtc pwer p ant built in tbe basement.
on the chosen evening until somen on as planned.
everything seemed to be going well that the wa.
a he f burning.
it turned out mrs v nde hr had hread in and had almost caught te ei xi and a smail part of manl la t pearl slr 8enera or s arted up an lit up.
but it was not the earth shattering 508 chapter 26 pascal however decided to stay in his new country.
he settled in an italian neighborhood in new york one of the many little italys that sprang up in u s cities.
these mostly italian neighborhoods bulged with residents who could afford only the cheapest tenement housing.
crowded together in tiny apartments most families had no privacy.
fortunately italian neighborhoods also offered opportunities for fun.
most italians were catholics who celebrated saints days as they had in italy.
they strung colored lights flags and streamers along the shops and streets.
families strolled among booths that offered food and games.
fireworks music and dancing reminded everyone of life back home.
above everything else italians valued family closeness.
some italian parents didnt send their children to school because they feared that learning english would separate their children from the family.
besides a child in school wasnt earning money to help the family.
as a result many immigrant children never learned the skills they needed for better jobs.
because many italian newcomers were poor and uneducated americans tended to look down on them.
when a few italians turned to crime and became notorious gangsters some people started thinking of all italians as criminals.
as a group however italian immigrants were generally more law abiding than average americans.
some americans feared that immigrants from italy would always be poor and illiterate.
pascal dangelo was one of many who proved them wrong.
after coming to the united states pascal bought himself a dictionary and learned to read and write english.
in time he became a well known poet whose work was published in national magazines.
italian immigrants often moved to little italys such as mulberry street in new york city shown in this photograph.
here rents were cheap and living conditions crowded.
pogrom an organized and violent persecution of a minority group 26 4 jewish immigrants from eastern europe maryusha antonovksy was no more.
in her place stood mary antin the same immigrant jewish girl but with a new american name.
mary had also bought real american machine made garments to replace her hateful homemade european style clothes.
i long to forget she said.
it is painful to be conscious of two worlds when immigrants arrived at ellis island they faced the dreaded medical inspection.
medical examinations were quick but thorough.
here a new arrival undergoes an exam to checkfor eye disease.
fleeing persecution mary antins first world had been a jewish village in russia.
for centuries russians had discriminated against jews who dressed worshiped and ate differently from their christian neighbors.
by the 1800s russia had hundreds of anti jewish laws.
jews could live only in certain areas.
they couldnt live in big cities or own land.
in 1881 assassins killed the russian monarch czar alexander ii.
nervous government leaders blamed jews for his murder even though the assassin was not jewish.
angry russians raged through jewish villages burning looting and killing.
these attacks called pogroms happened repeatedly for more than 30 years.
the word pogrom comes from russian words meaning like thunder many jews fled such persecution hoping to find refuge in america.
between 1881 and 1924 some 2 4 million jews came to the united states from russia and other countries in eastern europe.
mary antins father was one of them.
marys father left for america in 1891 hoping to earn enough money to send for his family.
in his first letter home mary sensed an elation joy a hint of triumph.
my father was inspired by a vision.
he saw something he promised us something.
it was this america when her father sent a steamship ticket for his family to join him the people in marys village gathered together filled with longing.
they wanted to handle the ticket mary remembered and mother must read them what is written on it after long rides in overcrowded trains and weeks of delay her family finally boarded a ship in hamburg germany although richer immigrants enjoyed comfortable cabins the antins were crowded together with hundreds of other passengers deep down in the ship.
seasick at first they frequently came up on deck for fresh air where sailors and girls had a good many dances 516 chapter 28 the majority of employees were workers from the west indies who could not afford to go home.
to prevent deadly yellow fever and malaria crews worked to eliminate the mosquitoes that carried these diseases.
they drained ditches spread oil on swamps and screened doors and windows.
within two years canal workers were no longer dying from these diseases.
a new chief engineer improved housing and strictly organized the huge project.
using dynamite and huge steam shovels men made a wide deep cut through panamas mountains.
the excavated dirt was moved by railroad car to lower elevations.
here workers created earthen dams to form three giant lakes.
engineers supervised the construction of locks a type of gate that would allow water levels to be raised and lowered along the canal.
by the time the 51 mile long canal opened in 1914 roosevelt had left office.
his influence in the panamanian revolution continued to be controversial.
roosevelt himself admitted i took the canal zone in 1921 congress apologized to colombia and gave it 25 million.
but anti american feelings remained high in latin america and panamanians increasingly resented u s control of the canal zone.
in 2000 the united states returned the zone to panama.
the culebra cut shown here was one ofthe engineering miracles that allowed engineers to complete the panama canal in ten years.
millions of pounds of dynamite blasted apart the mountain.
the earth was then used to construct dams to form lakes.
the united states becomes a world poj nationalism devotion to a national or ethnic identity including the desire for independence from rule by foreign countries militarism a policy of glorifying military power and military ideas and values 28 6 the outbreak of world war i by the time the first ship sailed through the panama canal the worlds attention was not on panama but on far off europe.
in august 1914 german troops poured across belgium on their way to try to conquer france.
europe was at war.
tensions in europe european countries had long competed with each other for colonies trade and territory.
by the early 1900s nationalism was complicating these rivalries.
austria hungry had built an empire by taking over smaller countries in the part of eastern europe known as the balkans.
nationalism inspired in the balkan people a burning desire to be independent of austrian rule.
as tensions grew european leaders looked for safety in militarism a policy of glorifying military power and military ideas and values.
when germany built up its navy to challenge great britains fleet great britain constructed more battleships.
as germanys army grew france built up its own army.
european countries also looked for safety in alliances.
in secret treaties germany and austria hungary agreed to help each other in case of attack.
great britain russia and france made similar agreements.
europe was dividing into what amounted to armed camps.
archduke franz ferdinand and his wife are shown here shortly before being assassinated by a serbian nationalist.
the assassination triggered world war i assassination leads to war an outburst of nationalism lit the fuse of war.
on june 28 1914 the heir to the austro hungarian throne archduke franz ferdinand was visiting the city of sarajevo in the province of bosnia.
many bosnians were serbs who wanted to be part of nearby serbia instead of austria hungary.
a serbian nationalist jumped out of a crowd and fatally shot the archduke and his wife.
outraged austria hungary accused serbia of having a hand in the assassinations and pressured serbia to give up most of its independence.
when the serbs refused austria hungary declared war.
the russians stepped in to defend the serbs.
the germans came to the aid of austria hungary by declaring war on russia.
russias ally france began to prepare for war.
eventually more than a dozen countries took sides in the great war decades later people called the conflict world war i austria hungary and germany headed the central powers.
france russia and great britain led the allied powers.
like most americans president wood row wilson wanted to stay out of the war.
declaring that the united states would remain neutral wilson begged citizens to be impartial in thought as well as deed.
562 chapter 29 facing new global challenges since 1991 the united states has turned its attention to new global challenges.
it has for example joined with other nations to assist the billion people around the world who live on less than 1 25 a day.
on september 11 2001 a shocked nation watched as passenger planes hijacked by terrorists flew into the two world trade center towers in new york city and the pentagon in washington d c in response president george w bush declared a war on terror that war has taken u s troops into iraq and afghanistan.
in both countries u s forces have worked to root out groups committed to the destruction of the united states and its allies.
the united states is also working with other nations to deal with climate change.
in 1988 the public became concerned about scientists observations that earths climate was growing warmer at an alarming rate.
the main reason for this warming they suggested is the burning of fuels such as oil gas and coal that release carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
as earth gets hotter they warned disasters like hurricanes floods and droughts may become more frequent.
preventing such disasters has become one of the greatest global challenges of the 21st century.
a team from the university of michigan celebrates winning the north american solar car challenge a cross country competition to build and race solar powered cars.
finding new sources of energy is one of the challenges americans face today.
chapter you learned about some of the changes that have shaped life in the united states since 1914 securing equal rights and opportunities in 1914 white men dominated the workforce and political life.
after much struggle women and men of all races have won the right to vote and compete as equals in all areas of life.
innovations change daily life cars and airplanes made travel faster and easier.
motion pictures created a new form of entertainment.
radio and television brought the world into every home.
americas changing economy during the first half of the last century the united states shifted from an agricultural to an industrial economy.
during the second half it shifted again to a service economy.
by the dawn of the 21st century the economy had entered information age.
the united states enters the world stage in 1914 the united states was just beginning to move onto the world stage.
by the turn of the 21st century it was the worlds sole superpower.
in the 21st century new ideas and challenges will continue to change the way we live.
linking past to present 58 reading further i i.
rachel carson talked directly to the american people.
we still haven t become mature enough to think of ourselves as only a tiny part of a vast and incredible universe she cautioned.
ii questions for the future protecting the earth.
feeding the people who live here.
also essential.
how to do both at the same time is a harder question to answer.
since the 1960s this challenge has perplexed both the world s most dedicated environmentalists and its best agricultural scientists.
can a book change the world.
rachel carson did not dare hope that it could.
but she wrote silent spring anyway and crossed her fingers.
the book published in 1962 alerted americans to the dangers of pesticides.
carson argued that the chemical industry in their eagerness to stop insects from destroying crops had exposed plants animals and people to poisons.
the effects she warned would be disastrous.
carson was a scientist and writer who loved nature.
at a time when few women had careers outside the home carson earned an advanced degree in marine biology.
she went on to write popular books about science.
but silent spring was unique.
in it carson criticized the big chemical companies that made pesticides.
she also criticized the farmers who used them profusely as well as the politicians who approved their use to clear public places of bugs.
she suggested that by trying to control nature people risked their own survival.
carson feared that her position would be very unpopular.
in the early 1960s many americans put great faith in science.
they were likely to accept that whatever scientists thought was a good idea was in fact a good idea.
few people thought about protecting the natural environment.
nonetheless silent spring made a huge splash.
a lot of americans were ready for its message no matter how disturbing it was.
the book was a best seller.
in just a few months it had sold 100 000 copies.
after its publication many states introduced bills to regulate pesticides.
positive reaction to the book was matched by negative reaction however.
some scientists criticized carsons lack of objectivity.
many said that chemicals were completely safe and posed no health risks.
some critics even attacked carson personally and called her a fanatic.
perhaps carson s most famous critic was norman borlaug.
borlaug too was a scientist.
he devoted his life to developing crops that could produce more food for people.
his plants needed pesticides but they yielded much more produce than ordinary plants.
borlaug charged that carson was one of the people who do not want to eradicate eliminate hunger for the past 50 years tensions have simmered between environmentalists like carson and agricultural scientists like borlaug.
they continue today.

chapter 2 revolution and the early republic 4763 4800 the living constitution chapter and explore the issues below use the annotation tools in your ebook to record your thoughts.
explore the issues how would you react to a people whose appearance and language are unlike anything you have ever known.
what can happen when one culture imposes its values on another.
1492 columbus first reaches north america.
1521 the spanish destroy the aztec empire.
1607 jamestown is founded.
1620 pilgrims settle in plymouth.
1400 1500 1600 1440 johann gutenberg develops his printing press.
1534 the reformation begins in england with the act of supremacy.
jl681 william penn founds pennsylvania.
117541 french and indian war begins.
3 588 1642 english civil england war begins between i defeats royalist forces and spanish parliamentary forces armada.
led by oliver cromwell.
17631 with the treaty of paris britain acquires a vast north american empire.
review unit 3 the americas west africa and europe main idea j why it matters now j.
terms names on the eve of their interaction native american west african and european peoples lived in complex societies.
the interaction of these cultures helped create the present day culture of the united states.
nomadic aztec anasazi pueblo iroquois benin kongo islam christianity reformation renaissance one american sstory taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how trade and commerce affected particular societies.
essie parrish a native american spiritual leader and healer kept alive stories from a time when her people the kashaya porno flourished along the northern california coast.
one day in 1958 she invited robert oswalt an anthropologist at the university of california to time travel with her to the 1540s.
as parrish spoke the centuries rolled back.
a personal voice essie parrish in the old days before the white people came up here there was a boat sailing on the ocean from the south.
because before that the kashaya porno had never seen a boat they said our world must be coming to an end.
couldnt we do something.
this big bird floating on the ocean is from somewhere probably from up high t hey promised our father a feast saying that destruction was upon them.
when they had done so they watched the ship sail way up north and disappear they were saying that nothing had happened to them the big bird person had sailed northward without doing anything because of the promise of a feast consequently they held a feast and a big dance 99 quoted in kashaya texts dressed for a ceremony in the 1950s spiritual leader essie parrish wears a feathered headdress and holds two bead covered staffs.
in this chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era vocabulary colonize to establish settlements under the control of a parent country main idea analyzing events what did spain and portugal agree to do in the treaty of tordesillas.
convinced that he had landed on islands off asia known to europeans as the indies columbus called the people he met los indios.
thus the name indian came to be mistakenly applied to all the diverse peoples of the americas.
the spanish monarchs were thrilled with columbus s discoveries and funded three more of his voyages this time to colonize the lands he had claimed.
the impact on native americans by the time columbus set sail for his return to hispaniola in 1493 europeans had already developed a pattern for colonization.
they had glimpsed the profitability of the plantation system realized the economic benefits of using native or local peoples for forced labor and learned to use european weapons to dominate native peoples.
these tactics would be used in the americas.
the arrival of the europeans devastated native americans by another means disease.
the taino for example had not developed any natural immunity to measles mumps chickenpox smallpox typhus or other diseases europeans had unknowingly brought with them.
consequently the taino died by the thousands once they were exposed.
the impact on africans with the decline of the native work force the european settlers of the americas eventually turned to africa for slaves.
the atlantic slave trade devastated many african societies particularly in west africa.
starting in the 1500s african cultures lost many of their young and more able members.
before the atlantic slave trade ended in the 1800s it had drained africa of at least 12 million people.
the impact on europeans columbus s voyages had profound effects on europeans as well.
in search of new lives europeans began to cross the atlantic by the thousands in what would become one of the biggest voluntary migrations in world history.
overseas expansion inflamed national rivalries in europe.
in 1494 spain and portugal signed the treaty of tordesillas tor de se es in which they agreed to divide the western hemisphere between them.
the columbian exchange the voyages of columbus and those after him led to the discovery of plants and animals in the americas that were new to europeans and africans.
ships took items such as corn potatoes and tobacco from the americas to europe and to africa.
from these countries they brought back livestock grains fruit and coffee.
this global transfer of living things called the columbian exchange began with columbus s first voyage and continues today.
history video christopher columbus explorer of the new world i i i i i j sweet vcorn avocado c0ssava peanut k t0 ericas a whgspple peppers rkey atlantic ocean coffee geography skillbuilder onioncitrus nai human environment afk ca and asia to interaction how do you think tho r l.
the columbian exchange rn avocaao vaooava reanut r otato ff ttope a am asia nilla beans uvcmvuint nuw uu yuu 1111 j the columbian exchange has enriched each hemisphere.
review unit 15 the spanish claim a new empire in the wake of columbus s voyages spanish explorers took to the seas to claim new colonies for spain.
these explorers were lured by the prospect of vast lands filled with gold and silver.
known as conquistadors kong ke sta dorz conquerors they conquered much of the americas.
cortes subdues the aztec soon after landing in mexico in 1519 hernando cortes learned of the vast and wealthy aztec empire in the region s interior.
with a force of 600 soldiers 17 horses 10 cannons and numerous dogs the video the arrival of the spanish v y playfl hernando cortes 1485 1547 conquistador marched inland.
the spaniards marveled at tenochtitlan the aztec capital with its towering temples and elaborate engineering works including a system that brought fresh water into the city.
we were amazed one of cortes s soldiers said of his first glimpse of tenochtitlan.
some of our soldiers even asked whether the things we saw were not a dream.
while the aztec city astonished the spaniards the capital s glittering gold stock seemed to hypnotize them.
they picked up the gold and fingered it like monkeys one native witness recalled.
they hungered like pigs for that gold.
the aztec emperor montezuma convinced at first that cortes was an armor clad god agreed to give the spanish explorer a share of the empire s existing gold supply.
the conquistador was not satisfied.
cortes eventually forced the aztec to mine more gold and silver.
in the spring of 1520 the aztec rebelled against the spaniards intrusion.
regarding montezuma as a traitor the aztec are believed to have stoned their ruler to death before driving out cortes s forces.
while they had successfully repelled the spanish invaders the aztec were falling victim to the diseases that the spanish had brought with them.
by the time cortes launched a counterattack in 1521 the spanish and their native allies overran an aztec force that had been greatly reduced by smallpox and measles.
after several months of fighting the invaders sacked and burned tenochtitlan and the aztec surrendered.
while flames still flickered in the shattered capital cortes laid plans for the colony of new spain.
the spanish pattern of conquest in building their american empire the spaniards lived among the native people and sought to impose their own culture upon them.
the settlers mostly men tended to intermarry with native women.
this practice eventually created a large mestizo mestizo or mixed spanish and native american population in the spanish colonies.
nonetheless the spanish also oppressed the people among whom they lived.
in their effort to exploit the land for its resources they forced native american workers to labor in an encomienda eng ko myen da system.
under that system natives farmed ranched or mined for spanish landlords who received the rights to their labor from spanish authorities.
cortes made himself the enemy of thousands of native americans but the daring conquistador did not have many friends among spaniards.
spanish authorities on cuba where cortes owned land accused the conquistador of murdering his wife catalina juarez.
there were ugly accusations but none proved wrote juarezs biographer.
in addition the cuban governor diego velazquez who resented cortess arrogance relieved him of the command of a gold seeking expedition to the mainland.
cortes left cuba anyway.
as he fought his way through mexico cortes had to battle not only the native americans but also the spanish forces that velazquez sent to arrest him.
main idea summarizing jj what factors enabled the spanish to conquer the aztec.
chapter to answer the following questions.
the americas west africa and europe pages 4 13 1 what effects did portuguese trade routes have on west africa.
2 in what ways did renaissance ideas and attitudes inspire and motivate european explorers.
spanish north america pages 14 20 3 what impact did the columbian exchange have on peoples lives throughout the world.
4 why did the spanish want to colonize the americas.
early british colonies pages 21 30 5 how did the goals of the jamestown colonists differ from those of the puritan colonists in massachusetts.
6 why did the english parliament pass the navigation acts.
what effects did they have.
the colonies come of age pages 31 39 7 how did immigration contribute to the ethnic diversity of the american colonies after 1700.
8 how did the differences between the northern and southern economies lead to the development of two distinct cultural regions.
critical thinking using your notes in a chart like the one shown compare and contrast spanish and british colonial policies toward native americans.
colonial policies toward native americans spanish british developing historical perspective what were some of the cultural characteristics of the ancient civilizations that flourished in the americas.
interpreting maps look at the map on page 29 compare the economic activities of the three regions of british colonies in the americas new england middle and southern.
42 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic uictadv the declaration of history independence el 7 video the year is 1787 you have recently helped your fellow patriots overthrow decades of oppressive british rule.
however it is easier to destroy an old system of government than to create a new one.
in a world of kings and tyrants your new republic struggles to find its place.
as you read the chapter 2 revolution and the early republic vocabulary reconciliation the restoration of a former state of harmony or friendship main idea developing historical perspective do you think that the olive branch petition was too little too late.
the second continental congress in may of 1775 colonial leaders called the second continental congress in philadelphia to debate their next move.
the loyalties that divided colonists sparked endless debates at the second continental congress.
some delegates called for independence while others argued for reconciliation with great britain.
despite such differences the congress agreed to recognize the colonial militia as the continental army and appointed george washington as its commander.
the battle of bunker hill cooped up in boston british general thomas gage decided to strike at militiamen on breed s hill north of the city and near bunker hill.
on june 17 1775 gage sent 2 400 british soldiers up the hill.
the colonists held their fire until the last minute and then began to mow down the advancing redcoats before finally retreating.
by the time the smoke cleared the colonists had lost 450 men while the british had suffered over 1 000 casualties.
the misnamed battle of bunker hill would prove to be the deadliest battle of the war.
by july the second continental congress was readying the colonies for war though still hoping for peace.
most of the delegates like most colonists felt deep loyalty to george iii and blamed the bloodshed on the king s ministers.
on july 8 congress sent the king the so called olive branch petition urging a return to the former harmony between britain and the colonies king george flatly rejected the petition.
furthermore he issued a proclamation stating that the colonies were in rebellion and urged parliament to order a naval blockade to isolate a line of ships meant for the american coast.
contributions of select founding fathers charles carroll served as a delegate to the continental congress and signed the declaration of independence helped to write marylands constitution of 1776 served in the u s senate from 1789 to 1792 john hancock served as president of the continental congress and became the first member to sign the declaration of independence commissioned george washington to lead the continental army as governor led massachusetts to ratify the u s constitution john peter muhlenberg member of the virginia house of burgesses and the pennsylvania assembly commissioned as a general in the continental army in 1777 elected to the u s senate benjamin rush author of an anti slavery pamphlet member of the continental congress and signer of the declaration of independence served as surgeon general of the continental army appointed treasurer of the u s mint in 1797 jonathan trumbull sr as governor of the colony of connecticut sided with the colonists the only governor of an english colony to do so provided much needed personnel and supplies for the continental army john witherspoon a presbyterian minister who moved to america to be the president of the college of new jersey later princeton university and became a social and religious leader served as a delegate to the continental congress and signed the declaration of independence skillbuilder choose one indivic to lead the colonie interpreting charts jual from the chart above and explain how his contributions helped s to independence and to develop the new democratic republic.
review unit 51 thomas paines pamphlet common sense helped to overcome many colonists doubts about separating from britain.
common t tb.
habitants a m e r i c a ob uib followiog sub 1 w 3 5 tfmmighd on a parent stitt.
of amuitu afctn of af pnftnt ability at astrin witk saw aiif.
ttiottto ibaduphu ti ijr m bell fa tw smbt.
the patriots declare independence despite the growing crisis many colonists were uncertain about the idea of independence.
following the olive branch petition public opinion began to shift.
the ideas behind the revolution this shift in public opinion occurred in large part because of the enlightenment ideas that had spread throughout the colonies in the 1760s and 1770s.
one of the key enlightenment thinkers was english philosopher john locke.
locke maintained that people have natural rights to life liberty and property.
furthermore he contended every society is based on a social contract an agreement in which the people consent to choose and obey a government so long as it safeguards their natural rights.
if the government violates that social contract by taking away or interfering with those rights people have the right to resist and even overthrow the government.
other influences on colonial leaders who favored independence were religious traditions that supported the cause of liberty.
one preacher of the time jonathan mayhew wrote that he had learned from the holy scriptures that wise brave and virtuous men were always friends of liberty.
some ministers even spoke from their pulpits in favor of liberty.
yet the ideas of limited government and civil rights had been basic to english law since even before a d 1215 when the english nobility had forced king john to sign magna carta or the great charter.
magna carta acknowledged certain specific rights of the barons against the king including some rights to due process a speedy trial and trial by a jury of one s peers.
its main significance though was to recognize that the sovereign did not have absolute authority but was subject like all men and women to the rule of law.
this principle was reaffirmed by the english bill of rights accepted by king william and queen mary in 1689 to the colonists however various acts of parliament between 1763 and 1775 had clearly violated their rights as englishmen.
in addition to due process a speedy trial and trial by a jury of one s peers those rights included taxation only by consent of property owners a presumption of innocence no standing army in peacetime without consent no quartering of troops in private homes freedom of travel in peacetime and the guarantee of regular legislative sessions.
thomas paines common sense just as important were the ideas of thomas paine.
in a widely read 50 page pamphlet titled common sense paine attacked king george and the monarchy.
paine a recent immigrant argued that responsibility for british tyranny lay with the royal brute of britain.
paine explained that his own revolt against the king had begun with lexington and concord.
a personal voice thomas paine no man was a warmer wisher for a reconciliation than myself before the fetal nineteenth of april 1775 but the moment the event of that day was made known i rejected the hardened sullen tempered pharaoh of england for ever the wretch that with the pretended title of father of his people can unfeelingly hear of their slaughter and composedly sleep with their blood upon his soul 5 common sense main idea making inferences why might the ideals of the enlightenment appeal to the colonists.
paine declared that independence would allow america to trade more freely.
he also stated that independence would give american colonists the chance to create a better society one free from tyranny with equal social and economic opportunities for all.
common sense sold nearly 500 000 copies in 1776 and was widely applauded.
in april 1776 george washington wrote i find common sense is working a powerful change in the minds of many men.
52 chapter 3 the growth of a young nation o effects of the indian removal act 1830s 1840s ye sequoyah or george guess devised the cherokee alphabet in 1821 to help preserve the culture of the cherokee nation against the growing hreat of american expansion.
4 many cherokee in the western territory like the woman pictured here taught their children at home in order to keep the cherokee language and customs alive.
wisconsin territory.
ottawa michigan o a a by 1840 about 16 000 cherokee had been forcibly moved 800 miles west on routes afterward called the trail of tears.
because of the suffering they endured from cold hunger and diseases such as tuberculosis smallpox and cholera one fourth died.
sauk and s fox 7 potawatoml delaware miami ohio shawnee and indiana seneca r illinois pennsylvania new jersey elaware hyland atlantic ocean nearly 15 000 creek many in manacles and chains were moved from alabama and georgia to the canadian river in indian territory in 1835 republic oftexas mexico kentucky missouri arkansas x chickasaw alabama georgia creek north carolina south carolina.
30 n by 1834 about 14 000 choctaw had relocated along the red river under the terms of the indian removal act of 1830 about 7 000 jemained in mississippi.
y louusiana 90w florida territory seminob cm of mexico 3 detail from trail of tears a parting by robert lindeux shi cherokee chickasaw blbl choctaw i i creek 1 seminole 4 1 1 other tribes 0 100 200 miles 0 100 200 kilometers c 8qw v geography skillbuilder 1 place where were most of the tribes moved.
2 movement what do you think were the long term effects of this removal on native americans.
review unit 125 in 1832 the issue of states rights was put to a test when congress raised tariffs again.
south carolinians declared the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 null void and no law.
then they threatened to secede or withdraw from the union if customs officials tried to collect duties.
in response an outraged jackson urged congress to pass the force bill to allow the federal government to use the military if state authorities resisted paying proper duties.
a bloody confrontation seemed likely until henry clay forged a compromise in 1833 clay proposed a tariff bill that would gradually lower duties over a ten year period.
the compromise also included passage of the force bill.
the tension between states rights and federal authority subsided temporarily.
jacksons bank war although jackson defended federal power in the nullification crisis he tried to decrease federal power when it came to the second bank of the united states.
jackson believed that the national bank was an agent of the wealthy and that its members cared nothing for the common people.
in 1832 jackson won reelection despite the efforts of his critics to make a campaign issue out of jackson s opposition to the bank.
after his reelection he tried to kill the bank by withdrawing all government deposits from the bank s branches and placing them in certain state banks called pet banks because of their loyalty to the democratic party.
as a result the bank of the united states became just another bank.
jackson won the bank war but his tactics and policies angered many people.
many accused him of acting more like a king than a president.
in 1832 his opponents formed a new political party which they later called the whig party.
main idea analyzing motives what were some of jacksons reasons for opposing the second bank of the united states.
analyzing political cartoons andrew the first andrew jackson once justified his tendency to place personal prerogative above constitutional law or national policy by stating that one man with courage makes a majority his critics replied with accusations of tyranny.
the new york american condemned jackson as a maniac who would trample the rights of our people under his feet the whig convention of 1834 declared your president has become your monarch both of those sentiments are reflected in this political cartoon that portrays jackson as a king.
ancient portraits of kings often depicted them grinding their conquered enemies beneath their heel.
beneath jacksons feet are the torn pages of the constitution.
in one hand jackson is holding a scepter a symbol of kingly power while in the other he is holding the veto a symbol of presidential power.
skillbuilder analyzing political cartoons 1 what does this cartoon suggest about jacksons attitude toward the constitution.
2 how does this cartoon particularly comment on jacksons use of presidential power.
i o pm o bokjsr to command.
i been consulted.
chapter 3 the growth of a young nation butterfield overland trail california trail mormon trail old spanish trail oregon trail sante fe trail 100 200 miles w 0 100 200 kilometers au i i wjj i geography skillbuilder 1 location approximately how long was the trail from st louis to el paso.
2 movement at a wagon train speed of about 15 miles a day about how long would that trip take.
main idea analyzing motives why did the mormons move farther west in their search for a new home.
main idea developing historical perspective why did many americans initially settle in texas.
declared this is the place.
soon they had coaxed settlements and farms from the bleak landscape by irrigating their fields.
salt lake city blossomed out of the land the mormons called deseret.
setting boundaries in the early 1840s great britain still claimed areas near the canadian border in parts of what are now maine and minnesota.
the webster ashburton treaty of 1842 settled these territorial disputes in the east and the midwest but the two nations merely continued the joint occupation of the oregon territory that they had first established in 1818 in 1846 the two countries agreed to extend the mainland boundary along the 49th parallel westward from the rocky mountains to puget sound establishing the current boundary between the united states and canada.
unfortunately establishing the boundary in the southwest with mexico would not be so peaceful.
texan independence after 300 years of spanish rule only a few thousand mexican settlers had migrated to what is now texas.
after 1820 that changed as texas became an important region in mexico and then an independent republic.
mexican independence and texan land grants the mission system used by spain declined after mexico had won independence from spain in 1821 after freeing the missions from spanish control the mexican government offered the surrounding lands to government officials and ranchers.
to make the land more secure and stable the mexican government also encouraged americans to settle in texas.
many americans rushed at the chance to buy inexpensive land in texas.
the population of anglo or english speaking settlers from the united states soon surpassed the population of tejanos or mexican settlers who lived in texas.
among the more prominent leaders of these american settlers was stephen e austin.
austin s father moses austin had received a land grant from spain to establish a colony between the brazos and colorado rivers but died before he was able to carry out his plans.
stephen obtained permission first from spain and then from mexico after it had won its independence to carry out his father s project.
in 1821 he established a colony where no drunkard no gambler no profane swearer and no idler would be allowed.
the main settlement of the colony was named san felipe de austin in stephen s honor.
by 1825 austin had issued 297 land grants to the group that later became known as texas s old three hundred.
each family received either 177 very inexpensive acres of farmland or 4 428 acres for stock grazing as well as a 10 year exemption from paying taxes.
i am convinced austin said that i could take on fifteen hundred families as easily as three hundred if permitted to do so.
by 1830 there were more than 20 000 americans in texas.
the texas revolution despite peaceful cooperation between anglos and tejanos differences over cultural issues intensified between anglos and the mexican government.
the overwhelmingly protestant anglo settlers spoke english instead of spanish.
furthermore many of the settlers were southerners who had brought slaves with them to texas.
mexico which had abolished slavery in 1829 insisted in vain that the texans free their slaves.
meanwhile mexican politics had become increasingly unstable.
austin had traveled to mexico city late in 1833 to present petitions to mexican president antonio lopez de santa anna for greater self government for texas.
while austin was on his way home santa anna had austin imprisoned for inciting revolution after santa anna suspended local powers in texas and other review unit 133 mexican states several rebellions broke out including one that would be known as the texas revolution.
when austin returned to texas in 1835 he was convinced that war was its only resource.
determined to force texas to obey mexican law santa anna marched his army toward san antonio.
at the same time austin and his followers issued a call for texans to arm themselves.
jgj the alamo the commander of the anglo troops lieutenant colonel william travis moved his men into the alamo a mission and fort in the center of san antonio.
travis believed that maintaining control of the alamo would prevent santa anna s movement farther north.
from february 23 1836 santa anna and his troops attacked the rebels holed up in the alamo.
on march 2 1836 as the battle for the alamo raged texans declared their independence from mexico and quickly ratified a constitution based on that of the united states.
the 13 day siege finally ended on march 6 1836 when mexican troops scaled the alamo s walls.
all 187 u s defenders and hundreds of mexicans died.
later in march santa anna s troops executed 300 rebels at goliad.
the alamo and the goliad executions whipped the texan rebels into a fury.
six weeks after the defeat at the alamo the rebels commander in chief sam houston and 900 main idea analyzing issues what disagreement led to the texas revolution.
war for texas independence 1835 1836 key players sam houston 1793 1863 sam houston ran away from home in tennessee at about age 15 and lived for three years with the cherokee.
he later fought in the u s army studied law was elected to congress and became governor of tennessee.
in his memoirs houston told of listening in vain for the signal guns indicating that the alamo still stood.
i listened with an acuteness of sense which no man can understand whose hearing has not been sharpened by the teachings of the dwellers of the forest.
the republic of texas chose houston to be its first president.
when texas became a state he was elected to the u s senate.
santa anna 1795 1876 antonio ldpez de santa anna reportedly once said if i were god i would wish to be more santa anna began his career fighting for spain in the war over mexican independence.
later he switched sides to fight for mexico.
declaring himself the napoleon of the west santa anna took control of the government after mexico won independence in 1821 he spent the next 35 years alternately serving as president leading troops into battle and living in exile.
santa anna served as president of mexico 11 times.
santa anna was a complex man with much charm.
he sacrificed his considerable wealth to return again and again to the battlefield and died in poverty almost forgotten.
main idea contrasting how would you contrast the northern and southern positions on the annexation of texas.
soldiers surprised a group of mexicans near the san jacinto river.
with shouts of remember the alamo.
the texans killed 630 of santa anna s soldiers in 18 minutes and captured santa anna himself.
the texans set santa anna free only after he signed the treaty of velasco which granted independence to texas.
in september 1836 sam houston was elected president of the new republic of texas.
texas moves toward the union most texans hoped that the united states would annex their republic but u s opinion divided along sectional lines.
southerners wanted texas in order to extend slavery which already had been established there.
northerners feared that the annexation of more slave territory would tip the uneasy balance in the senate in favor of slave states and prompt war with mexico.
the 1844 u s presidential campaign focused on westward expansion.
the winner james k polk a slaveholder firmly favored the annexation of texas.
the war with mexico in march 1845 angered by u s texas negotiation on annexation the mexican government recalled its ambassador from washington.
on december 29 1845 texas entered the union.
events moved quickly toward war.
history video independence for texas 71 polk urges war president polk believed that war with mexico would bring not only texas into the union but also new mexico and california.
hence the president supported texan claims in disputes with mexico over the texas mexico border.
while texas insisted that its southern border extended to the rio grande mexico maintained that texas s border stopped at the nueces river 100 150 miles northeast of the rio grande.
despite the fact that mexico had ceased formal diplomatic relations with the u s polk hoped to negotiate secretly the boundary dispute as well as the sale of california and new mexico.
he dispatched john slidell a congressman from louisiana to negotiate both matters.
the mexican government refused to receive slidell when polk heard this news he ordered u s troops into the territory between the rio grande and the nueces river that the united states claimed as its own.
review unit 135 geography skillbuilder 1 location from which locations in texas did u s forces come to buena vista.
2 region in which country were most of the battles fought.
history video the mexican american war 5t the war begins in 1845 john c fremont led an american military exploration party into california violating mexico s territorial rights.
in response mexican troops crossed the rio grande.
in a skirmish near matamoros mexican soldiers killed 11 u s soldiers.
polk immediately called for war and congress approved.
jf in 1846 polk ordered colonel stephen kearny and his troops to march from fort leavenworth kansas to santa fe new mexico.
they were met there by a new mexican contingent that included upper class mexicans who wanted to join the united states.
new mexico fell to the united states without a shot.
i main idea analyzing issues what border dispute affected the war with mexico.
the republic of california in california a group of american settlers seized the town of sonoma in june 1846 hoisting a flag that featured a grizzly bear the rebels proudly declared their independence from mexico and proclaimed the nation of the republic of california.
kearny arrived from new mexico and joined forces with fremont and an american naval expedition.
the mexican troops quickly gave way leaving u s forces in control of california.
america wins the war meanwhile american troops in mexico led by u s generals zachary taylor and winfield scott scored one military victory after another.
after about a year of fighting mexico conceded defeat.
on february 2 1848 the united states and mexico signed the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo.
mexico agreed to the rio grande as the border between texas and mexico and ceded the new mexico and california territories to the united states.
the united chapter 4 the union in peril the north takes charge main idea why it matters now terms names after four years of bloody fighting the union wore down the confederacy and won the war.
the union victory confirmed the authority of the federal government over the states.
gettysburg gettysburg address vicksburg william tecumseh sherman appomattox court house thirteenth amendment john wilkes booth oneamerican sstdry use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the consequences of the civil war.
mary chesnut was the daughter of a south carolina governor and the wife of a u s senator who resigned his office to serve in the confederate government.
during the war she recorded her observations and thoughts in a diary.
in 1864 chesnut went to hear benjamin h palmer a minister and professor speak about the war.
in her diary she described how palmer s pessimistic words filled her with foreboding about the future of the confederacy.
mary chesnut a personal voice mary chesnut september 21st i did not know before how utterly hopeless was our situation.
this man is so eloquent.
it was hard to listen and not give way.
despair was his word and martyrdom.
he offered us nothing more in this world than the mar tyrs crown.
he spoke of these times of our agony.
and then came the cry help us oh god.
vain is the help of man and so we came away shaken to the depths.
quoted in mary chesnuts civil war by september 1864 the northern armies had won several decisive battles.
mary chesnut must already have had some idea of the threat posed to her way of life however.
in 1863 she wrote that the south the only world we cared for had been literally kicked to pieces.
the tide turns the year 1863 actually had begun well for the south.
in december 1862 lee s army had defeated the union army of the potomac at fredericksburg virginia.
then in may the south defeated the north again at chancellorsville virginia.
review unit 175 the north s only consolation after chancellorsville came as the result of an accident.
as general stonewall jackson returned from a patrol on may 2 confederate guards accidentally shot him in the left arm.
a surgeon amputated his arm the following day.
when lee heard the news he exclaimed he has lost his left arm but i have lost my right.
the true loss was still to come jackson caught pneumonia and died on may 10 despite jackson s death lee decided to press his military advantage and invade the north.
he needed supplies and he thought that a major confederate victory on northern soil might tip the balance of public opinion in the union to the proslavery politicians.
accordingly he crossed the potomac into maryland and then pushed on into pennsylvania.
the battle of gettysburg near the sleepy town of gettysburg in southern pennsylvania the most decisive battle of the war was fought.
the battle of gettysburg began on july 1 when confederate soldiers led by a p hill encountered several brigades of union cavalry under the command of john buford an experienced officer from illinois.
buford ordered his men to take defensive positions on the hills and ridges surrounding the town.
when hill s troops marched toward the town from the west buford s men were waiting.
the shooting attracted more troops and both sides called for reinforcements.
by the end of the first day of fighting 90 000 union troops under the command of general george meade had taken the field against 75 000 confederates led by general lee.
main idea analyzing motives what did lee hope to gain by invading the north.
76 chapter to answer the following questions.
the divisive politics of slavery pages 156 165 1 what was the compromise of 1850.
2 who supported the republican party that was formed in 1854.
the civil war begins pages 168 174 3 what were the military strategies of the north and the south at the onset of the civil war.
4 what role did african americans and women play in the civil war.
the north takes charge pages 175 183 5 which northern tactic helped destroy morale in the south after the defeats at gettysburg and vicksburg.
6 what effect did the war have on the economies of the north and the south.
reconstruction and its effects pages 184 189 7 why did the radicals want to impeach andrew johnson.
8 in what ways did emancipated slaves exercise their freedom.
9 how did southern whites regain political power during reconstruction.
critical thinking using your notes in a chart like the one shown list the results and the significance of the national elections of 1856 1860 1866 1868 and 1876 election year results significance 1856 1860 1866 1868 1876 developing historical perspective how close did african americans come to gaining full civil rights during reconstruction.
explain your answer.
interpreting maps look at the maps on pages 170 171 what was the most important river in the unions tactic of splitting the confederacy in two.
what city became essential to this goal after the fall of new orleans.
use the information in the passage and your knowledge of u s history to answer questions 1 and 2.
in these days men have learned the art of sinning expertly and genteelly so as not to shock the eyes and senses of respectable society.
human property is high in the market and is therefore well fed well cleaned tended and looked after that it may come to sale sleek and strong and shining 99 harriet beecher stowe uncle toms cabin 1 in the mid 19th century harriet beecher stowe was a leader in the struggle for a abolition.
b womens rights.
c better working conditions.
d tax supported public schools.
2 uncle tom s cabin was written in response to f the raid on harpers ferry.
g the lincoln douglas debates.
h the fugitive slave act.
j the dred scott decision.
grants siege of vicksburg was part of the unions strategy to a destroy southern morale.
b c d blockade southern ports split the confederacy in two.
capture the confederate capital.
in the reconstruction act of 1867 congress set requirements for readmission of former confederate states into the union.
which of the following problems did the act address.
f southern states did not allow african americans to vote.
g southern states had little money to pay for public works projects.
h former slaves needed education.
j confederate bonds and money were worthless.
71 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history writesmart collaborative learnin recall the issues that you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter 5 main idea comparing how did the cowboys life differ from the myth about it.
during the long drive the cowboy was in the saddle from dawn to dusk.
he slept on the ground and bathed in rivers.
he risked death and loss every day of the drive especially at river crossings where cattle often hesitated and were swept away.
because lightning was a constant danger cowboys piled their spurs buckles and other metal objects at the edge of their camp to avoid attracting lightning bolts.
thunder or even a sneeze could cause a stampede.
3 legends of the west legendary figures like james butler wild bill hickok and martha jane burke calamity jane actually never dealt with cows.
hickok served as a scout and a spy during the civil war and later as a marshal in abilene kansas.
he was a violent man who was shot and killed while holding a pair of aces and a pair of eights in a poker game a hand still known as the dead man s hand.
calamity jane was an expert sharpshooter who dressed as a man.
she may have been a scout for colonel george custer.
the wild west show in the 1880s william f cody toured the country with a show called buffalo bills wild west.
the show featured trick riding and roping exhibitions.
it thrilled audiences with mock battles between cowboys and indians.
wild bill hickok annie oakley calamity jane shown here and even sitting bull toured in wild west shows.
their performances helped make western life a part of american mythology.
the end of the open range almost as quickly as cattle herds multiplied and ranching became big business the cattle frontier met its end.
overgrazing of the land extended bad weather and the invention of barbed wire were largely responsible.
between 1883 and 1887 alternating patterns of dry summers and harsh winters wiped out whole herds.
most ranchers then turned to smaller herds of high grade stock that would yield more meat per animal.
ranchers fenced the land with barbed wire invented by illinois farmer joseph f glidden.
it was cheap and easy to use and helped to turn the open plains into a series of fenced in ranches.
the era of the wide open west was over.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
great plains george a custer battle of wounded knee treaty of fort laramie assimilation longhorn sitting bull dawes act chisholm trail long drive main idea using your notes fill in supporting details about the culture of the plains indians.
culture of the plains indians buffalo and horse family life 1 beliefs critical thinking making inferences why do you think the assimilation policy failed.
in small groups discuss the americanization movement.
think about the experience of native americans such as zitkala sa the attitudes of many white leaders toward native americans the merits of owning property the importance of cultural heritage analyzing causes what economic opportunities drew large numbers of people to the great plains beginning in the mid 1800s.
drawing conclusions identify the reasons for the rise and the decline of the cattle industry.
changes on the western frontier 211 geography spotlight the klondike gold rush gold.
shouted the headline of the seattle post intelligencer on july 17 1897 a huge gold strike had been made along the klondike river in canada s remote yukon territory near the alaska border.
soon gold was discovered on the alaska side of the border as well.
as word reached seattle and spread the lure of gold inspired thousands of people to rush to the west.
over the next year about 100 000 americans stampeded to the klondike in search of fortune.
the region s physical geography and its human geographic factors such as communication and transportation networks human environment interaction and economic development had a significant impact on the klondike gold rush.
ru i s i 0.
at v 1 klondike goldfields other goldfields principal routes of the klondike gold rush alaska u 0 twriiei bering sea n a 1 di k pacific ocfan 500 miles 1 000 kilometers 170w i 160w i 150w 140w 130w communication and transportation once gold was discovered it took time for word to spread.
in july 1897 the steamer portland docked in seattle with a group of successful klondike gold miners and their riches aboard.
newspapers and telegraphs carried word of their success around the world.
about 10 000 seattle residents headed for alaska to try their luck.
people from elsewhere began to flock to seattle hoping to make it north to the goldfields before winter.
from seattle there were two main routes one mostly by water through the bering sea to the yukon river and one primarily over land involving a boat to skagwav alaska followed by a trek along the dyea trail over chilkoot pass or the white pass trail over white pass.
unfortunately the water route was expensive so many mfoers were forced to use the grueling overland routes.
the trip was long cold and difficult.
for examse at a certain point the dyea trail became too steep for pack animals and miners had to lug their supplies up a steep snow staircase often making several trips.
conditions were arsh and starvation malnutrition and exposure to cold were serious problems manv gave up and several died.
iviany hapter 5 jji to k j v 5 f f f f tf f f f f f 100 000 people set out for the klondike.
ffff 40 000 people make it.
sr sr 20 000 stake claims.
f 4 000 prospectors find gold.
200 become rich.
human environment interaction miners efforts to reach the klondike goldfields were further complicated by the supplies they had to bring with them.
canadian officials required that miners bring enough provisions for a year or nearly a ton of goods.
prospectors brought groceries clothing hardware tents and sleds.
prospectors made slow progress on their journeys north having to move a years worth of supplies over rough terrain.
the image at left shows men with their supplies preparing to tackle chilkoot pass around 1898 those who reached the goldfields still had to deal with the issue of how to find and extract gold.
some gold could be found in creeks but most was in the soil around the creeks.
in the winter miners used fires to heat the frozen ground which allowed them to haul out mounds of frozen gravel.
then during the summer they would shovel the gravel into a sluice a trough through which water flowed and the water would carry off lightweight materials leaving the gold to sink to the bottom.
the mother and son prospecting team shown above are using a sluice in fairbanks alaska.
economic development and population shifts unfortunately the odds of striking it rich were not good as the graphic above shows.
most of the prospectors who reached the klondike came away disappointed.
the best gold bearing creeks had already been claimed and the reports of gold for the taking had been greatly exaggerated.
the greatest economic impact was on the towns in the region.
for instance as many as three fourths of the prospectors passed through seattle and the money from the supplies they purchased there boosted the economy considerably.
cities also developed near the goldfields.
about 30 000 people settled in dawson city in the yukon territory.
the population of vancouver doubled and in edmonton it tripled.
changes on the western frontier 213 teks 12a 15a 27b settling on the great plains main idea why it matters now terms names settlers on the great plains transformed the land despite great hardships.
the great plains region remains the breadbasket of the united states.
homestead act morrill act exoduster bonanza farm soddy american sstory taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes about settling the great plains.
when esther clark hill was a girl on the kansas prairie in the 1800s her father often left the family to go on hunting or trading expeditions.
his trips left esther s mother aliena clark alone on the farm.
esther remembered her mother holding on to the reins of a runaway mule team her black hair tumbling out of its pins and over her shoulders her face set and white while one small girl clung with chattering teeth to the sides of the rocking wagon.
the men in the settlement spoke admiringly about leny s nerve and esther thought that daily life presented a challenge even greater than driving a runaway team.
a personal voice esther clark hill i think as much courage as it took to hang onto the reins that day it took more to live twenty four hours at a time month in and out on the lonely and lovely prairie without giving up to the loneliness.
quoted in pioneer women as the railroads penetrated the frontier and the days of the free ranging cowboy ended hundreds of thousands of families migrated west lured by vast tracts of cheap fertile land.
in their effort to establish a new life they endured extreme hardships and loneliness.
plains settlers like this woman depicted in harvey dunns painting pioneer woman had to be strong and self reliant.
settlers move westward to farm it took over 250 years from the first settlement at jamestown until 1870 to turn 400 million acres of forests and prairies into flourishing farms.
settling the second 400 million acres took only 30 years from 1870 to 1900 human geographic factors such as federal land policy and the completion of transcontinental railroad lines made this rapid settlement possible.
railroads open the west from 1850 to 1871 the federal government made huge land grants to the railroads 170 million acres worth half a billion 4 chapter 6 texas test practice j use the quotation below and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1.
no man however benevolent liberal and wise can use a large fortune so that it will do half as much good in the world as it would if it were divided into moderate sums and in the hands of workmen who had earned it by industry and frugality.
b hayes from the diary and letters of rutherford birchard hayes 1 which of the following people could best be described by rutherford b hayess words benevolent liberal and a large fortune.
b thomas edison b eugene v debs c charles darwin d andrew carnegie 2 the american federation of labor afl differed from the knights of labor in that the knights of labor focused on f collective bargaining and aggressive use of strikes.
g organizing only unskilled workers.
h arbitration and use of strikes as a last resort.
j winning a shorter workweek.
3 how did the railroads both benefit from and contribute to the industrialization of the united states.
a the railroads needed government protection and their development helped government grow.
b the railroads used new inventions and brought people to see the inventions.
c the railroads used steel and coal and delivered both to new markets.
d the railroads needed passengers and passengers needed to get to new industries.
in the 19th century government attempts to regulate industry in the united states included the interstate commerce act 1887 and the sherman antitrust act 1890.
what posed the biggest obstacle to enforcement of these laws.
f the business tactics of industrialists g the use of vertical integration h the rulings of the supreme court j the theory of social darwinism i 71 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history j writesmart collaborative learni recall the issues that you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter 7 wrv1 l w.
ttfc i ik ii vi tv7 v j b h 4 t history ellis island arrival 7i video hester st mynotebook.
interact y the year is 1880 new york city s swelling population has created a housing crisis.
immigrant families crowd into apartments that lack light ventilation and sanitary facilities.
children have nowhere to play except in the streets and are often kept out of school to work and help support their families.
you are a reformer who wishes to help immigrants improve their lives.
as you read the chapter 7 background from 1815 to 1848 a wave of revolutions mostly sparked by a desire for constitutional governments shook europe.
in 1830 for example the polish people rose up against their russian rulers.
europeans between 1870 and 1920 approximately 20 million europeans arrived in the united states.
before 1890 most immigrants came from countries in western and northern europe.
beginning in the 1890s however increasing numbers came from southern and eastern europe.
in 1907 alone about a million people arrived from italy austria hungary and russia.
why did so many leave their homelands.
many of these new immigrants left to escape religious persecution.
whole villages of jews were driven out of russia by pogroms organized attacks often encouraged by local authorities.
other europeans left because of rising population.
between 1800 and 1900 the population in europe doubled to nearly 400 million resulting in a scarcity of land for farming.
farmers competed with laborers for too few industrial jobs.
in the united states jobs were supposedly plentiful.
in addition a spirit of reform and revolt had spread across europe in the 19th century.
influenced by political movements at home many young european men and women sought independent lives in america.
chinese and japanese while waves of europeans arrived on the shores of the east coast chinese immigrants came to the west coast in smaller numbers.
between 1851 and 1883 about 300 000 chinese arrived.
many came to seek their fortunes after the discovery of gold in 1848 sparked the california gold rush.
chinese immigrants helped build the nation s railroads including the first transcontinental line.
when the railroads were completed they turned to farming mining and domestic service.
some like fong see started businesses.
however chinese immigration was sharply limited by a congressional act in 1882 in 1884 the japanese government allowed hawaiian planters to recruit japanese workers and a japanese emigration boom began.
the united states annexation of hawaii in 1898 resulted in increased japanese immigration to the west coast.
immigration continued to increase as word of comparatively high american wages spread.
the wave peaked in 1907 when 30 000 left japan for the united states.
by 1920 more than 200 000 japanese lived on the west coast.
i history u s immigration patterns as of 1900 video italians in america old world new land t russia 4 poland 3 5 mexico china japan l geography skillbuilder 1 movement where did the greatest number of italian immigrants settle.
2 movement from which country did the smallest percentage of immigrants come.
settlement figures in thousands.
new york in 3 massachusetts wisconsin cm 1 5 total immigrants and urbanization 255 n the west indies and mexico between 1880 and 1920 about 260 000 immigrants arrived in the eastern and southeastern united states from t e est indies.
they came from jamaica cuba puerto rico and other islands.
many west indians left their homelands because jobs were scarce and the industrial boom in the united states seemed to promise work for everyone.
mexicans too immigrated to the united states to find work as well as to flee political turmoil.
the 1902 national reclamation act which encouraged the irrigation of arid land created new farmland in western states and drew mexican farm workers northward.
after 1910 political and social upheavals in mexico prompted even more immigration.
about 700 000 people 7 percent of the population of mexico at the time came to the u s over the next 20 years.
life in the new land main idea analyzing causes what reasons did people from other parts of the world have for immigrating to the united states.
no matter what part of the globe immigrants came from they faced many adjust ments to an alien and often unfriendly culture.
a difficult journey by the 1870s almost all immigrants traveled by steamship.
the trip across the atlantic ocean from europe took approximately one week while the pacific crossing from asia took nearly three weeks.
many immigrants traveled in steerage the cheapest accommodations in a ship s cargo holds.
rarely allowed on deck immigrants were crowded together in the gloom unable to exercise or catch a breath of fresh air.
they often had to sleep in louse infested bunks and share toilets with many other passengers.
under these conditions disease spread quickly and some immigrants died before they reached their destination.
for those who survived the first glimpse of america could be breathtaking.
a personal voice rosa cavalleri european governments used passports to control the number of professionals and young men of military age who left the country.
we were so near it seemed too much to believe.
everyone stood silent like in prayer.
then we were entering the harbor.
the land came so near we could almost reach out and touch it.
everyone was holding their breath.
me too some boats had bands playing on their decks and all of them were tooting their horns to us and leaving white trails in the water behind them.
quoted in rosa the life of an italian immigrant ellis island after initial moments of excitement the immigrants faced the anxiety of not knowing whether they would be admitted to the united states.
they had to pass inspection at immigration stations such as the one at castle garden in new york which was later moved to ellis island in new york harbor.
about 20 percent of the immigrants at ellis island were detained for a day or more before being inspected.
however only about 2 percent of those were denied entry.
the processing of immigrants on ellis island was an ordeal that might take five hours or more.
first they had to pass a physical examination by a doctor.
anyone with a serious health problem or a contagious disease such as tuberculosis was promptly sent home.
those who passed the medical exam then reported to a government inspector.
the inspector checked documents and questioned immigrants to.
57 rinnovasioni modlccaelonl o udimaricnl vocabulary tuberculosis a bacterial infection characterized by fever and coughing that spreads easily many immigrants like these arriving at ellis island were subjected to tests such as the one below.
to prove their mental competence they had to identify the four faces looking left in 14 seconds.
can you do it.
fig 4 moon section of v c lest.
the subject should be able to point out the four moons that are looking to the left in fourteen seconds if lie is directed to begin at the upper right band corner anil proceed systematically along each line left to right.
vocabulary felony any one of the most serious crimes under the law including murder rape and burglary determine whether they met the legal requirements for entering the united states.
the requirements included proving they had never been convicted of a felony demonstrating that they were able to work and showing that they had some money at least 25 after 1909.
one irish immigrant mary mullins gordon describes the overwhelming surroundings that newcomers encountered at ellis island.
5 the key section of the v.
the time element has not been worked out for this section but it is hardly the less laluable.
a is shown the subject and he is asked to find the nearest like it in fig.
i un is shown and he is asked to find it in fig.
3 c is shown and he is asked to find it in jftg.
4 n is shown and he is asked to find it in fig.
a an and he is asked to find it in fig.
4 i shown r main idea identifying problems ft what difficulties did immigrants face in gaining admission to the united states.
a personal voice mary mullins gordon when i saw ellis island its a great big place we all had to gather your bags and the place was crowded with people and talking and crying.
and we passed through some of the halls there big open spaces there and there was bars and there was people behind these bars and they were talking different languages and i was scared to death.
i thought i was in jail 57 ellis island oral history project from 1892 to 1924 ellis island was the chief immigration station in the united states.
an estimated 17 million immigrants passed through its noisy bustling facilities.
angel island while european immigrants arriving on the east coast passed through ellis island asians primarily chinese arriving on the west coast gained admission at angel island in san francisco bay.
between 1910 and 1940 about 50 000 chinese immigrants entered the united states through angel island.
processing at angel island stood in contrast to the procedure at ellis island.
immigrants endured harsh questioning and a long detention in filthy ramshackle buildings while they waited to find out whether they would be admitted or rejected.
g cooperation for survival once admitted to the country immigrants faced the challenges of finding a place to live getting a job and getting along in daily life while trying to understand an unfamiliar language and culture.
many immigrants sought out people who shared their cultural values practiced their religion immigrants and urbanization history video angel island ellis island of the west 7.
257 and spoke their native language.
the ethnic communities were e ra s or immigrants.
people pooled their money to build churches or synagogues.
ey formed social clubs and aid societies.
they founded orphanages and homes or the elderly and established cemeteries.
they even published newspapers in their own languages.
committed to their own cultures but also trying hard to grow into their new identities many immigrants came to think of themselves as hyphenated americans.
as hard as they tried to fit in these new polish and italian and chinese americans felt increasing friction as they rubbed shoulders with people born and raised in the united states.
native born people often disliked the immigrants unfamiliar customs and languages and viewed them as a threat to the american way of life.
immigration restrictions vocabulary synagogue place of meeting for worship and religious instruction in the jewish faith main idea summarizing how did immigrants deal with challenges they faced.
many native born americans thought of their country as a melting pot a mixture of people of different cultures and races who blended together by abandoning their native languages and customs.
many new immigrants however did not wish to give up their cultural identities.
as immigration increased strong antiimmigrant feelings emerged.
the rise of nativism one response to the growth in immigration was nativism or overt favoritism toward native born americans.
nativism gave rise to anti immigrant groups and led to a demand for immigration restrictions.
many nativists believed that anglo saxons the germanic ancestors of the english were superior to other ethnic groups.
these nativists did not object to immigrants from the right countries.
prescott f hall a founder in 1894 of the immigration restriction league identified desirable immigrants as british german and scandinavian stock historically free energetic progressive.
nativists thought that problems were caused by immigrants from the wrong countries slav latin and asiatic races historically down trodden.
and stagnant.
nativists sometimes objected more to immigrants religious beliefs than to their ethnic backgrounds.
many native born americans were protestants and thought that roman catholic and jewish immigrants would undermine the democratic institutions established by the country s protestant founders.
the american protective association a nativist group founded in 1887 launched vicious anti catholic attacks and many colleges businesses and social clubs refused to admit jews.
in 1897 congress influenced by the immigration restriction league passed a bill requiring a literacy test for immigrants.
those who could not read 40 words in english or their native language would be refused entry.
although president cleveland vetoed the bill it was a powerful statement of public sentiment.
in 1917 a similar bill would be passed into law in spite of president woodrow wilson s veto.
anti asian sentiment nativism also found a foothold in the labor movement particularly in the west where native born workers feared that jobs would go to chinese vocabulary progressive favoring advancement toward better conditions or new ideas immigrants who would accept lower wages.
the depression of 1873 intensified anti chinese senti ment in california.
work was scarce and labor groups exerted political pressure on the govern ment to restrict asian immigration.
the founder of the workingmen s party denis kearney headed the anti chinese movement in california.
he made hundreds of speeches throughout the state each ending with the message the chinese must go.
in 1882 congress slammed the door on chinese immigration for ten years by passing the chinese exclusion act.
this act banned entry to all chinese except students teachers merchants tourists and government officials.
in 1892 congress extended the law for another ten years.
in 1902 chinese immigration was restricted indefinitely the law was not repealed until 1943 the gentlemen s agreement the fears that had led to anti chinese agitation were extended to japanese and other asian people in the early 1900s.
in 1906 the local board of education in san francisco segregated japanese children by putting them in separate schools.
when japan raised an angry protest at this treatment of its emigrants president theodore roosevelt worked out a deal.
under the gentlemen s agreement of 1907 1908 japan s government agreed to limit emigration of unskilled workers to the united states in exchange for the repeal of the san francisco segregation order.
although doorways for immigrants had been all but closed to asians on the west coast cities in the east and the midwest teemed with european immigrants and with urban opportunities and challenges.
fear and resentment of chinese immigrants sometimes resulted in mob attacks like the one shown here.
assessment 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
ellis island melting pot chinese exclusion act angel island nativism gentlemens agreement main idea using your notes create a diagram such as the one below.
list two or more causes of each effect.
causes effects 1 immigrants 2 leave their 3 home countries.
1 immigrants face 2 hardships in the 3 united states.
1 some nativists 2 want to restrict 3 immigration.
critical thinking identifying problems which group of immigrants do you think faced the greatest challenges in the united states.
analyzing effects what were the effects of the massive influx of immigrants to the u s in the late 1800s.
5 summarizing describe how many immigrants felt about seeking new lives in the united states.
6 evaluating what arguments can you make against nativism and anti immigrant feeling.
think about the personal qualities of immigrants the reasons for anti immigrant feeling the contributions of immigrants to the united states immigrants and urbanization 259 tracing themes diversity and the national identity before the first europeans arrived a variety of cultural groups coastal fishing societies desert farmers plains and woodland hunters inhabited north america.
with the arrival of europeans and africans the cultural mix grew more complex.
although this diversity has often produced tension it has also been beneficial.
as different groups learned from one another about agriculture technology and social customs american culture became a rich blend of cultures from around the world.
spanish north america spanish missionaries in the southwest tried to impose their culture upon native americans.
however many native americans retained aspects of their original cultures even as they took on spanish ways.
for example today many pueblo indians of new mexico perform ancient ceremonies such as the corn dance in addition to celebrating the feast days of catholic saints.
later the first cowboys descendants of the spanish would introduce to white americans cattle ranching techniques developed in mexico.
the declaration of independence the signers of the declaration of independence were descendants of immigrants.
the founders ancestors had come to north america in search of economic opportunity and freedom of religious expression.
when the second continental congress declared a united states in 1776 they acknowledged that the country would contain diverse regions and interests.
thus the founders placed on the presidential seal the motto e pluribus unum out of many one the emancipation proclamation at the midpoint of the civil war president abraham lincoln issued the emancipation proclamation freeing all slaves in areas of the union that were in rebellion.
although the proclamation could not be enforced immediately it was a strong statement of opposition to slavery and it paved the way for african americans citizenship.
iso chapter 7 jp texas test practice use the quotation and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1.
the chinese.
ask for fair treatment.
since the first restriction law was passed the united states has received as immigrants more than two million austro hungarians two million italians and a million and a half russians and finns.
each of these totals is from five to seven times the whole amount of chinese immigration of all classes during thirty years of free immigration.
the question is not now of the admission of laborers but whether other chinese who are entitled to come under both law and treaty shall receive the same courtesies as people of other nations and shall be relieved from many harassing regulations.
they must no longer be detained photographed and examined as if they were suspected of crime.
ng poon chew from the treatment of the exempt classes of chinese in the united states 1 the information in the passage supports which one of the following points of view.
a european immigration should be restricted.
b chinese laborers should be allowed to immigrate.
c all immigrants are treated like criminals.
d chinese immigrants and european immigrants should be treated the same.
use the cartoon and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 2.
2 the cartoon suggests that boss tweed the large figure at left f was solely responsible for stealing the peoples money.
g did not steal the peoples money.
h had help from his associates in stealing the peoples money.
j was loyal to his associates.
test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history vwritesmart think about the issues you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter 8 i i white colored one result of jim crow laws was separate drinking fountains for whites and african americans.
why it mattered in the decades following the civil war 1861 1865 southern state legislatures passed laws that aimed to limit civil rights for african americans.
the black codes of the 1860s and later jim crow laws were intended to deprive african americans of their newly won political and social rights granted during reconstruction.
plessy was one of several supreme court cases brought by african americans to protect their rights against segregation.
in these cases the court regularly ignored the fourteenth amendment and upheld state laws that denied blacks their rights.
plessy was the most important of these cases because the court used it to establish the separate but equal doctrine.
as a result city and state governments across the south and in some other states maintained their segregation laws for more than half of the 20th century.
these laws limited african americans access to most public facilities including restaurants schools and hospitals.
without exception the facilities reserved for whites were superior to those reserved for nonwhites.
signs reading colored only and whites only served as constant reminders that facilities in segregated societies were separate but not equal.
historical impact it took many decades to abolish legal segregation.
during the first half of the 20th century the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp led the legal fight to overturn plessy.
although they won a few cases over the years it was not until 1954 in brown v board of education that the court overturned any part of plessy.
in that case the supreme court said that separate but equal was unconstitutional in public education but it did not completely overturn the separate but equal doctrine.
in later years the court did overturn the separate but equal doctrine and it used the brown decision to do so.
for example in 1955 rosa parks was convicted for violating a montgomery alabama law for segregated seating on buses.
a federal court overturned the conviction finding such segregation unconstitutional.
the case was appealed to the supreme court which upheld without comment the lower court s decision.
in doing so in this and similar cases the court signaled that the reasoning behind plessy no longer applied.
as secretary of the montgomery chapter 8 amusement parks to meet the recreational needs of city dwellers chicago new york city and other cities began setting aside precious green space for outdoor enjoyment.
many cities built small playgrounds and playing fields throughout their neighborhoods for their citizens enjoyment.
some amusement parks were constructed on the outskirts of cities.
often built by trolley car companies that sought more passengers these parks boasted picnic grounds and a variety of rides.
the roller coaster drew daredevil customers to coney island in 1884 and the first ferris wheel drew enthusiastic crowds to the world s columbian exposition in chicago in 1893 clearly many americans were ready for new and innovative forms of entertainment and a whole panorama of recreational activities soon became available.
eight hours for work eight hours for rest eight hours for what we will the carpenters union worcester massachusetts main idea making inferences how did the mass production of bicycles change womens lives.
bicycling and tennis with their huge front wheels and solid rubber tires the first american bicycles challenged their riders.
because a bump might toss the cyclist over the handlebars bicycling began as a male only sport.
however the 1885 manufacture of the first commercially successful safety bicycle with its smaller wheels and air filled tires made the activity more popular.
and the victor safety bicycle with a dropped frame and no crossbar held special appeal to women.
abandoning their tight corsets women bicyclists donned shirtwaists tailored blouses and split skirts in order to cycle more comfortably.
this attire soon became popular for daily wear.
the bicycle also freed women from the scrutiny of the ever present chaperone.
the suffragist susan b anthony declared i think bicycling has done more to emancipate women than anything else in the world.
it gives women a feeling of freedom and self reliance.
fifty thousand men and women had taken to cycles by 1888 two years later 312 american firms turned out 10 million bikes in one year.
41 americans took up the sport of tennis as enthusiastically as they had taken up cycling.
the modern version of this sport originated in north wales in 1873 a year later the united states saw its first tennis match.
the socialite florence harriman recalled that in the 1880s her father returned from england with one of new york s first tennis sets.
at first neighbors thought the elder harriman had installed the nets to catch birds.
hungry or thirsty after tennis or cycling.
turn of the century enthusiasts turned to new snacks with recognizable brand names.
they could munch on a hershey chocolate bar first sold in 1900 and wash down the chocolate with a coca cola.
an atlanta pharmacist originally formulated the drink as a cure for headaches in 1886 the ingredients included extracts from peruvian coca leaves as well as african cola nuts.
bicycling and other new sports became fads in the late 1800s.
the negro leagues were first formed in 1920 spectator sports americans not only participated in new sports but became avid fans of spectator sports especially boxing and baseball.
though these two sports had begun as popular informal activities by the turn of the 20th century they had become profitable businesses.
fans who couldn t attend an important boxing match jammed barbershops and hotel lobbies to listen to telegraphed transmissions of the contest s highlights.
baseball new rules transformed baseball into a professional sport.
in 1845 alexander j cartwright an amateur player organized a club in new york city and set down regulations that used aspects of an english sport called rounders.
five years later 50 baseball clubs had sprung up in the united states and new york alone boasted 12 clubs in the mid 1860s.
in 1869 a professional team named the cincinnati red stockings toured the country.
other clubs soon took to the road which led to the formation of the national league in 1876 and the american league in 1900 in the first world series held in 1903 the boston pilgrims beat the pittsburgh pirates.
african american baseball players who were excluded from both leagues because of racial discrimination formed their own clubs and two leagues the negro national league and the negro american league.
the novelist mark twain called baseball the very symbol.
and visible expression of the drive and push and rush and struggle of the raging tearing booming nineteenth century.
by the 1890s baseball had a published game schedule official rules and a standard sized diamond.
the spread of mass culture as increasing numbers of americans attended school and learned to read the cultural vistas of ordinary americans expanded.
art galleries libraries books and museums brought new cultural opportunities to more people.
other advances fostered mass entertainment.
new media technology led to the release of hundreds of motion pictures.
mass production printing techniques gave birth to thousands of books magazines and newspapers.
mass circulation newspapers looking for ways to captivate readers attention american newspapers began using sensational headlines.
for example to introduce its story about the horrors of the johnstown pennsylvania flood of 1889 in which more than 2 000 people died one newspaper used the headline the valley of death.
joseph pulitzer a hungarian immigrant who had bought the new york world in 1883 pioneered popular innovations such as a large sunday edition main idea drawing conclusions why do you think sports were so popular among americans at the turn of the century.
294 chapter assessment terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its connection to late 19th century american life.
1 louis sullivan 2 orville and wilbur wright 3 booker t washington w e b du bois 5 niagara movement 6 ida b wells 7 jim crow laws 8 plessyv.
ferguson 9 debt peonage 10 rural free delivery main ideas use your notes and the information in the chapter 11 the first world war 1914 1920 fein.
i h 1 mfh unit project in this unit you will read about important changes in the nation and the world that helped the united states to assume a major global role.
use your knowledge of historical eras the units content and the major characteristics of history to identify the eras in this unit.
then create a webpage that describes the defining characteristics of each era.
the statue of liberty by francis hopkinson smith a tsu.
v a ws s 1 y a.
7 b section 1 the origins of progressivism main idea political economic and social change in late 19th century america led to broad progressive reforms.
section 2 women in public life main idea as a result of social and economic change many women entered public life as workers and reformers.
section 3 teddy roosevelt s square deal main idea as president theodore roosevelt worked to give citizens a square deal through progressive reforms.
section 4 progressivism under taft main idea taft s ambivalent approach to progressive reform led to a split in the republican party and the loss of the presidency to the democrats.
section 5 wilson s new freedom strong reform agenda as a progressive leader.
a 1916 suffrage parade.
usa world 18961 william mckinley is elected president.
william mckinley.
is reelected.
119001 1901 mckinley is assassinated theodore roosevelt becomes president.
1904j theodore roosevelt is elected president 1900 1889 eiffel tower 1 d ofto 1 i opens for visitors.
1898 marie 5 1899 boer war curie discovers in south africa radium.
1901 u t commonwealth of australia is created.
304 chapter 9 ss william h taft is elected president.
e b du bois helps found the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp.
mynotefocwk interact with history woodrow wilson is reelected.
11919 eighteenth amendment outlaws alcoholic beverages.
it is the dawn of the 20th century and the reform movement is growing.
moral reformers are trying to ban alcoholic beverages.
political reformers work toward fair government and business practices.
women fight for equal wages and the right to vote.
throughout society social and economic issues take center stage.
as you read the chapter 9 main idea analyzing effects what social and economic effects did higher education have on women.
college with a faculty of 8 men and 22 women accepted its first students in 1865 smith and wellesley colleges followed in 1875 though columbia brown and harvard colleges refused to admit women each university established a separate college for women.
although women were still expected to fulfill traditional domestic roles women s colleges sought to grant women an excellent education.
in her will smith college s founder sophia smith made her goals clear.
a personal voice sophia smith it is my desire to furnish for my own sex means and facilities for education equal to those which are afforded now in our college to young men.
it is not my design to render my sex any the less feminine but to develop as fully as may be the powers of womanhood furnish women with means of usefulness happiness honor now withheld from them.
quoted in alma mater by the late 19th century marriage was no longer a woman s only alternative.
many women entered the work force or sought higher education.
in fact almost half of college educated women in the late 19th century never married retaining their own independence.
many of these educated women began to apply their skills to needed social reforms.
women and reform uneducated laborers started efforts to reform workplace health and safety.
the participation of educated women often strengthened existing reform groups and provided leadership for new ones.
because women were not allowed to vote or run for office women reformers strove to improve conditions at work and home.
their social housekeeping targeted workplace reform housing reform educational improvement and food and drug laws.
in 1896 african american women founded the national association of colored women or nacw by merging two earlier organizations.
josephine ruffin identified the mission of the african american women s club movement as the moral education of the race with which we are identified.
the nacw managed nurseries reading rooms and kindergartens.
after the seneca falls convention of 1848 women split over the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments which granted equal rights including the right to vote to african american men but excluded women.
susan b anthony a leading proponent of woman suffrage the right to vote said i would sooner cut off my right hand than ask the ballot for the black man and not for women.
in 1869 anthony and elizabeth cady stanton had founded the national women suffrage association nwsa which united with another group in 1890 to suffragists recruit supporters for a march.
become the national american woman suffrage association or nawsa.
other prominent leaders included lucy stone and julia ward howe the author of the battle hymn of the republic.
woman suffrage faced constant opposition.
the liquor industry feared that women would vote in support of prohibition while the textile industry worried that women would vote for restrictions on child labor.
many men simply feared the changing role of women in society.
a three part strategy for suffrage suffragist leaders tried three approaches to achieve their objective.
first they tried to convince state legislatures to grant women the right to vote.
they achieved a victory in the territory of wyoming in 1869 and by the 1890s utah colorado and idaho had also granted voting rights to women.
after 1896 efforts in other states failed.
second women pursued court cases to test the fourteenth amendment which declared that states denying their male citizens the right to vote would lose congressional representation.
weren t women citizens too.
in 1871 and 1872 susan b anthony and other women tested that question by attempting to vote at least 150 times in ten states and the district of columbia.
the supreme court ruled in 1875 that women were indeed citizens but then denied that citizenship automatically conferred the right to vote.
third women pushed for a national constitutional amendment to grant women the vote.
stanton succeeded in having the amendment introduced in california but it was killed later.
for the next 41 years women lobbied to have it reintroduced only to see it continually voted down.
before the turn of the century the campaign for suffrage achieved only modest success.
later however women s reform efforts paid off in improvements in the treatment of workers and in safer food and drug products all of which president theodore roosevelt supported along with his own plans for reforming business labor and the environment.
playft susan b anthony 1820 1906 born to a strict quaker family susan b anthony was not allowed to enjoy typical childhood entertainment such as music games and toys.
her father insisted on self discipline education and a strong belief system for all of his eight children.
at an early age anthony developed a positive view of womanhood from a teacher named mary perkins who educated the children in their home.
after voting illegally in the presidential election of 1872 anthony was fined 100 at her trial.
not a penny shall go to this unjust claim she defiantly declared.
she never paid the fine.
main idea making inferences why did suffragist leaders employ a three part strategy for gaining the right to vote.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
nacw susan b anthony suffrage nawsa main idea using your notes in a chart like the one below fill in details about working women in the late 1800s.
women workers late 1800s z i 1 farm women domestic workers factory workers white collar workers what generalizations can you make about women workers at this time.
critical thinking 3 synthesizing what women and movements during the progressive era helped dispel the stereotype that women were submissive and nonpolitical.
explaining impact what actions did women take to expand their political rights in american society.
analyzing issues identify the social contributions of women to american society during the progressive era.
explain how you might use these to recruit other women to support reform movements.
think about the problems that each movement was trying to remedy how women benefited from each cause 316 chapter 9 government workers inspect meat as it moves through the packinghouse.
a typical late 19th century product advertisement.
pure food and drug act before any federal regulations were established for advertising food and drugs manufacturers had claimed that their products accomplished everything from curing cancer to growing hair.
in addition popular children s medicines often contained opium cocaine or alcohol.
in response to concerns about these practices as well as the harmful preservatives that manufacturers added to food congress passed the pure food and drug act in 1906 which halted the sale of contaminated foods and medicines and called for truth in labeling.
although this act did not ban harmful products outright its requirement of truthful labels reflected the progressive belief that given accurate information people would act wisely.
along with the meat inspection act the pure food and drug act reflects the continuation of the changing relationship between the federal government and private businesses during this period.
this act marks the first general pure food and drug law at the federal level.
the government s bureau of chemistry which later became the food and drug administration took responsibility for enforcement of the law.
unfortunately enforcement met with mixed results.
on the whole the law helped to protect consumers by improving product standards and reducing confusion about the benefits and dangers of various products.
however some critics point out that the law reduced marketplace competition by forcing out smaller producers.
also efforts to regulate the patent medicine industry were largely unsuccessful until new legislation was passed in 1938 conservation and natural resources before roosevelt s presidency the federal government had paid very little attention to the nation s natural resources.
in 1872 yellowstone national park was established as the country s first national park and the u s forest bureau was formed in 1887 the government also set aside 45 million acres of timberlands for a national forest reserve.
despite such measures the government mostly stood by while private interests gobbled up the shrinking wilderness.
main idea comparing what similarities did the meat inspection act and pure food and drug act share.
chapter 9 in the late 19th century americans had shortsightedly exploited their natural environment.
pioneer farmers leveled the forests and plowed up the prairies.
ranchers allowed their cattle to overgraze the great plains.
coal companies cluttered the land with refuse from mines.
lumber companies ignored the effect of their logging operations on flood control and neglected to plant trees to replace those they had cut down.
cities dumped untreated sewage and industrial wastes into rivers poisoning the streams and creating health hazards.
conservation measures roosevelt condemned the view that america s resources were endless and made conservation a primary concern.
john muir a naturalist and writer with whom roosevelt camped in california s yosemite national park in 1903 persuaded the president to set aside 148 million acres of forest reserves.
roosevelt also set aside 1 5 million acres of water power sites and another 80 million acres of land that experts from the u s geological survey would explore for mineral and water resources.
roosevelt also established more than 50 wildlife sanctuaries and several national parks.
true to the progressive belief in using experts in 1905 the president named gifford pinchot as head of the u s forest service.
a professional conservationist pinchot had administrative skill as well as the latest scientific and technical information.
he advised roosevelt to conserve forest and grazing lands by keeping large tracts of federal land exempt from private sale.
conservationists like roosevelt and pinchot however did not share the views of muir who advocated complete preservation of the wilderness.
instead conservation to them meant that some wilderness areas would be preserved while others would be developed for the common good.
indeed roosevelt s federal water projects transformed some dry wilderness areas to make agriculture possible.
under the national reclamation act of 1902 known as the newlands geography skillbuilder 1 region prior to 1901 which regions had the greatest amount of conservation lands.
2 human environment interaction describe the effects of roosevelts conservation efforts o and the impact he had on the environment.
the progressive era historical spotlight act money from the sale of public lands in the west funded large scale irrigation projects such as the roosevelt dam in arizona and the shoshone dam in wyoming.
the newlands act established the precedent that the federal government would manage the precious water resources of the west.
roosevelt and civil rights main idea summarizing summarize roosevelts approach to environmental problems.
yosemite national park the naturalist john muir visited the yosemite region of central california in 1868 and made it his home base for a period of six years while he traveled throughout the west.
muir was the first to suggest that yosemites spectacular land formations had been shaped by glaciers.
today the parks impressive cliffs waterfalls lakes and meadows draw sports enthusiasts and tourists in all seasons.
roosevelt s concern for the land and its inhabitants was not matched in the area of civil rights.
though roosevelt s father had supported the north his mother martha may well have been the model for the southern belle scarlett o hara in margaret mitchell s famous novel gone with the wind.
in almost two terms as president roosevelt like most other progressives failed to support civil rights for african americans.
he did however support a few individual african americans.
despite opposition from whites roosevelt appointed an african american as head of the charleston south carolina customhouse.
in another instance when some whites in mississippi refused to accept the black postmistress he had appointed he chose to close the station rather than give in.
in 1906 however roosevelt angered many african americans when he dismissed without question an entire regiment of african american soldiers accused of conspiracy in protecting others charged with murder in brownsville texas.
as a symbolic gesture roosevelt invited booker t washington to dinner at the white house.
washington head of the tuskegee normal and industrial institute an all black training school was then the african american leader most respected by powerful whites.
washington faced opposition however from other african civil rights leaders gather at the 1905 niagara falls conference.
14 chapter 10 teks 4a 12a 15c america as a world power main idea why it matters now terms names the russo japanese war the panama canal and the mexican revolution added to americas military and economic power.
american involvement in conflicts around 1900 led to involvement in world war i and later to a peacekeeper role in todays world.
panama canal roosevelt corollary dollar diplomacy francisco pancho villa emiliano zapata john j pershing r one american s story 1 taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how teddy roosevelt and woodrow wilson used american power around the world.
joseph bucklin bishop a policy adviser to the canal s chief engineer played an important role in the building of the panama canal.
as editor of the canal record a weekly newspaper that provided americans with updates on the project bishop described a frustrating problem that the workers encountered.
a personal voice joseph bucklin bishop the canal zone was a land of the fantastic and the unexpected.
no one could say when the sun went down what the condition of the cut would be when the sun rose.
for the work of months or even years might be blotted out by an avalanche of earth or the toppling over of a mountain of rock.
it was a task to try mens souls but it was also one to kindle in them a joy of combat.
and a faith in ultimate victory which no disaster could shake.
workers digging the panama canal faced hazardous landslides and death from disease.
quoted in the impossible dream the building of the panama canal the building of the panama canal reflected america s new role as a world power.
as a technological accomplishment the canal represented a confident nation s refusal to let any physical obstacle stand in its way.
teddy roosevelt and the world the assassination of william mckinley in 1901 thrust vice president theodore roosevelt into the role of a world leader.
roosevelt was unwilling to allow the imperial powers of europe to control the world s political and economic destiny.
in 1905 building on the open door notes to increase american influence in east asia roosevelt mediated a settlement in a war between russia and japan.
america claims an empire 359 ky y player theodore roosevelt 1858 1919 rimless glasses a bushy mustache and prominent teeth made roosevelt easy for cartoonists to caricature.
his great enthusiasm for physical activity boxing tennis swimming horseback riding and hunting provided cartoonists with additional material.
some cartoons portrayed roosevelt with the toy teddy bear that he inspired.
roosevelt had six children who became notorious for their rowdy antics.
their father once sent a message through the war department ordering them to call off their attack on the white house.
roosevelt thrived on the challenges of the presidency.
he wrote i do not believe that anyone else has ever enjoyed the white house as much as i have roosevelt the peacemaker in 1904 russia and japan russia s neighbor in east asia were both imperialist powers and they were competing for contro of korea.
the japanese took the first action in what would become the russo japanese war with a sudden attack on the russian pacific fleet.
to everyone s surprise japan destroyed it.
japan then proceeded to destroy a second fleet sent as reinforcement.
japan also won a series of land battles securing korea and manchuria.
as a result of these battles japan began to run out of men and money a fact that it did not want to reveal to russia.
instead japanese officials approached president roosevelt in secret and asked him to mediate peace negotiations.
roosevelt agreed and in 1905 russian and japanese delegates convened in portsmouth new hampshire.
the first meeting took place on the presidential yacht.
roosevelt had a charming way of greeting people with a grasp of the hand a broad grin and a hearty dee lighted.
soon the opposing delegates began to relax and cordially shook hands.
the japanese wanted sakhalin island off the coast of siberia and a large sum of money from russia.
russia refused.
roosevelt persuaded japan to accept half the island and forgo the cash payment.
in exchange russia agreed to let japan take over russian interests in manchuria and korea.
the successful efforts in negotiating the treaty of portsmouth won roosevelt the 1906 nobel peace prize.
as u s and japanese interests expanded in east asia the two nations continued diplomatic talks.
in later agreements they pledged to respect each other s possessions and interests in east asia and the pacific.
panama canal by the time roosevelt became president many americans including roosevelt felt that the united states needed a canal cutting across central america.
such a canal would greatly reduce travel time for commercial and military ships by providing a shortcut between the atlantic and pacific oceans.
as early as 1850 the united states and britain had agreed to share the rights to such a canal.
in the hay pauncefote treaty of 1901 however britain gave the united states exclusive rights to build and control a canal through central america.
engineers identified two possible routes for the proposed canal.
one through nicaragua posed fewer obstacles because much of it crossed a large lake.
the other route crossed through panama then a province of colombia and was shorter and filled with mountains and swamps.
site selection was influenced as much by human geographic factors as physical.
in the late 1800s a french company had tried to build a canal in panama.
after ten years the company gave up.
it sent an agent philippe bunau varilla to washington to convince the united states to buy its claim.
in 1903 the president and congress decided to use the panama route and agreed to buy the french company s route for 40 million.
7 before beginning work on the panama canal the united states had to get permission from colombia which then ruled panama.
when these negotiations broke down bunau varilla helped organize a panamanian rebellion against colombra.
on november 3 1903 nearly a dozen u s warships were present as panama declared ts independence.
fifteen days later panama and the united main idea analyzing effects what were the results of roosevelts negotiations with the japanese and russians.
360 chapter 10 diaz s government some 2 000 marines were sent to nicaragua.
the revolt was put down but some marine detachments remained in the country until 1933 the taft administration followed the policy of using the u s government to guarantee loans made to foreign countries by american businesspeople.
this policy was called dollar diplomacy by its critics and was often used to justify keeping european powers out of the caribbean.
woodrow wilsons missionary diplomacy the monroe doctrine issued by president james monroe in 1823 had warned other nations against expanding their influence in latin america.
the roosevelt corollary asserted in 1904 that the united states had a right to exercise international police power in the western hemisphere.
in 1913 president woodrow wilson gave the monroe doctrine a moral tone.
according to wilson s missionary diplomacy the united states had a moral responsibility to deny recognition to any latin american government it viewed as oppressive undemocratic or hostile to u s interests.
prior to this policy the united states recognized any government that controlled a nation regardless of that nation s policies or how it had come to power.
wilson s policy pressured nations in the western hemisphere to establish democratic governments.
almost immediately the mexican revolution put wilson s policy to the test.
main idea analyzing motives why did president wilson refuse to recognize huertas government.
the mexican revolution mexico had been ruled for more than three decades by a military dictator porfirio diaz.
a friend of the united states diaz had long encouraged foreign investments in his country.
as a result foreigners mostly americans owned a large share of mexican oil wells mines railroads and ranches.
while foreign investors and some mexican landowners and politicians had grown rich the common people of the country were desperately poor.
in 1911 mexican peasants and workers led by francisco madero overthrew diaz.
madero promised democratic reforms but he proved unable to satisfy the conflicting demands of landowners peasants factory workers and the urban middle class.
after two years general victoriano huerta took over the government.
within days madero was murdered.
wilson refused to recognize the government that huerta formed.
he called it a government of butchers.
j k k history video the peasant revolution f.
intervention in mexico wilson adopted a plan of watchful waiting looking for an opportunity to act against huerta.
the opportunity came in april 1914 when one of huerta s officers arrested a small group of american sailors in tampico on mexico s eastern shore.
the mexicans quickly released them and apologized but wilson used the incident as an excuse to intervene in mexico and ordered u s marines to occupy veracruz an important mexican port.
eighteen americans and at least 200 mexicans died during the invasion.
the incident brought the united states and mexico close to war.
argentina brazil and chile stepped in to mediate the conflict.
they proposed that huerta step down and that u s troops withdraw without paying mexico for damages.
mexico rejected the plan and wilson refused to recognize a government that had come to power as a result of violence.
the huerta regime soon collapsed however and venustiano carranza a nationalist leader became president in 1915 wilson withdrew the troops and formally recognized the carranza government.
vt rspectfv.
intervention in mexico most u s citizens supported american intervention in mexico.
edith oshaughnessy wife of an american diplomat in mexico city had another perspective.
after touring veracruz oshaughnessy wrote to her mother i think we have done a great wrong to these people instead of cutting out the sores with a clean strong knife of war.
and occupation we have only put our fingers in each festering wound and inflamed it further america claims an empire 363 history through i i i i zapatistas 1931 jose orozco one of mexicos foremost artists painted these zapatistas followers of zapata to honor the peasant men and women who fought in the mexican revolution.
orozco did many paintings in support of the revolution.
what aspects of the image does the artist use to convey strength and unity.
rebellion in mexico carranza was in charge but like others before him he did not have the support of all mexicans.
rebels under the leadership of francisco pancho villa ve s andemiliano zapata e mel va no za pa ta opposed carranza s provisional government.
zapata son of a mestizo paasant was dedicated to land reform.
it is better to die on your feet than live on your knees zapata told the peasants who joined him.
villa a fierce nationalist had frequently courted the support and aid of the united states.
a personal voice pancho villa a s long as i have anything to do with the affairs in mexico there will be no further friction between my country and my friends of the north to president wilson the greatest american i stand pledged to do what i can to keep the faith he has in my people and if there is anything he may wish i will gladly do it for i know it will be for the good of my country.
new york times january 11 1915 despite villa s talk of friendship when president wilson recognized carranza s government villa threatened reprisals against the united states.
in january 1916 carranza invited american engineers to operate mines in northern mexico.
before they reached the mines however villa s men took the americans off a train and shot them.
two months later some of villa s followers raided columbus new mexico and killed 17 americans.
americans held villa responsible.
i chasing villa with the american public demanding revenge president wilson ordered brigadier general john j pershing and an expeditionary force of about 15 000 soldiers into mexico to capture villa dead or alive.
for almost a year villa eluded pershing s forces.
wilson then called out 150 000 national guardsmen and stationed them along the mexican border.
in the meantime 164 chapter 10 section 3 one american s story to learn more about luis munoz rivera and puerto rican self rule.
use a chart like the one above to summarize the information from the primary and secondary sources.
1 locating sources.
what is the primary source you can use in this passage.
what is the secondary source.
2 secondary source.
what information do you think has been collected from several sources.
who is the author of this quote.
what are his or her credentials.
what qualifies this individual to report on this event.
4 xdnformsn was collected after the event.
what coes this help you learn about the historical perspective of the quotation.
369 sk2 the first world war essential question mynotebook how did world war i affect the united states and europe.
texas essential knowledge and skills teks 2d 4c 4d 4e 4f 4g 12b 13a 15d 19b a 25a 27b 29b usa world 11914 hollywood california becomes the center of movie production in the u s 1914 1914 archduke franz ferdinand and his wife are assassinated.
g5j german u boats sink the lusitania and 1 198 people die.
1915 alexander graham bell makes first transcon tinental telephone call.
1916 woodrow wilson is reelected president.
1914j germany declares war on russia and france.
great britain declares war on germany and austria hungary.
albert einstein proposes his general theory of relativity.
1916 the battles of verdun and the somme claim millions of lives.
1917 russia withdraws from the war.
119181 the bolsheviks establish a communist regime in russia.
1918 the first world war ends.
influenza nttawimy wdowns with pneumonia k ps0ww m ia mmhtlt mkiiitt isj theme b mhm6 btptttmemf f ko.
you must do the same tlsaw w s wutk 119191a worldwide influenza epidemic kills over 30 million.
the first world war 371 help us to beep chicago the healthiest city m tse world world war i begins main idea why itt matters now terms names as world war i intensified the united states was forced to abandon its neutrality.
the united states remains involved in european and world affairs.
nationalism militarism allies central powers archduke franz ferdinand no mans land trench warfare lusitania zimmermann note use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the causes of world war i it was about 1 00 e q on april 6 1917 and the members of the u s house of representatives were tired.
for the past 15 hours they had been debating president wilson s request for a declaration of war against germany.
there was a breathless hush as jeannette rankin of montana the first woman elected to congress stood up.
rankin declared i want to stand by my country but i cannot vote for war.
later she reflected on her action.
a personal voice jeannette rankin i believe that the first vote i cast was the most significant vote and a most significant act on the part of women because women are going to have to stop war.
i felt at the time that the first woman in congress should take the first stand that the first time the first woman had a chance to say no to war she should say it quoted in jeannette rankin first lady in congress after much debate as to whether the united states should join the fight congress voted in favor of u s entry into world war i with this decision the government abandoned the neutrality that america had maintained for three years.
what made the united states change its policy in 1917.
jeannette rankin was the only member of the house to vote against the u s entering both world war i and world war ii.
causes of world war i although many americans wanted to stay out of the war several factors made american neutrality difficult to maintain.
as an industrial and imperial power the united states felt many of the same pressures that had led the nations of europe into devastating warfare.
historians generally cite four long term causes of the first world war nationalism imperialism militarism and the formation of a system of alliances.
hapter 11 main idea analyzing causes how did nationalism and imperialism lead to conflict in europe.
vocabulary alliance a formal agreement or union between nations nationalism throughout the 19th century politics in the western world were deeply influenced by the concept of nationalism a devotion to the interests and culture of one s nation.
often nationalism led to competitive and antagonistic rivalries among nations.
in this atmosphere of competition many feared germany s growing power in europe.
in addition various ethnic groups resented domination by others and longed for their nations to become independent.
many ethnic groups looked to larger nations for protection.
russia regarded itself as the protector of europe s slavic peoples no matter which government they lived under.
among these slavic peoples were the serbs.
serbia located in the balkans was an independent nation but millions of ethnic serbs lived under the rule of austria hungary.
as a result russia and austria hungary were rivals for influence over serbia.
imperialism for many centuries european nations had been building empires slowly extending their economic and political control over various peoples of the world.
colonies supplied the european imperial powers with raw materials and provided markets for manufactured goods.
as germany industrialized it competed with france and britain in the contest for colonies.
militarism empires were expensive to build and to defend.
the growth of nationalism and imperialism led to increased military spending.
because each nation wanted stronger armed forces than those of any potential enemy the imperial powers followed a policy of militarism the development of armed forces and their use as a tool of diplomacy.
by 1890 the strongest nation on the european continent was germany which had set up an army reserve system that drafted and trained young men.
britain was not initially alarmed by germany s military expansion.
as an island nation britain had always relied on its navy for defense and protection of its shipping routes and the british navy was the strongest in the world.
however in 1897 wilhelm ii germany s kaiser or emperor decided that his nation should also become a major sea power in order to compete more successfully against the british.
soon british and german shipyards competed to build the largest battleships and destroyers.
france italy japan and the united states quickly joined the naval arms race.
alliance system by 1907 there were two major defense alliances in europe.
the triple entente later known as the allies consisted of france britain and russia.
the triple alliance consisted of germany austria hungary and italy.
german emperor wilhelm ii center marches with two of his generals hindenburg left and ludendorff during world war i.
373 germany and austria hungary together with the ottoman empire an empire o mostly middle eastern lands controlled by the turks were later known as e central powers.
the alliances provided a measure of international security because nations were reluctant to disturb the balance of power.
as it turned out a spark set off a major conflict.
an assassination leads to war that spark flared in the balkan peninsula which was known as the powder keg of europe in addition to the ethnic rivalries among the balkan peoples europe s leading powers had interests there.
russia wanted access to the mediterranean sea.
germany wanted a rail link to the ottoman empire.
austria hungary which had taken control of bosnia in 1878 accused serbia of subverting its rule over bosnia.
the powder keg was ready to explode.
in june 1914 archduke franz ferdinand heir to the austrian throne visited the bosnian capital sarajevo.
as the royal entourage drove through the city serbian nationalist gavrilo princip stepped from the crowd and shot the archduke and his wife sophie.
princip was a member of the black hand an organization promoting serbian nationalism.
the assassinations touched off a diplomatic crisis.
on july 28 austria hungary declared what was expected to be a short war against serbia.
the alliance system pulled one nation after another into the conflict.
on august 1 germany obligated by treaty to support austria hungary declared war on russia.
on august 3 germany declared war on russia s ally france.
after germany invaded belgium britain declared war on germany and austria hungary.
the great war had begun.
crisis in the balkans after world war i bosnia became part of a country that eventually became known as yugoslavia.
although yugoslavia included various religious and ethnic groups the government was dominated by serbs.
in 1991 yugoslavia broke apart and bosnia declared independence in 1992 however serbs wanted bosnia to remain part of serbian controlled yugoslavia.
a bloody civil war broke out.
this war became notorious for the mass murder and deportation of bosnian muslims a process known as ethnic cleansing in 1995 the united states helped negotiate a cease fire.
but peace in the balkans did not last.
in the late 1990s albanians in the province of kosovo also tried to break away from serbia.
serbias violent response which included the ethnic cleansing of albanians prompted nato to intervene.
kosovo declared its independence in 2008 despite serbias opposition.
main idea analyzing effects why were so many european nations pulled into the conflict.
the fighting starts on august 3 1914 germany invaded belgium following a strategy known as the schlieffen plan.
this plan called for a holding action against russia combined with a quick drive through belgium to paris after france had fallen the two german armies would defeat russia.
as german troops swept across belgium thousands of civilians fled in terror.
in brussels the belgian capital an american war correspondent described the first major refugee crisis of the 20th century.
a personal voice richard harding davis we found the side streets blocked with their carts.
into these they had thrown mattresses or bundles of grain and heaped upon them were families of three generations.
old men in blue smocks white haired and bent old women in caps the daughters dressed in their one best frock and hat and clasping in their hands all that was left to them all that they could stuff into a pillow case or flour sack.
heart broken weary hungry they passed in an unending caravan.
from hooray for peace hurrah for war vocabulary refugee a person who flees in search of protection or shelter as in times of war or religious persecution 4 chapter 11 ypres 3rd battle july nov 1917 allied victory costs over half a million casualties.
j cantigny may 1918 u s troops fill gaps between french and british lines during german offensive.
american troops go on the offensive when russia pulled out of the war in 1917 the germans shifted their armies from the eastern front to the western front in france.
by may they were within 50 miles of paris.
the aef arrived just in time to help stop the german advance at cantigny in france.
several weeks later u s troops played a major role in throwing back german attacks at chateau thierry and belleau wood.
in july and august they helped win the second battle of the marne.
the tide had turned against the central powers.
in september u s soldiers began to mount offensives against the germans at saint mihiel and in the meuse argonne area.
for more than a month the allies pushed northward.
in the battle of the argonne forest the americans suffered some 120 000 casualties.
by november however they occupied the hills around sedan france.
american war hero during the fighting in the meuse argonne area alvin york became famous as a war hero.
york sought exemption as a conscientious objector a person who opposes warfare on moral grounds pointing out that the bible says thou shalt not kill.
york eventually decided that it was morally acceptable to fight if the cause was just.
on october 8 1918 armed only with a rifle and a revolver york killed 25 germans and with six other doughboys captured 132 prisoners.
general pershing called him the outstanding soldier of the aef.
for his heroic acts york was promoted to sergeant and awarded the congressional medal of honor.
the collapse of germany on november 3 1918 austria hungary surrendered to the allies.
that same day german sailors mutinied against government authority.
the mutiny spread quickly everywhere in germany groups of soldiers and workers organized revolutionary councils.
on november 9 socialist leaders in the capital berlin established a german republic.
the kaiser gave up the throne.
drawing conclusions how did american forces help the allies win the war.
i although there were no allied soldiers on german territory and no truly decisive battle had been fought the germans were too exhausted to continue fighting.
so at the eleventh hour on the eleventh day in the eleventh month of 1918 germany agreed to a cease fire and signed the armistice or truce that ended the war.
the final toll world war i was the bloodiest war in history up to that time.
deaths numbered about 22 million more than half of them civilians.
in addition 20 million people were wounded and 10 million more became refugees.
the direct economic costs of the war may have been about 338 billion.
the united states lost 48 000 men in battle with another 62 000 dying of disease.
more than 200 000 americans were wounded.
for the allies news of the armistice brought great relief.
private john barkley described the reaction to the news.
a personal voice john l barkley about 9 oclock in the evening we heard wild commotion in the little town.
the french people old and young were running through the streets.
old men and women wed seen sitting around their houses too feeble to move were out in the streets yelling vive la france.
vive la france.
vive iamerica.
down the street came a soldier.
he was telling everybody the armistice had been signed.
i said whats an armistice it sounded like some kind of machine to me.
the other boys around there didnt know what it meant either.
when the official word came through that it meant peace we couldnt believe it.
finally jesse said well kid i guess it really does mean the war is over i said i just cant believe its true but it was.
no hard feelings i across the atlantic americans also rejoiced at the news.
many now expected life to return to normal.
however people found their lives at home changed almost as much as the lives of those who had fought in europe.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
eddie rickenbacker selective service act main idea using your notes fill in a web like the one below to show how americans responded to the war.
why was the entire population affected by americas entry into world war i.
convoy system american expeditionary force general john j pershing alvin york critical thinking analyzing impact how did specific needs result in technological innovations in the military during world war i.
how did these innovations impact fighting and the stalemate on the western front.
4 analyzing events what were the significant battles of world war i.
how did the aef contribute to allied victories.
analyzing visual sources this world war i poster shows the role of non combatants overseas.
what is the message in this propaganda poster.
conscientious objector armistice back our 3k55k girls over thenv united war work campaign the first world war 387 teks4f 13a 19b 21a the war at home main odea why iit matters now terms naumras world war i spurred social political and economic change in the united states.
such changes increased government powers and expanded economic opportunities.
war industries board bernard m baruch propaganda george creel espionage and sedition acts great migration taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how world war i changed american life.
r one american s story j the suffragist harriot stanton blatch visited a munitions plant in new jersey during world war i and proudly described women at work.
a personal voice harriot stanton blatch the day i visited the place in one of the largest shops women had only just been put on the work but it was expected that in less than a month they would be found handling all of the twelve hundred machines under that one roof alone.
the skill of the women staggers one.
after a week or two they master the operations on the turret gauging and routing machines.
the best worker on the facing machine is a woman.
she is a piece worker as many of the women are.
this woman earned the day i saw her five dollars and forty cents.
she tossed about the fuse parts and played with that machine as i would with a baby.
quoted in we the american women before world war i women had been excluded from many jobs.
however the wartime need for labor brought over a million more women into the work force.
for women as for the rest of society world war i brought about far reaching changes.
congress gives power to wilson harriot stanton blatch followed in the footsteps of her famous mother elizabeth cady stanton.
winning the war was not a job for american soldiers alone.
as secretary of war newton baker said war is no longer samson with his shield and spear and sword and david with his sling.
it is the conflict of smokestacks now the combat of the driving wheel and the engine.
because world war i was such an immense conflict the entire economy had to be refocused on the war effort the shift from producing consumer goods to producing war supplies was too complicated and important a job for private industry to handle on its own so business and government collaborated in the effort.
in the process the power of government was greatly expanded.
congress gave president wilson direct control over much of the economy including the power to fix prices and to regulate even to nationalize certain war related industries.
188 chapter 11 u s forces in vietnam in 1968 this statue of lenin the leader of the 1917 russian revolution was toppled by latvian citizens in 1991 s n the cold war after world war ii tensions between the united states and communist countries like the soviet union and china developed into a nonmilitary conflict known as the cold war.
during the cold war which lasted for nearly 50 years the united states and the soviet union competed to extend their political and economic influence.
in some parts of the world such as korea and vietnam the cold war led to prolonged military warfare.
the great costs of these conflicts both in money and in lives led to renewed calls for isolationism.
nevertheless the u s remained actively involved in the cold war throughout the 1980s.
life involvement in europe when the fascist threat to democracy became too great to ignore the united states joined the allies in fighting the axis powers during world war ii.
the united states and the soviet union emerged from the war as the two strongest military powers in the world.
it was now impossible for the nation to return to isolationism.
the united states took an active role in rebuilding europe through programs like the marshall plan and was instrumental in establishing the unite nations.
the united states also stayed involved with europe militarily during the cold war as a member o the north atlantic treaty organization nato.
the first world war 405 chapter 13 the roaring life of the 1920s 1920 1929 chapter 12 equality of opportunity and affirmative action in the 1960s and 1970s groups pressed for changes in the law to remove barriers to economic opportunity.
laws such as the civil rights act of 1964 were passed to prevent discrimination against women and racial and ethnic minorities in order to provide equity in educational and business opportunities.
as well affirmative action policies were designed to remedy effects of past discrimination.
the term affirmative action first used by lyndon b johnson in 1965 includes efforts to give work and educational opportunities to members of historically disadvantaged groups.
some have labeled affirmative action reverse discrimination while others view it as a means to counterbalance continued discrimination that the law has been unable to prevent.
computers and internet startups in recent years many of the brightest college students have chosen to study computer science in hopes of landing a high paying job.
alternatively independent minded computer experts might become entrepreneurs people who start and run their own businesses.
for an initial period of several months to several years an entrepreneur may work upwards of 70 or 80 hours each week yet the business will have no income.
since the late 1990s both groups have increasingly looked to the internet for opportunities.
entrepreneurs seek money making opportunities as they develop ways to expand the capabilities of this developing technology.
in turn the growth of internet based businesses creates jobs for people who have specialized computer skills.
politics of the roaring twenties 429 chapter 13 harlem in the 1920s the fletcher henderson orchestra became one of the most influential jazz bands during the harlem renaissance.
here henderson the bands founder sits at the drums with louis armstrong on trumpet third from left.
at the turn of the century new yorks harlem neighborhood was overbuilt with new apartment houses.
enterprising african american realtors began buying and leasing property to other african americans who were eager to move into the prosperous neighborhood.
as the number of blacks in harlem increased many whites began moving out.
harlem quickly grew to become the center of black america and the birthplace of the political social and cultural movement known as the harlem renaissance.
1 ii nmi i iljt ljf j l jl nl jln jlasthj st cott bn club new ycll ciiv r e ronx harlem room jan johnson.
homk izzo tusthstj in the mid 1920s the cotton club was one of a number of fashionable entertainment clubs in harlem.
although many venues like the cotton club were segregated white audiences packed the clubs to hear the new music styles of black performers such as duke ellington and bessie smith.
zos central park justh sk ioc il e l st.
predominantly i black neighborhoods rnicnnzn if if n 1 mile 1 kilometer u 11 sstfffiw.
ist v in 1927 harlem was a bustling neighborhood.
theoaring l the hot five included from left louis armstrong johnny st cyr johnny dodds kid ory and lil hardin armstrong.
in many of her novels short stories poems and books of folklore zora neale hurston portrayed the lives of poor unschooled southern blacks in her words the greatest cultural wealth of the continent.
much of her work celebrated what she called the common person s art form the simple folkways and values of people who had survived slavery through their ingenuity and strength.
african american performers the spirit and talent of the harlem renaissance reached far beyond the world of african american writers and intellectuals.
some observers including langston hughes thought the movement was launched with shuffle along a black musical comedy popular in 1921.
it gave just the proper push to that negro vogue of the 20s he wrote.
several songs in shuffle along including love will find a way won popularity among white audiences.
the show also spotlighted the talents of several black performers including the singers florence mills josephine raker and mabel mercer.
during the 1920s african americans in the performing arts won large followings.
the tenor roland hayes rose to stardom as a concert singer and the singer and actress ethel waters debuted on broadway in the musical africana.
paul robeson the son of a one time slave became a major dramatic actor.
his performance in shakespeare s othello first in london and later in new york city was widely acclaimed.
subsequently robeson struggled with the racism he experienced in the united states and the indignities inflicted upon him because of his support of the soviet union and the communist party.
he took up residence abroad living for a time in england and the soviet union.
african americans and jazz jazz was born in the early 20th century in new orleans where musicians blended instrumental ragtime and vocal blues into an exuberant new sound.
in 1918 joe king oliver and his creole jazz band traveled north to chicago carrying jazz with them.
in 1922 a young trumpet player named louis armstrong joined oliver s group which became known as the creole jazz band.
his talent rocketed him to stardom in the jazz world.
famous for his astounding sense of rhythm and his ability to improvise armstrong made personal expression a key part of jazz.
after two years in chicago in 1924 he joined fletcher henderson s band then the most important big jazz band in new york city.
armstrong went on to become perhaps the most important and influential musician in the history of jazz.
he often talked about his anticipated funeral.
a personal voice louis armstrong theyre going to blow over me.
cats will be coming from everywhere to play.
i had a beautiful life.
when i get to the pearly gates ill play a duet with gabriel.
well play sleepy time down south he wants to be remembered for his music just like i do.
quoted in the negro almanac jazz quickly spread to such cities as kansas city memphis and new york city and it became the most popular music for dancing.
during the 1920s harlem pulsed to the sounds of jazz which lured throngs of whites to the showy exotic nightclubs there including the famed cotton club.
in the late 1920s edward kennedy duke ellington a jazz pianist and composer led his ten piece main idea synthesizing in what ways did writers of the harlem renaissance celebrate a rebirth.
chapter 13 orchestra at the cotton club.
in a 1925 essay titled the negro spirituals alain locke seemed almost to predict the career of the talented ellington.
a personal voice alain locke up to the present the resources of negro music have been tentatively exploited in only one direction at a time melodically here rhythmically there harmonically in a third direction.
a genius that would organize its distinctive elements in a formal way would be the musical giant of his age.
quoted in afro american writing an anthology of prose and poetry i i main idea summarizing jjj besides literary accomplishments in what areas did african americans achieve remarkable results.
through the 1920s and 1930s ellington won renown as one of america s greatest composers with pieces such as mood indigo and sophisticated lady.
cab calloway a talented drummer saxophonist and singer formed another important jazz orchestra which played at harlem s savoy ballroom and the cotton club alternating with duke ellington.
along with louis armstrong calloway popularized scat or improvised jazz singing using sounds instead of words.
bessie smith a female blues singer was perhaps the outstanding vocalist of the decade.
she recorded on black oriented labels produced by the major record companies.
she achieved enormous popularity and in 1927 became the highest paid black artist in the world.
vy positive and negative impact some critics of the harlem renaissance argued that many of the artistic works of the era perpetuated racial stereotypes and presented african americans as primitive or exotic.
these critics wanted to see artistic representations that emphasized african american progress.
some observers have agreed with these critiques pointing out that the commercial success of some artists employing primitive and exotic styles may have discouraged other artists from pursuing different styles.
the harlem renaissance represented a portion of the great social and cultural changes that swept america in the 1920s.
the period was characterized by economic prosperity new ideas changing values and personal freedom as well as important developments in art literature and music.
most of the social changes were lasting.
the economic boom however was short lived.
j assessment for each term or name write a sentence harlem renaissance claude mckay langston hughes explaining its significance paul robeson louis armstrong duke ellington bessie smith 1 terms names zora neale hurston james weldon johnson marcus garvey main idea using your notes in a tree diagram identify three areas of artistic achievement in the harlem renaissance.
for each name two outstanding african americans.
write a paragraph explaining the impact of these achievements.
critical thinking analyzing causes speculate on why an african american renaissance flowered during the 1920s.
support your answer.
think about racial discrimination in the south campaigns for equality in the north harlems diverse cultures the changing culture of all americans forming generalizations how did popular culture in america change as a result of the great migration.
drawing conclusions what did the harlem renaissance contribute to both black and general american history.
describe the positive and negative impacts of this significant artistic and literary movement.
the roaring life of the 1920s 457 american literature 1920 1929 literature in the jazz age after world war i american literature like american jazz moved to the vanguard of the international artistic scene.
many american writers remained in europe after the war some settling in london but many more joining the expatriate community on the left bank of the seine river in paris where they could live cheaply.
back in the united states such cities as chicago and new york were magnets for america s young artistic talents.
new york city gave birth to the harlem renaissance a blossoming of african american culture named for the new york city neighborhood where many african american writers and artists settled.
further downtown the artistic community of greenwich village drew literary talents such as the poets edna st vincent millay and e e cummings and the playwright eugene oneill.
f scott fitzgerald the foremost chronicler of the jazz age was the minnesota born writer f scott fitzgerald who in paris new york and later hollywood rubbed elbows with other leading american writers of the day.
in the following passage from tales of the jazz age a collection of short stories by fitzgerald the narrator describes a great city shortly after a victorious war there had been a war fought and won and the great city of the conquering people was crossed with triumphal arches and vivid with thrown flowers of white red and rose.
all through the long spring days the returning soldiers marched up the chief highway behind the strump of drums and the joyous resonant wind of the brasses while merchants and clerks left their bickerings and figurings and crowding to the windows turned their white bunched faces gravely upon the passing battalions.
never had there been such splendor in the great city for the victorious war had brought plenty in its train and the merchants had flocked thither from the south and west with their households to taste of all the luscious feasts and witness the lavish entertainments prepared and to buy for their women furs against the next winter and bags of golden mesh and varicolored slippers of silk and silver and rose satin and cloth of gold.
so gaily and noisily were the peace and prosperity impending hymned by the scribes and poets of the conquering people that more and more spenders had gathered from the provinces to drink the wine of excitement and faster and faster did the merchants dispose of their trinkets and slippers until they sent up a mighty cry for more trinkets and more slippers in order that they might give in barter what was demanded of them.
some even of them flung up their hands helplessly shouting alas.
i have no more slippers.
i have no more trinkets.
may heaven help me for i know not what i shall do.
but no one listened to their great outcry for the throngs were fat too busy day by day the foot soldiers trod jauntily the highway and all exulted because the young men returning were pure and brave sound of tooth and pink of cheek and the young women of the land were virgin and comely both of face and of figure.
f scott fitzgerald may day tales of the jazz age chapter 13 evaluating in literature in the jazz age on pages 458 459 you read excerpts from works written in the l u by f scott fitzgerald edna st vincent millay and claude mckay.
how might a phrase current at the time flaming youth be an appropriate and accurate phrase to descri e the young people and voices in these excerpts.
mm texas test practice use the visual below and your knowledge of united states history to answer question 1 hamiltons ss daughters bf 2 the great flowering of african american artistic activity in the 1920s is known as f the jazz age g the speakeasy h the harlem renaissance j american fundamentalism 1 the woman shown on this magazine cover represents a lifestyle championed by which of the following 1920s figures.
a zelda sayre fitzgerald b edna st vincent millay c anna howard shaw d aimee semple mcpherson use the quotation and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 3.
no more fear no more cringing no more sycophantic begging and pleading but the negro must strike straight from the shoulder for manhood rights and for full liberty.
africa calls now more than ever 9 3 the quotation supports the back to africa movement.
one important leader of this movement in the 1920s was a marcus garvey b james weldon johnson c zora neale hurston d paul robeson 7 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history vwritesmart multimedia activity et think about the issues you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter to answer the following questions.
a new deal fights the depression pages 488 494 1 how did franklin roosevelt change the role of the federal government during his first hundred days.
2 summarize the reasons why some people opposed the new deal.
the second new deal takes hold pages 495 501 3 in what ways did the new deal programs extend federal aid.
4 how did the wagner act help working people.
the new deal affects many groups pages 504 509 5 summarize the impact the new deal had on various ethnic groups.
6 why did many urban voters support roosevelt and the democratic party.
culture in the 1930s pages 510 514 7 what purpose did movies and radio serve during the great depression.
8 explain how the new deal programs supported artists and writers in the 1930s.
the impact of the new deal pages 515 519 9 list five new deal agencies that are still in place today.
10 what benefits did the tennessee valley authority provide.
what negative impact did it have.
thinking critically using your notes copy the web below and fill it in with actions that americans took to end the economic crisis of the 1930s.
developing historical perspective what federal pro grams instituted in the 1930s and later discontinued might be of use to the nation today.
explain and support your opinion in a paragraph or two.
522 chapter 16 world war looms 1931 1941 chapter 16 background luftwaffe in german means air weapon main idea evaluating how did german blitzkrieg tactics rely on new military technology.
the soviet union declares neutrality like czechoslovakia poland had a sizable german speaking population.
in the spring of 1939 hitler began his familiar routine charging that germans in poland were mistreated by the poles and needed his protection.
some people thought that this time hitler must be bluffing.
after all an attack on poland might bring germany into conflict with the soviet union poland s eastern neighbor.
at the same time such an attack would most likely provoke a declaration of war from france and britain both of whom had promised military aid to poland.
the result would be a two front war.
fighting on two fronts had exhausted germany in world war i surely many thought hitler would not be foolish enough to repeat that mistake.
as tensions rose over poland stalin surprised everyone by signing a nonaggression pact with hitler.
once bitter enemies on august 23 1939 fascist germany and communist russia now committed never to attack each other.
germany and the soviet union also signed a second secret pact agreeing to divide poland between them.
with the danger of a two front war eliminated the fate of poland was sealed.
blitzkrieg in poland as day broke on september 1 1939 the german luftwaffe or german air force roared over poland raining bombs on military bases airfields railroads and cities.
at the same time german tanks raced across the polish countryside spreading terror and confusion.
this invasion was the first test of germany s newest military strategy the blitzkrieg or lightning war.
blitzkrieg made use of advances in the development of conventional weapons such as fast tanks and more powerful aircraft to surprise the enemy and then quickly crush all opposition with overwhelming force.
on september 3 two days following the terror in poland britain and france declared war on germany.
the blitzkrieg tactics worked perfectly.
major fighting was over in three weeks long before france britain and their allies could mount a defense.
in the last week of fighting the soviet union attacked poland from the east grabbing some of its territory.
the portion germany annexed in western poland contained almost two thirds of poland s population.
by the end of the month poland had ceased to exist and world war ii had begun.
539 a german tank unit in western poland in 1939 for months there was nothing much to defend against as the war turned into a sitzkrieg endured by soldiers such as this french one on the maginot line.
the phony war for the next several months after the fall of poland french and british troops on the maginot line a system of fortifications built along france s eastern border see map on p 538 sat staring into germany waiting for something to happen.
on the siegfried line a few miles away german troops stared back.
the blitzkrieg had given way to what the germans called the sitzkrieg sitting war and what some newspapers referred to as the phony war.
after occupying eastern poland stalin began annexing the baltic states of estonia latvia and lithuania.
late in 1939 stalin sent his soviet army into finland.
after three months of fighting the outnumbered finns surrendered.
suddenly on april 9 1940 hitler launched a surprise invasion of denmark and norway in order to protect those countries freedom and independence but in truth hitler planned to build bases along the coasts to strike at great britain.
next hitler turned against the netherlands belgium and luxembourg which were overrun by the end of may.
the phony war had ended.
france and britain fight on france s maginot line proved to be ineffective the german army threatened to bypass the line during its invasion of belgium.
hitler s generals sent their tanks through the ardennes a region of wooded ravines in northeast france thereby avoiding british and french troops who thought the ardennes were impassable.
the germans continued to march toward paris.
the fall of france the german offensive trapped almost 400 000 british and french soldiers as they fled to the beaches of dunkirk on the french side of the english channel.
in less than a week a makeshift fleet of fishing trawlers tugboats river barges pleasure craft more than 800 vessels in all ferried about 330 000 british french and belgian troops to safety across the channel.
a few days later italy entered the war on the side of germany and invaded france from the south as the germans closed in on paris from the north.
on june 22 1940 at compiegne as william shirer and the rest of the world watched hitler handed french officers his terms of surrender.
germans would occupy the northern part of france and a nazi controlled puppet government headed by marshal philippe petain would be set up at vichy in southern france.
after france fell a french general named charles de gaulle fled to england where he set up a government in exile.
de gaulle proclaimed defiantly france has lost a battle but france has not lost the war.
the battle of britain in the summer of 1940 the germans began to assemble an invasion fleet along the french coast.
because its naval power could not compete with that of britain germany also launched an air war at the same time.
the luftwaffe began making bombing main idea analyzing motives how did hitler rationalize the german invasion of denmark and norway.
4 children watch with wonder and fear as the battling british and german air forces set the skies of london aflame.
background hitler demanded that the surrender take place in the same railroad car where the french had dictated terms to the germans in world war i runs over britain.
its goal was to gain total control of the skies by destroying britain s royal air force raf.
hitler had 2 600 planes at his disposal.
on a single day august 15 approximately 2 000 german planes ranged over britain.
every night for two solid months bombers pounded london.
the battle of britain raged on through the summer and fall.
night after night german planes pounded british targets.
at first the luftwaffe concentrated on airfields and aircraft.
next it targeted cities.
londoner len jones was just 18 years old when bombs fell on his east end neighborhood.
a personal voice len jones after an explosion of a nearby bomb you could actually feel your eyeballs being sucked out.
i was holding my eyes to try and stop them going.
and the suction was so vast it ripped my shirt away and ripped my trousers.
then i couldnt get my breath the smoke was like acid and everything round me was black and yellow.
quoted in london at war winston churchill 1874 1965 churchill was possibly britains greatest weapon as that nation faced the nazis.
a born fighter churchill became prime minister in may 1940 and used his gift as a speaker to arouse britons and unite them w e shall defend our island whatever the cost may be we shall fight on the beaches we shall fight on the landing grounds we shall fight in the fields and in the streets we shall fight in the hills we shall never surrender the raf fought back brilliantly.
with the help of a new technological device called radar british pilots accurately plotted the flight paths of german planes even in darkness.
on september 15 1940 the raf shot down over 185 german planes at the same time they lost only 26 aircraft.
six weeks later hitler called off the invasion of britain indefinitely.
never in the field of human conflict said churchill in praise of the raf pilots was so much owed by so many to so few.
still german bombers continued to pound britain s cities trying to disrupt production and break civilian morale.
british pilots also bombed german cities.
civilians history in both countries unrelentingly carried on.
video winston churchill 7l l terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
neville chamberlain appeasement blitzkrieg winston churchill nonaggression pact charles de gaulle main idea using your notes trace the movement of german expansion from 1937 to the end of 1940 by supplying events to follow the dates shown on the time line.
l937 1939 1 1938 1 1940 1 what event was the most significant.
critical thinking analyzing motives to what extent do you think lies and deception played a role in hitlers tactics.
support your answer with examples.
think about william shirers diary entry about headlines in the nazi newspapers soviet german relations hitlers justifications for military aggression evaluating decisions if you had been a member of the british house of commons in 1938 would you have voted for or against the munich agreement.
support your decision.
analyzing issues how did the development of conventional weapons factor into germanys blitzkrieg strategy.
world war looms teks7d the holocaust main idea why it matters now during the holocaust the nazis systematically executed 6 million jews and 5 million other non aryans after the atrocities of the holocaust agencies formed to publicize human rights.
these agencies have remained a force in todays world.
taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on events that led to the holocaust.
j terms names holocaust ghetto kristallnacht concentration genocide camp gerda weissmann was a carefree girl of 15 when in september 1939 invading german troops shattered her world.
because the weissmanns were jews they were forced to give up their home to a german family.
in 1942 gerda her parents and most of poland s 3 000 000 jews were sent to labor camps.
gerda recalls when members of hitler s elite schutzstaffel or security squadron ss came to round up the jews.
a personal voice gerda weissmann klein we had to form a line and an ss man stood there with a little stick.
i was holding hands with my mother and he looked at me and said how old and i said eighteen and he sort of pushed me to one side and my mother to the other side.
and shortly thereafter some trucks arrived.
and we were loaded onto the trucks.
i heard my mothers voice from very far off ask where to and i shouted back i dont know gerda weissmann quoted in the film one survivor remembers klein in her mid teens when the american lieutenant kurt klein who would later become gerda s husband liberated her from the nazis in 1945 just one day before her 21st birthday she weighed 68 pounds and her hair had turned white.
even so of all her family and friends she alone had survived the nazis campaign to exterminate europe s jews.
the persecution begins on april 7 1933 shortly after hitler took power in germany he ordered all non aryans to be removed from government jobs.
this order was one of the first moves in a campaign for racial purity that eventually led to the holocaust the systematic murder of 6 million jews across europe.
the nazis also murdered 5 million other people.
542 chapter 16 texas test practice use the cartoon and your knowledge of u s history to answer questions 1 and 2.
1 all of the following are true of f d r s neutrality policy except a roosevelt found it hard to keep the united states neutral.
b roosevelt did not always enforce the neutrality acts.
c roosevelt promoted the neutrality policy of the united states throughout the war.
d roosevelt spoke out against isolationism.
2 president wilsons image rises above president roosevelt to wish him luck for helping to pass the bill he is signing keeping the united states out of a war.
winning the next presidential election gaining greater revenues from europe.
use the quotation and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 3.
in the future days which we seek to make secure we look forward to a world founded upon four essential human freedoms.
the first is freedom of speech and expression.
everywhere in the world.
the second is freedom of every person to worship god in his own way.
everywhere in the world.
the third is freedom from want.
the fourth is freedom from fear 99 franklin roosevelt address to congress 1941 3 the four freedoms speech helped gain widespread support in the united states for a increasing aid to the allies.
b decreasing immigration.
c a military and arms buildup.
d a presidential election.
test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history my writesmart recall the issues that you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter skill activity identifying bias defining the skill a bias is a prejudiced point of view.
the bias may be slanted by personal or political beliefs.
historical accounts that are biased reflect the personal prejudices of the author or historian and tend to be one sided.
bias can help historians understand the different attitudes during a certain time in history.
you can find bias in written oral and visual materials such as diaries speeches and propaganda posters.
the bias may appear for a variety of reasons and gives clues about an author s intent or background.
for example the author may be trying to justify an action or sway an opinion.
to avoid inserting bias into his or her own work a historian must examine different points of view and primary sources.
it is important to look at many sources on the same incident or issue in order to achieve a balanced analysis.
understanding the skill strategy analyze biases this passage is from a speech by president franklin d roosevelt the day after the japanese bombed pearl harbor in 1941 the chart that follows summarizes the speech.
address to congress requesting a declaration of war yesterday december 7 1941 a date which will live in infamy the united states was q suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and airforces of the empire of japan.
the united states was at peace with that nation and at the solicitation of japan was still in conversation with its government and its emperor looking toward the maintenance of peace in the pacific q it will be recorded that the distance of hawaii from japan makes it obvious that the attack was deliberately planned many days or even weeks ago japan has therefore undertaken a surprise offensive extending throughout the pacific area.
the facts of yesterday and today speak for themselves.
the people of the united states have already formed their opinions and well understand the implications to the very life and safety of our nation no matter how long it may take us to overcome this premeditated invasion the american people in their righteous might will win through to absolute victory.
believe that i interpret the will of the congress and of the people when i assert that we will not only defend ourselves to the uttermost but will make it very certain that this form of treachery shall never again endanger us.
hostilities exist there is no blinking at the fact that our people our territory and our interests are in grave danger i ask that the congress declare that since the unprovoked and dastardly attack by japan on o sunday december 7 1941 a state of war has existed between the united states and the japanese empire.
president franklin d roosevelt december 8 1941 0 identify the written oral or visual material and determine the author.
is this a document poster speech or other primary source.
what is the context of this source.
who is the author and what is his or her occupation.
if it is an image you may not know the author or date unless the source is revealed.
you can use context clues to help determine what the author represents and the timeframe in which it was created.
0 examine the authors point of view.
look for words phrases statements or images that might convey a positive or negative slant and thus reveal the authors bias.
how does president roosevelt feel about the japanese attack.
c 559 ski 0 consider the author s goal.
in this address the president wants congress to declare war on japan the speaker is using rhetoric or the skill of using language effectively and persuasively.
consider whether rhetoric is appropriate for this event.
0 examine the evidence.
is the information the author presents consistent with other accounts or supported by factual data.
is the behavior described consistent with human nature as you have observed it.
strategy make a chart for each of the heads listed on the left hand side of the chart summarize what information you can find in the passage.
author president franklin d pooseveit date december 3 1941 occasion declaring war on japan the day after pearl harbor in honolulu was attacked tone serious pleading demanding confident bias the author seems to have the prejudice that the united states is justified in going to war against japan because he believes the attack was premeditated.
he feels that if the united states does not declare war against japan the safety of the country is at stake.
applying the skill do internet research to find an audio recording of another speech from the early years of world war ii.
as you listen to the speech take notes about what you hear.
then use the strategies and a chart like the one above to analyze the speech for bias.
1 identify the material and determine the author.
what do you know about this author.
does the author support the axis nations or the united states.
on what occasion was the speech created and delivered.
2 examine the authors point of view.
what details in the speech help you identify the authors point of view.
are there any phrases that convey a positive or negative slant.
3 consider the authors goal.
what do you think the author wants to convey to others.
4 examine the evidence.
ia i k is the information the author provides in his or her speech consistent with other information you have learned about this time period and event.
559 mynotebook how did the united states use its resources to win world war ii.
texas essential knowledge and skills teks 2d 7b 7c 7d 7e 7f 7g 17a 19b 29b section 1 mobilizing for defense main idea following the attack on pearl harbor the united states mobilized for war.
section 2 the war for europe and north africa main idea allied forces led by the united states and great britain battled axis powers for control of europe and north africa.
section 3 the war in the pacific main idea in order to defeat japan and end the war in the pacific the united states unleashed a terrible new weapon the atomic bomb.
section 4 the home front main idea after world war ii americans adjusted to new economic opportunities and harsh social tensions.
h942 roosevelt creates the war production board to coordinate mobilization.
usa world i the raid on pearl harbor disabled the bulk of the u s fleet including the tennessee left and the arizona right.
19411 the japanese bomb pearl harbor.
bbc a philip randolph demands that war industries hire african americans.
1941 1941 hitler invades the soviet union.
ll 42j nazis develop the final solution for exterminating jews.
ql942 japanese americans are sent to relocation centers.
l1942 j in the pacific the battle of midway tom to tide in favor of the allies.
i 560 chapter 17 d day june 6 1944 allied forces i i flooded area glider landing di i 6 miles canal 0 3 6 kilometers a london d day morning a platoon of american infantry wade ashore to omaha beach.
e n g i i s h c h a n n e i army group commander of ground forces montgomery u s 1st army bradley vierville sur mer gold beach isigny trdvieres to st l6 j 4 i.
71 omaha beach great britain rnanbt mulberry harbor in order to accommodate the vast number of invading ships the allies built two enormous concrete ports and towed them to gold beach on the french coast on d day.
they sank 70 old ships to create a breakwater for the artificial harbor.
y geography skillbuilder 1 place how does the inset map at the top of the page help explain why hitler was expecting the invasion to cross from dover to calais over the strait of dover.
2 human environment interaction was d day a si p or complex operation.
how can you tell.
u historical spotlight audie murphy near the end of the second world war audie murphy became famous as the most decorated american soldier of the war.
he received 24 medals from the united states including the congressional medal of honor.
he was also awarded three medals by france and one more by belgium.
born in kingston texas murphy enlisted in the army in 1942 he served in north africa and europe and in 1944 he rose to the rank of second lieutenant.
his most impressive act of bravery occurred in january 1945 near colmar france when in the midst of a furious german attack he jumped onto a burning tank destroyer and killed about 50 axis troops with his machine gun.
although wounded in the leg he rallied his troops to retake the ground the germans had gained earlier in the day.
the battle of the bulge in october 1944 americans captured their first german town aachen.
hitler responded with a desperate last gasp offensive.
he ordered his troops to break through the allied lines and to recapture the belgian port of antwerp.
this bold move the fuhrer hoped would disrupt the enemy s supply lines and demoralize the allies.
on december 16 under cover of dense fog eight german tank divisions broke through weak american defenses along an 80 mile front.
hitler hoped that a victory would split american and british forces and break up allied supply lines.
tanks drove 60 miles into allied territory creating a bulge in the lines that gave this desperate last ditch offensive its name the battle of the bulge.
as the germans swept westward they captured 120 american gis near malmedy.
elite german troops the ss troopers herded the prisoners into a large field and mowed them down with machine guns and pistols.
the battle raged for a month.
when it was over the germans had been pushed back and little seemed to have changed.
but in fact events had taken a decisive turn.
the germans had lost 120 000 troops 600 tanks and assault guns and 1 600 planes in the battle of the bulge soldiers and weapons they could not replace.
from that point on the nazis could do little but retreat.
fj liberation of the death camps meanwhile allied troops pressed eastward into the german heartland and the soviet army pushed westward across poland toward berlin.
soviet troops were the first to come upon one of the nazi death camps in july 1944 as the soviets drew near a camp called majdanek in poland ss guards worked feverishly to bury and burn all evidence of their hideous crimes.
but they ran out of time.
when the soviets entered majdanek they found a thousand starving prisoners barely alive the world s largest crematorium and a storehouse containing 800 000 shoes.
this is not a concentration camp reported a stunned soviet war correspondent it is a gigantic murder plant.
the americans who later liberated nazi death camps in germany were equally horrified.
vocabulary elite a small and privileged group main idea analyzing effects why was the battle of the bulge important.
a personal voice robert t johnson we started smelling a terrible odor and suddenly we were at the concentration camp at landsberg.
forced the gate and faced hundreds of starving prisoners.
we saw emaciated men whose thighs were smaller than wrists many had bones sticking out thru their skin.
also we saw hundreds of burned and naked bodies.
that evening i wrote my wife that for the first time i truly realized the evil of hitler and why this war had to be waged quoted in voices letters from world war ii unconditional surrender by april 25 1945 the soviet army had stormed berlin.
as soviet shells burst overhead the city panicked.
hordes of soldiers stationed in berlin deserted and were shot on the spot or hanged from the nearest tree wrote claus fuhrmann a berlin clerk.
on their chests they had placards reading we betrayed the fuhrer p 576 chapter skill activity clarifying and summarizing i defining the skill clarifying means checking to be sure you clearly understand what you have read.
one way to do this is by asking yourself questions about the material.
in your answers you might restate in your own words what you have read.
when you summarize you condense what you have read into a shorter easier to understand format.
a good summary should include only a passage s main ideas and its most important supporting details.
when summarizing remember to use your own words.
knowing how to summarize can help you understand and recall the main ideas of what you read.
understanding the skill strategy understand and condense the text think about what a passage is trying to say and identify the main ideas.
clarify any words or concepts you don t know.
then in your own words write a summary that condenses and also clarifies key information.
the passage below tells about ways women men and children helped the war efforts at home.
following the description is a summary that condenses and also clarifies key information.
sacrifice and struggle at home i world war ii made demands of every american.
allied soldiers sailors and pilots risked life and i limb so that others could enjoy freedom the women children and men who remained in the united i states also played a key role in ensuring success overseas.
millions of americans contributed to the war effort by taking jobs in factories or offices.
in addition men women and children did their part at home to help the united states win the war.
meeting the food needs of the military took top priority in the united states.
the planting of victory gardens was one way in which americans filled these needs.
victory gardens planted at home i allowed more commercially produced food to be sent from farms to troops overseas.
victory gardens i alone did not solve all the nation s food needs.
some foods could not be produced in home gardens and there was simply not enough of certain products to go around.
as a result the united states began rationing food shortly after the nation entered the war.
during the war the government rationed products such as coffee butter sugar and meat.
each member of the family received a ration book which entitled that person to a certain amount of certain foods.
i the shortage of materials such as metal glass rubber and gasoline during the war also changed life for americans.
gasoline was rationed.
americans helped meet the demand for other materials by holding scrap drives in which citizens collected waste materials of all sorts that might be i used in the war efforts.
empty tin cans bits of rubber and glass anything that could be useful was salvaged.
even women s silk and nylon stockings were recycled to make parachutes.
scrap drives i provided a way for young americans to help with the war effort.
i i 599 ski 0 identify the main idea of the passage.
often a main idea is located at the beginning of the passage.
0 look for key supporting details.
include only the most important facts and details in the summary.
pay attention to numbers dates quantities and other data.
0 clarify understanding.
try to use your prior knowledge and experience to understand unfamiliar words or concepts.
for instance you may know that a food drive is an organized effort to collect food which should help yon to understand scrap drive.
if you still don t understand something look it up.
for example the word rationing means limiting the amount of a certain product that each individual can get.
then restate the passages main idea and most important details in your own words in a summary.
strategy write a summary you can write your summary in a paragraph.
the paragraph below summarizes the passage.
after writing your summary review it to see that you have included only the most important details.
summary during world war ii people helped support the war both overseas and at home.
women children and men that remained in the united states supported the efforts by getting jobs to make needed materials growing victory gardens to supply food and following rationing efforts.
to combat a scarcity of metal glass and rubber goods young people started scrap drives to collect waste materials that could then be recycled into items soldiers could use ouch as parachutes.
applying the skill turn to chapter 19 and your knowledge of american history.
4 i my vritesmart xcehtury review the graph on page 643 convert the graph into chart form.
then review the chart above.
use the chart to create a graph showing the same information in visual form.
use the charts and graphs to pose and answer a series of questions about geographic patterns and distributions in the united states from 1940 to 1970 consider how the population was changing and where people were living.
create a website to share your findings.
in 1956 president eisenhower signed the interstate highway act that led to the construction of a nationwide highway network.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write a persuasive essay supporting the law.
in the first part of your essay clearly outline the benefits created by the law.
in the second part of your essay address the concerns of those who oppose the law.
end of chapter skill activity interpreting graphs and charts defining the skill graphs show statistical information in a visual manner.
historians use graphs to visualize and compare amounts ratios economic trends and changes over time.
line graphs typically show quantities on the vertical axis up the left side and time in various units on the horizontal axis across the bottom.
pie graphs are useful for showing relative proportions.
the circle represents the whole and the slices represent the parts belonging to various subgroups.
bar graphs are commonly used to display information about quantities.
charts including simple charts tables and diagrams are visual representations of information such as facts and statistics.
historians use charts to organize condense simplify and summarize information.
tables classify information by groups.
numbers percentages dates and other data can be classified in the columns and rows of a table for easy reference and comparison.
understanding the skill strategy interpret graphs and charts graphs and charts can be useful tools for answering questions about geographic patterns and distributions.
to learn more about changes in population density in different regions review the graph and chart below.
identify the type of information presented in the graph or chart and how it is organized.
then analyze the information in order to pose and answer questions.
l u s population density by region 1900 2000 northeast midwest south bwest source demographic trends in the 20th century u s census bureau identify the subject of the graph.
read the title to identify the main idea of the graph.
when more than one subject is shown such as different regions the graph will probably show a relationship between them.
look at the way the information is organized.
examine the labels.
read the horizontal and vertical axis laheis these tell what the line graph measures and the unit of measurement.
look at the legend.
find out the each symbol or color in the graph represents.
5 0ul wnat eacn analyze the graph.
summarize the information shown in each part of the graph and pose questions what trends do you see n the line graph over certain years.
when did the population in certain egics grow the most.
what can you infer about geographic patterns and distributions.
8 g 1 percentage of total population living in metropolitan areas by size of metropolitan area population 1950 to 2000 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 5 million 12 2 15 8 15 2 20 4 21 2 29 9 1 million to 4 999 999 17 3 19 5 25 5 25 5 28 9 27 5 20 000 to 999 999 17 9 18 9 19 9 19 4 18 7 16 less than 250 000 8 7 9 1 8 4 9 8 8 7 6 9 source u s census bureau 0 identify the subject of the chart.
read the title to get the main idea of the chart.
0 look at the way the information is organized.
read the row and column headings.
charts can be organized alphabetically chronologically or in other ways.
identify the entries included under each heading.
0 analyze the graph.
interpret compare and contrast the information to draw inferences and conclusions and make predictions.
determine what the statistics indicate about how the number of people living in metropolitan areas changed over time.
use this information to pose historical questions such as in what way has the population in metropolitan areas changed between 1950 and 2000 strategy write a summary write a paragraph to summarize what you learned from the chart or graph.
this example summarizes what you can learn from the chart above.
the percentage of people living in metropolitan areas over 5 million increased steadily between 1950 and 2000.
it rose almost 250 percent.
from the chart it appears that population in smaller metropolitan areas rises and falls over time but population rises consistently in larger metropolitan areas.
j applying the skill turn to chapter 19 section 1 page 636 and look at the visuals in a dynamic economy.
study the graphs and write a paragraph in which you summarize what you learned from them.
1 identify the subject of the graph or chart.
what information do the graphs show.
2 look at the way the information is organized.
hare anv what do the labels reveal about what is shown.
do the grap y common labels.
conclusions and pose questions.
what pp 1950 and 1962.
665 si unit 6 apter 20 the new frontier and the great society 1960 1968 faafter 21 civil rights 1954 1968 tpfr 22 the vietnam war years 1954 1975 japrer 23 an era of social change j 1960 1975 i living with great turmoil 1954 1975 j fiigit w j 4 7 y sf s w p t c f i v 1 unit project in this unit you will read about a turbulent time in american history when many groups were seeking equality.
use your knowledge of historical eras the units content and the major characteristics of history to identify the eras in this unit.
then create a webpage that describes the defining characteristics of each era.
civil rights march 1965 by james karales v f t r y v mki ul 666 5.
k l960l john f kennedy is elected president.
1961 u s launches the bay of pigs invasion.
1962 john glenn becomes the first american to orbit the earth.
1962 u s and ussr face off in the cuban missile crisis.
19631 president kennedy is assassinated lyndon b johnson becomes president.
usa world i960 1961 1962 1963 i960 seventeen african countries gain independence.
i96lj soviet cosmonaut yurigagarin becomes the first human in outer space.
1962 the drug thalidomide is pulled from the market after it is found responsible for thousands of birth defects in europe.
668 chapter 21 background seep essyv.
ferguson on page 290 main idea analyzing effects what were the effects of the supreme court decision plessy v ferguson.
plessy v ferguson during the 1890s a number of other court decisions and state laws severely limited african american rights.
in 1890 louisiana passed a law requiring railroads to provide equal but separate accommodations for the white and colored races.
in the plessy v ferguson case of 1896 the supreme court ruled that this separate but equal law did not violate the fourteenth amendment which guarantees all americans equal treatment under the law.
armed with the plessy decision states throughout the nation but especially in the south passed what were known as jim crow laws aimed at separating the races.
these laws forbade marriage between blacks and whites and established many other restrictions on social and religious contact between the races.
there were separate schools as well as separate streetcars waiting rooms railroad coaches elevators witness stands and public restrooms.
the facilities provided for blacks were always inferior to those for whites.
nearly every day african americans faced humiliating signs that read colored water no blacks allowed whites only.
fly segregation continues into the 20th century after the civil war some african americans tried to escape southern racism by moving north.
this migration of southern african americans speeded up greatly during world war i as many african american sharecroppers abandoned farms for the promise of industrial jobs in northern cities.
however they discovered racial prejudice and segregation there too.
most could find housing only in all black neighborhoods.
many white workers also resented the competition for jobs.
this sometimes led to violence.
apartheid segregation in south africa in 1948 the white government of south africa passed laws to ensure that whites would stay in control of the country.
those laws established a system called apartheid which means apartness the system divided south africans into four segregated racial groups whites blacks coloreds of mixed race and asians.
it restricted what jobs nonwhites could hold where they could live and what rights they could exercise.
because of apartheid the black african majority were denied the right to vote.
in response to worldwide criticism the south african government gradually repealed the apartheid laws starting in the late 1970s.
in 1994 south africa held its first all race election and elected as president nelson mandela a black anti apartheid leader whom the white government had imprisoned for nearly 30 years.
i l segregation required cz3 segregation permitted n l segregation prohibited l no specific legislation or local option these photos of the public schools for white children top and for black children above in a southern town in the 1930s show that separate facilities were often unequal in the segregation era.
u s school segregation 1952 maine geography skillbuilder region in which regions were schools segregated by law.
in which were segregation expressly prohibited.
civil rights 7 thurgood marshall 1908 1993 thurgood marshall dedicated his life to fighting racism.
his father had labored as a steward at an all white country club his mother as a teacher at an all black school.
marshall himself was denied admission to the university of maryland law school because of his race.
in 1961 president john f kennedy nominated marshall to the u s court of appeals.
lyndon johnson picked marshall for u s solicitor general in 1965 and two years later named him as the first african american supreme court justice.
in that role he remained a strong advocate of civil rights until he retired in 1991 after marshall died in 1993 a copy of the brown v board of education decision was placed beside his casket.
on it an admirer wrote you shall always be remembered a developing civil rights movement in many ways the events of world war ii set the stage for the civil rights movement.
first the demand for soldiers in the early 1940s created a shortage of white male laborers.
that labor shortage opened up new job opportunities for african americans latinos and white women.
second nearly one million african americans served in the armed forces which needed so many fighting men that they had to end their discriminatory policies.
such policies had previously kept african americans from serving in fighting units.
many african american soldiers returned from the war determined to fight for their own freedom now that they had helped defeat fascist regimes overseas.
third during the war civil rights organizations actively campaigned for african american voting rights and challenged jim crow laws.
in response to protests president roosevelt issued a presidential directive prohibiting racial discrimination by federal agencies and all companies that were engaged in war work.
the groundwork was laid for more organized campaigns to end segregation throughout the united states.
challenging segregation in court the desegregation campaign was led largely by the naacp which had fought since 1909 to end segregation.
one influential figure in this campaign was charles hamilton houston a brilliant howard university law professor who also served as chief legal counsel for the naacp from 1934 to 1938 the naacp legal strategy in deciding the naacp s legal strategy houston focused on the inequality between the separate schools that many states provided.
at that time the nation spent ten times as much money educating a white child as an african american child.
thus houston focused the organization s limited resources on challenging the most glaring inequalities of segregated public education.
in 1938 he placed a team of his best law students under the direction of thurgood marshall.
over the next 23 years marshall and his naacp lawyers would win 29 out of 32 cases argued before the supreme court.
several of the cases became legal milestones each chipping away at the segregation platform of plessyv.
in the 1946 case morgan v virginia the supreme court declared unconstitutional those state laws mandating segregated seating on interstate buses.
in 1950 the high court ruled in sweatt v painter that state law schools must admit black applicants even if separate black schools exist.
brown v board of education marshall s most stunning victory came on may 17 1954 in the case known as brown v board of education of topeka.
see page 708.
in this case the father of eight year old linda brown had charged the board of education of topeka kansas with violating linda s rights by denying her admission to an all white elementary school four blocks from her house.
the nearest all black elementary school was 21 blocks away.
in a landmark verdict the supreme court unanimously struck down segregation in schooling as an unconstitutional violation of the fourteenth amendment s equal protection main idea developing historical perspective how did events during world war ii lay the groundwork for african americans to fight for civil rights in the 1950s.
702 chapter 22 i i throng support for containment even after congress had approved e on in gulf resolution president johnson opposed sending u s ground troops to vietnam.
johnson s victory in the 1964 presidential election was due in part to charges that his republican opponent barry goldwater was an anticommunist who might push the united states into war with the soviet union.
in contrast to goldwater s heated warlike language johnson s speeches were more moderate yet he spoke determinedly about containing communism.
he declared he was not about to send american boys 9 or 10 000 miles away from home to do what asian boys ought to be doing for themselves however in march of 1965 that is precisely what the president did.
working closely with his foreign policy advisers particularly secretary of defense robert mcnamara and secretary of state dean rusk president johnson began dis main idea contrasting what differing opinions did johnsons advisers have about vietnam.
patching tens of thousands of u s soldiers to fight in vietnam.
some americans viewed johnson s decision as contradictory to his position during the presidential campaign.
however most saw the president as following an established and popular policy of confronting communism anywhere in the world.
congress as well as the american public strongly supported johnson s strategy.
a 1965 poll showed that 61 percent of americans supported the u s policy in vietnam while only 24 percent opposed.
there were dissenters within the johnson administration too.
in october of 1964 undersecretary of state george ball had argued against escalation warning that once on the tiger s back we cannot be sure of picking the place to dismount.
however the president s closest advisers strongly urged escalation believing the defeat of communism in vietnam to be of vital importance to the future of america and the world.
dean rusk stressed this view in a 1965 memo to president johnson.
t v y playr a personal voice dean rusk 46 the integrity of the u s commitment is the principal pillar of peace throughout the world.
if that commitment becomes unreliable the communist world would draw conclusions that would lead to our ruin and almost certainly to a catastrophic war.
so long as the south vietnamese are prepared to fight for themselves we cannot abandon them without disaster to peace and to our interests throughout the world.
quoted in in retrospect the troop buildup accelerates by the end of 1965 the u s government had sent more than 180 000 americans to vietnam.
the american commander in south vietnam general william westmoreland continued to request more troops.
westmoreland a west point graduate who had served in world war ii and korea was less than impressed with the fighting ability of the south vietnamese army or the army of the republic of vietnam arvn.
the arvn cannot stand up to this pressure without substantial u s combat support on the ground the general reported.
the only possible response is the aggressive deployment of u s.
throughout the early years of the war the johnson administration complied with westmorelands requests by 1967 the number of u s troops in vietnam had climbed to about 500 000 general william westmoreland 1914 2005 general westmoreland retired from the military in 1972 but even in retirement he could not escape the vietnam war.
in 1982 cbs tv aired a documentary entitled the uncounted enemy a vietnam deception.
the report viewed by millions asserted that westmoreland and the pentagon had deceived the u s government about the enemys size and strength during 1967 and 1968 to make it appear that u s forces were winning the war.
westmoreland claiming he was the victim of distorted false and specious information.
derived by sinister deception filed a 120 million libel suit against cbs.
the suit was eventually settled with both parties issuing statements pledging mutual respect.
cbs however stood by its story.
the vietnam war years 7j fighting in the jungle the united states entered the war in vietnam believing that its superior weaponry would lead it to victory over the vietcong.
however the jungle terrain and the enemy s guerrilla tactics soon turned the war into a frustrating stalemate.
an elusive enemy because the vietcong lacked the high powered weaponry of the american forces they used hit and run and ambush tactics as well as a keen knowledge of the jungle terrain to their advantage.
moving secretly in and out of the general population the vietcong destroyed the notion of a traditional front line by attacking u s troops in both the cities and the countryside.
because some of the enemy lived amidst the civilian population it was difficult for u s troops to discern friend from foe.
a woman selling soft drinks to u s soldiers might be a vietcong spy.
a boy standing on the corner might be ready to throw a grenade.
adding to the vietcong s elusiveness was a network of elaborate tunnels that allowed them to withstand airstrikes and to launch surprise attacks and then disappear quickly.
connecting villages throughout the countryside the tunnels became home to many guerrilla fighters.
the more the americans tried to drive us away from our land the more we burrowed into it recalled nguyen quoc a major in the vietcong army.
in addition the terrain was laced with countless booby traps and land mines.
because the exact location of the vietcong was often unknown u s troops laid land mines throughout the jungle.
the vietcong also laid their own traps and disassembled and reused u s mines.
american soldiers marching through south tunnels of the vietcong remote smoke outlets s h submerged entrance storage cache for weapons explosives and rice well first aid station powered by bicycle 738 chapters on nearly 400 campuses.
youths opposing the war did so for several reasons.
the most common was the belief that the conflict in vietnam was basically a civil war and that the u s military had no business there.
some said that the oppressive south vietnamese regime was no better than the communist regime it was fighting.
others argued that the united states could not police the entire globe and that war was draining american strength in other important parts of the world.
still others saw war simply as morally unjust.
the antiwar movement grew beyond college campuses.
small numbers of returning veterans began to protest the war.
folk singers such as pete seeger joan baez phil ochs and the trio peter paul and mary used music as a popular protest vehicle.
the number one song in september 1965 was eve of destruction in which singer barry mcguire stressed the ironic fact that young men could be drafted at age 18 but had to be 21 to vote.
perhaps the most popular antiwar song of the time was i feel like i m fixin to die rag by country joe and the fish.
written by bandleader joe mcdonald a vietnam veteran this song sarcastically encouraged young men politicians businesses and even parents to give their whole hearted support to the war.
from protest to resistance by 1967 the antiwar movement had intensified with no sign of slowing down.
we were having no effect on u s policy recalled one protest leader so we thought we had to up the ante.
in the spring of 1967 nearly half a million protesters of all ages gathered in new york s central park.
shouting burn cards not people.
and hell no we won t go.
hundreds tossed their draft cards into a bonfire.
a woman from new jersey told a reporter so many of us are frustrated.
we want to criticize this war because we think it s wrong but we want to do it in the framework of loyalty.
historical spotlight ballad of the green berets not every vietnam era pop song about war was an antiwar song.
at the top of the charts for five weeks in 1966 was the ballad of the green berets by staff sergeant barry sadler of the u s army special forces known as the green berets fighting soldiers from the sky fearless men who jump and die men who mean just what they say the brave men of the green beret.
the recording sold over a million copies in its first two weeks of release and was billboard magazines song of the year.
difficult decisions resist the draft or serve your country.
as the fighting in vietnam intensified young men of draft age who opposed the war found themselves considering one of two options register with the draft board and risk heading off to war or find a way to avoid military service.
ways to avoid service included medical and educational deferments.
but a great many men did not qualify for these.
the choices that remained such as fleeing the country going to jail or giving in and joining the ranks came with a high price.
once a decision was made there was no turning back.
1 imagine you oppose the war and are called to serve in vietnam.
what decision would you make.
would you feel guilty if you avoided the draft.
if you chose to serve how would you view those who did not serve your country.
2 do you think more young men would have been willing to serve had this been a different war.
others were more radical in their view.
david harris who would spend 20 months in jail for refusing to serve in vietnam explained his motives.
a personal voice david harris theoretically i can accept the notion that there are circumstances in which you have to kill people.
i could not accept the notion that vietnam was one of those circumstances.
and to me that left the option of either sitting by and watching what was an enormous injustice or finding some way to commit myself against it.
and the position that i felt comfortable with in committing myself against it was total noncooperation i was not going to be part of the machine.
quoted in the war within draft resistance continued from 1967 until president nixon phased out the draft in the early 1970s.
during these years the u s government accused more than 200 000 men of draft offenses and imprisoned nearly 4 000 draft resisters.
although some were imprisoned for four or five years most won parole after 6 to 12 months.
throughout these years about 10 000 americans fled many to canada.
in october of 1967 a demonstration at washington s lincoln memorial drew about 75 000 protesters.
after listening to speeches approximately 30 000 demonstrators locked arms for a march on the pentagon in order to disrupt the center of the american war machine as one organizer explained.
as hundreds of protesters broke past the military police and mounted the pentagon steps they were met by tear gas and clubs.
about 1 500 demonstrators were injured and at least 700 arrested.
war divides the nation by 1967 americans increasingly found themselves divided into two camps regarding the war.
those who strongly opposed the war and believed the united states should withdraw were known as doves.
feeling just as strongly that america should unleash much of its greater military force to win the war were the hawks.
despite the visibility of the antiwar protesters a majority of american citizens in 1967 still remained committed to the war.
others while less certain about the proper u s role in vietnam were shocked to see protesters publicly criticize a war in which their fellow americans were fighting and dying.
a poll taken in december of 1967 showed that 70 percent of americans believed the war protests were acts of disloyalty.
a firefighter who lost his son in vietnam articulated the bitter feelings a number of americans felt toward the antiwar movement.
a personal voice im bitter its people like us who give up our sons for the country.
the college types the professors they go to washington and tell the government what to do.
but their sons they dont end up in the swamps over there in vietnam.
theyre deferred because theyre in school.
or they get sent to safe places.
what bothers me about the peace crowd is that you can tell from their attitude the way they look and what they say that they dont really love this country a firefighter quoted in working class war main idea evaluating do you think it was right for the government to imprison draft resisters.
this sign reflects the view of many americans that the antiwar protests undermined the war effort in vietnam.
main idea responding to antiwar posters americans who supported the government s vietnam policy developed their own slogans support our men in vietnam and evaluating america love it or leave it ej what were the key issues that johnson remains determined throughout the turmoil and division divided america.
that engulfed the country during the early years of the war president johnson remained firm.
attacked by doves for not withdrawing and by hawks for not increasing military power rapidly enough johnson was dismissive of both groups and their motives.
he continued his policy of slow escalation.
a personal voice lyndon b johnson there has always been confusion frustration and difference of opinion in this country when there is a war going on.
you know what president roosevelt went through and president wilson in world war i he had some senators from certain areas.
that gave him serious problems until victory was assured.
we are going to have these differences.
no one likes war.
all people love peace.
but you cant have freedom without defending it quoted in no hail no farewell however by the end of 1967 johnson s policy and the continuing stalemate had begun to create turmoil within his own administration.
in november defense secretary robert mcnamara a key architect of u s escalation in vietnam quietly announced he was resigning to become head of the world bank.
it didn t add up mcnamara recalled later.
what i was trying to find out was how the war went on year after year when we stopped the infiltration from north vietnam or shrunk it and when we had a very high body count and so on.
it just didn t make sense.
ir as it happened mcnamara s resignation came on the threshold of the most tumultuous year of the sixties.
in 1968 the war and johnson s presidency would take a drastic turn for the worse.
assessment 1 terms names for each of the following write a sentence explaining its significance.
draft students for a free speech movement new left democratic society sds dove hawk main idea using your notes re create the tree diagram below on your paper.
then fill it in with examples of student organizations issues and demonstrations of the new left.
critical thinking developing historical perspective imagine it is 1967 do you think you would ally yourself with the hawks or the doves.
give reasons that support your position.
4 evaluating do you agree that antiwar protests were acts of disloyalty.
why or why not.
analyzing visual sources this antiwar poster is a parody of the world war i uncle sam poster shown on page 382 which states i want you for the u s army why might the artist have chosen this american character to express the antiwar message.
teks8e 8f 1968 a tumultuous year main idea why it matters now terms names an enemy attack in vietnam two assassinations and a chaotic political convention made 1968 an explosive year.
disturbing events in 1968 accentuated the nations divisions which are still healing in the 21st century.
tet offensive clark clifford robert kennedy eugene mccarthy hubert humphrey george wallace oneamerican sstory 4 taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the major events of 1968 on june 5 1968 john lewis the first chairman of the student nonviolent coordinating committee fell to the floor and wept.
robert f kennedy a leading democratic candidate for president had just been fatally shot.
two months earlier when martin luther king jr had fallen victim to an assassin s bullet lewis had told himself he still had kennedy.
and now they both were gone.
lewis who later became a congressman from georgia recalled the lasting impact of these assassinations.
a personal voice john lewis 66there are people today who are afraid in a sense to hope or to have hope again because of what happened in.
1968 something was taken from us.
the type of leadership that we had in a sense invested in that we had helped to make and to nourish was taken from us.
something died in all of us with those assassinations.
quoted in from camelot to kent state these violent deaths were but two of the traumatic events that rocked the nation in 1968 from a shocking setback in vietnam to a chaotic democratic national convention in chicago the events of 1968 made it the most tumultuous year of a turbulent decade.
john lewis the tet offensive turns the war the year 1968 began with a daring surprise attack by the vietcong on numerous cities in south vietnam.
the simultaneous strikes while ending in military defeat for the communist guerrillas stunned the american public.
many people with moderate views began to turn against the war.
a surprise attack january 30 was the vietnamese equivalent of new years eve the beginning of the lunar new year festivities known in vietnam as tet.
748 chapter assessment terms and names for each term or name below write a sentence explaining its connection to the vietnam war years.
1 ho chi minh 6.
2 ngo dinh diem 7.
3 vietcong 8.
4 william westmoreland 9.
5 napalm 10 tet offensive robert kennedy henry kissinger vietnamization pentagon papers 1964 congress passes the tonkin gulf resolution giving the president broad military powers in vietnam.
1966 1967 1967 antiwar protests 1 in the united 1 states intensify.
1965 first major u s combat troops arrive in vietnam to fight the vietcong and north vietnamese army.
1968 vietcong launch massive tet offensive on numerous south vietnamese cities.
1969 paris peace talks begin in earnest president nixon announces vietnamization of war gradual withdrawal of u s troops.
1970 1971 1970 president nixon orders invasion of cambodia to destroy enemy supply bases american college campuses erupt in protest.
1972 nixon unleashes christmas bombings on north vietnamese cities after peace talks break off.
1973 1974 1975 1973 united states and north vietnam sign a truce the u s withdraws the last of its troops from vietnam.
main ideas use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
moving toward conflict pages 730 735 1 how did the tonkin gulf resolution lead to greater u s involvement in vietnam.
2 explain the relationship of the vietnam war to the domino theory.
u s involvement and escalation pages 736 741 3 why did so much of the american public and many in the johnson administration support u s escalation in vietnam.
4 why did the war begin to lose support at home.
what contributed to the sinking morale of the u s troops.
a nation divided pages 742 747 5 what race related problems existed for african american soldiers who served in the vietnam war.
6 summarize the ways in which the united states was sharply divided between hawks and doves.
a tumultuous year pages 748 753 7 what circumstances set the stage for president johnson s public announcement that he would not seek another term as president.
8 what acts of violence occurred in the united states during 1968 that dramatically altered the mood of the country.
the end of the war and its legacy pages 754 761 9 briefly describe the military conflict in vietnam soon after the last u s combat troops departed in 1973.
10 list the immediate effects and the more lasting legacies of americas involvement in the vietnam war.
critical thinking using your notes create a cause and effect diagram like the one below for the gulf of tonkin resolution and the war powers act.
then explain the impact of each event on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government.
cause congressional p jvieasure effect developing historical perspective read the economic spotlight feature on pages 762 763 describe thr economic impact of defense spending on the business cycle and education priorities from 1945 to the 1990s.
784 chapter.
now that youve learned how your countrys highest office holder president nixon lost the nations trust after the watergate scandal would you change your response.
discuss your suggestions with a small group.
then create a list ranking the misuses from least to most severe.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write your list.
xggftury in a small group discuss possible environmental problems in each group members neighborhood listing them on a sheet of paper.
compare lists with other groups to determine the most common problems.
list possible solutions for each problem.
jpcus on writing mywritesmart based on what you have read in this chapter 25 main idea analyzing causes what factors led to reagans victory in 1980.
when jimmy carter loses his.
reagan s long standing skill at simplifying issues and presenting clear cut answers led his supporters to call him the great communicator.
also his commitment to military and economic strength appealed to many americans.
only 52 6 percent of american voters went to the polls in 1980 reagan won the election by a narrow majority he got 44 million votes or 51 percent of the total.
his support however was spread throughout the country so that he carried 44 states and won 489 electoral votes.
republicans also gained control of the senate for the first time since 1954 as reagan assumed the presidency many people were buoyed by his genial smile and his assertion that it was morning again in america.
c now conservatives had elected one of their own a true believer in less government lower taxes and traditional values.
once elected reagan worked to translate the conservative agenda into public policy.
presidential election of 1980 party candidate electoral votes popular votes republican ronald reagan 489 43 904 153 democratic jimmy carter 49 35 483 883 independent john anderson 5 720 060 11 alaska j hawaii 3 district of columbia geography skillbuilder 1 location which states and or district voted for jimmy carter in 1980.
2 region which region of the country north south east or west voted exclusively for ronald reagan.
ia w assessment 1 terms names for each term or name below write a sentence explaining its significance.
entitlement program affirmative action conservative coalition ronald reagan new right reverse discrimination moral majority main idea using your notes use a cluster diagram to record the critical thinking analyzing motives how did the leaders of the conservative movement of the 1980s want to change government.
think about the difference between the conservative view of government and the liberal view the groups that made up the conservative coalition conservatives attitudes toward existing government programs analyzing effects what role did the moral majority play in the conservative movement of the 1970s and early 1980s.
evaluating leadership what personal qualities in ronald reagan helped him to win election as president in 1980.
choose one issue and explain in a paragraph the conservative position on that issue.
the conservative tide conservative policies under reagan and bush main idea why iit matters now terms names presidents reagan and bush pursued a conservative agenda that included tax cuts budget cuts and increased defense spending.
the conservative views of reagan and bush created policies and priorities that affect government spending and budgeting today.
reaganomics supply side economics strategic defense initiative sandra day oconnor deregulation environmental protection agency epa geraldine ferraro george bush oneamerican sstdry use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the effects of reagans economic policies.
president ronald reagan throughout the 1980 presidential campaign and in the early days of his administration president reagan emphasized the perilous state of the economy during the carter administration.
in a speech to the nation on february 5 1981 his first televised speech from the white house reagan announced his new economic program.
he called for a reduction in income tax rates for individuals and a big reduction in government spending.
a personal voice ronald reagan im speaking to you tonight to give you a report on the state of our nations economy.
i regret to say that were in the worst economic mess since the great depression.
its time to recognize that weve come to a turning point.
were threatened with an economic calamity of tremendous proportions and the old business as usual treatment cant save us.
together we must chart a different course.
televised speech to the nation february 5 1981 president reagan would deal with these problems by consistently stressing a sweeping package of new economic policies.
these economic policies dubbed reaganomics consisted of three parts 1 budget cuts 2 tax cuts and 3 increased defense spending.
reaganomics takes over as soon as reagan took office he worked to reduce the size and influence of the federal government which he thought would encourage private investment.
because people were anxious about the economy in 1980 their concern opened the door for new approaches to taxes and the federal budget.
834 chapter 25 main idea summarizing what are the main ideas of supply side economics.
dget cuts reagan s strategy for downsizing the federal government included eep cuts in government spending on social programs.
yet his cuts did not affect a segments of the population equally.
entitlement programs that benefited the middle class such as social security medicare and veterans pensions remained intact.
on the other hand congress slashed by 10 percent the budget for programs that benefited other groups urban mass transit food stamps welfare benefits job training medicaid school lunches and student loans.
tax cuts reaganomics rested heavily upon supply side economics.
this theory held that if people paid fewer taxes they would save more money.
banks could then loan that money to businesses which could invest the money in resources to improve productivity.
the supply of goods then would increase driving down prices.
at reagan s urging congress lowered income taxes by about 25 percent over a three year period.
reagan based his ideas for supply side economics on the work of economists such as george gilder and arthur laffer aj a personal voice arthur laffer the most debilitating act a government can perpetrate on its citizens is to adopt policies that destroy the economys production base for it is the production base that generates any prosperity to be found in the society.
u s tax policies over the last decade have had the effect of damaging this base by removing many of the incentives to economic advancement.
it is necessary to restore those incentives if we are to cure our economic palsy.
the economics of the tax revolt a reader increased defense spending at the same time reagan authorized increases in military spending that more than offset cuts in social programs.
between 1981 and 1984 the defense department budget almost doubled.
indeed the president revived two controversial weapons systems the mx missile and the b l bomber.
in 1983 reagan asked the country s scientists to develop a defense system that would keep americans safe from enemy missiles.
officially called the strategic defense initiative or sdi the system quickly became known as star wars after the title of a popular movie.
the defense department estimated that the system would cost trillions of dollars.
recession and recovery while reagan was charting a new course for the american economy the economy itself was sinking into recession.
lasting from july 1981 until november 1982 it was the most severe recession since the great depression.
however early in 1983 an economic upturn began as consumers went on a spending spree.
their confidence in the economy was bolstered by tax cuts a decline in interest rates and lower inflation.
the stock market surged unemployment declined and the gross national product went up by almost 10 percent.
the stock market boom lasted until 1987 when the market crashed losing 508 points in one day.
this fall was due in large part to automated and computerized buying and selling systems.
however the market recovered and then continued its upward climb.
the national debt climbs beneath the surface of recovery lay problems that continued to plague the economy.
tax cuts had helped the rich while social welfare cuts had hurt the poor.
despite large reductions in parts of the background the trickle down theory ronald reagans budget director david stockman used supply side economics to draft the economic recovery tax act of 1981 his tax package cut income taxes and business taxes by an average of 25 percent the largest tax cuts went to those with the highest incomes.
administration officials defended the plan by claiming that as prosperity returned the profits at the top would trickle down to the middle class and even the poor.
despite reagans trickle down theory the wealthy gained the most from these tax cuts.
in the 1980s the rich got richer as poverty deepened for many others.
the conservative tide analyzing political cartoons inflation stagecoach during reagans first term federal spending far outstripped federal revenue and created a huge budget deficit.
in this cartoon reagan with budget director david stockman sitting beside him on the inflation stagecoach sees something that shouldnt be there skillbuilder analyzing political cartoons 1 what is the meaning of the wheel flying off the stagecoach.
2 whom do the passengers inside the stagecoach represent.
main idea anita hill and clarence thomas testify before the senate judiciary committee in october 1991.
budget federal spending still outstripped federal revenue.
budget deficits were growing.
even though reagan backed away from supply side economics in 1982 and imposed new taxes they were not enough to balance the budget.
by the end of his first term the national debt had almost doubled.
b judicial power shifts to the right one of the most important ways in which reagan accomplished his conservative goals was through his appointments to the supreme court.
reagan nominated sandra day o connor antonin scalia and anthony m kennedy to fill seats left by retiring judges.
o connor was the first woman to be appointed to the court.
he also nominated justice william rehnquist the most conservative justice on the court at the time to the position of chief justice.
president bush later made the court even more conservative when david h souter replaced retiring justice william brennan.
bush also nominated clarence thomas to take the place of thurgood marshall.
however controversy exploded when law professor anita hill testified that thomas had sexually harassed her when she worked for him in the 1980s.
during several days of televised senate hearings committee members questioned thomas hill and witnesses for each side.
thomas eventually won approval by a final vote of 52 to 48 the reagan and bush appointments to the supreme court ended the liberal control over the court that had begun under franklin roosevelt.
these appointments became increasingly significant as the court revisited constitutional issues related to such topics as discrimination abortion and affirmative action.
in 1989 the court in a series of rulings restricted a woman s right to an abortion.
the court also imposed new restrictions on civil rights laws that had been designed to protect the rights of women and minorities.
during the 1990 1991 session the court narrowed the rights of arrested persons.
analyzing effects what were some of the effects of reaganomics 836 chapter 25 in the war on drugs drug abuse battles over abortion rights sometimes competed just suy u.
for public attention with concerns about rising drug abuse.
a few nancy reagan slogan people argued that drugs should be legalized to reduce the power of gangs who made a living selling illegal drugs.
others called for treatment facilities to treat addictions.
the reagan administration launched a war on drugs and supported moves to prosecute users as well as dealers.
first lady nancy reagan toured the country with an antidrug campaign that admonished students to just say no.
main idea identifying problems b what problems in education emerged during the 1980s.
education education became another issue that stirred people s concerns.
in 1983 a federal commission issued a report on education titled a nation at risk.
the report revealed that american students lagged behind students in most other industrialized nations.
in addition the report stated that 23 million americans were unable to follow an instruction manual or fill out a job application form.
the commission s findings touched off a debate about the quality of education.
the commission recommended more homework longer school days and an extended school year.
it also promoted increased pay and merit raises for teachers as well as a greater emphasis on basic subjects such as english math science social studies and computer science.
in april 1991 president bush announced an education initiative america 2000.
he argued that choice was the salvation of american schools and recommended allowing parents to use public funds to send their children to schools of their choice public private or religious.
first lady barbara bush toured the country to promote reading and writing skills.
the urban crisis the crisis in education was closely connected to the crisis in the cities.
many undereducated students lived in cities such as baltimore chicago detroit philadelphia and washington d c during the 1970s the united states had become increasingly suburbanized as more and more white families responded to the lure of new homes big lawns shopping malls and well equipped schools outside the cities.
businesses moved too taking jobs and tax revenue with them.
poor people and racial minorities were often left in cities burdened by high unemployment rates crumbling infrastructures inadequate funds for sanitation and health services deteriorating schools and growing social problems.
by 1992 thousands of people were homeless including many families with children.
cities were increasingly divided into wealthy neighborhoods and poverty stricken areas.
one poverty stricken area south central los angeles which had erupted in violence in 1965 and 1968 erupted again in 1992 four white police officers had been videotaped beating an african american man named rodney king who had been fleeing from the officers in a speeding car.
an all white jury found the officers not guilty on charges of brutality.
this verdict resulted in riots that lasted five days and caused the deaths of 53 people.
difficult sending money into space under the reagan administration the government shifted the emphasis of the space program from scientific to military and commercial applications.
beginning in 1981 nasa directed a series of space shuttle flights.
the agency hoped to establish a space station and have the shuttle ferry workers and materials to it.
the explosion of the space shuttle challenger in 1986 in which the crew was killed crew shown above caused a reexamination of ventures into space.
many people thought the money spent on space should be spent on social needs.
1 should the federal government spend money on space exploration when so many american citizens require basic assistance.
2 if you were a legislator being asked to vote in favor of funding space exploration today how would you vote.
the equal rights struggle within this environment of dwindling resources and social struggle women worked to achieve economic and social gains.
geraldine ferraro speaks at the 1984 democratic convention.
political losses and gains during the early 1980s women s rights activists worked to obtain ratification of the equal rights amendment era.
although congress had passed the amendment in 1972 it had not yet been ratified or approved by three fourths of the states.
supporters of the amendment had until june 30 1982 to gain ratification from 38 states.
they obtained only 35 of the 38 ratifications they needed and the era did not become law.
with the failure of the equal rights amendment women s organizations began to concentrate on electing women to public office.
more women candidates began to run for office and in 1984 the democrats chose geraldine ferraro as their vice presidential candidate.
she had spoken of the necessity for women to continue working for equal opportunities in american society.
a personal voice geraldine ferraro it is not just those of us who have reached the top who are fighting this daily battle.
it is a fight in which all of us rich and poor career and home oriented young and old participate simply because we are women.
quoted in vital speeches of the day womens and mens average yearly earnings in selected careers 1982 career women men accountant 19 916 25 272 advertising manager 19 396 32 292 computer operator 13 728 17 992 cook 8 476 9 880 engineer 26 052 31 460 financial manager 19 136 30 004 high school teacher 18 980 21 424 insurance salesperson 15 236 22 152 lawyer 30 264 34 008 personnel specialist 17 836 26 832 physician 21 944 26 884 police detective 15 548 20 072 real estate salesperson 16 432 24 076 registered nurse 20 592 20 696 retail sales worker 8 736 13 728 social worker 15 600 20 436 university professor 20 748 26 832 source bureau of labor statistics current population survey 1983 1989 skillbuilder interpreting charts 1 name one career that paid men and women almost equally.
2 what conclusion can you draw from this chart.
in the november 1992 election the number of women in the house of representatives increased from 23 to 47 and the number of women senators tripled from two to six.
president reagan also had earlier named two women to his cabinet in 1983 elizabeth dole became secretary of transportation and margaret heckler became secretary of health and human services.
nevertheless women remained underrepresented in political affairs.
inequality several factors contributed to what some called the feminization of poverty.
by 1992 57 8 percent of the nation s women were part of the work force and a growing percentage of women worked as professionals and managers.
however in that year women earned only about 75 cents for every dollar men earned.
female college graduates earned only slightly more than male high school graduates.
also about 31 percent of female heads of households lived in poverty and among african american women the poverty rate was even higher.
new trends in divorce settlements aggravated the situation.
because of no fault divorce fewer women won alimony payments and the courts rarely enforced the meager child support payments they awarded.
to close the income gap that left so many women poor women s organizations and unions proposed a system of pay equity.
jobs would main idea summarizing what steps did women take to help them move forward after the era failed to pass.
842 chapter 25 the gay rights movement advances during the 1970s and 1980s gay men and lesbians began to fight openly for civil rights.
while the gay rights movement suffered a setback during the early 1980s in the face of conservative opposition and the aids crisis by the late 1980s and early 1990s a new surge of gay activism was under way in the country direct action groups sprang up throughout the country calling for an end to anti gay discrimination.
although several speakers at the 1992 republican national convention condemned gay activism these speakers were unable to slow the pace of change.
by the year 1993 seven states and 110 communities had outlawed such discrimination.
a gay rights march in washington d c october 1987 1 terms names for each term or name below write a sentence explaining its significance.
aids acquired immune pay equity jesse jackson antonia coello novello deficiency syndrome l douglas wilder lauro cavazos main idea using your notes use a chart like the one below to list some of the social problems of the reagan and bush years and how the government responded to them.
critical thinking predicting effects how might improvements in the educational system help solve other social problems.
think about the impact education might have on health related problems the impact that education might have on urban problems the impact that education might have on unemployment 4 summarizing identify the political and economic contributions of women to american society in the 1980s.
5 comparing compare the political gains and losses experienced by various groups during the reagan and bush administrations.
forming generalizations why might a widening gap between the richest and poorest citizens of a country be a cause for concern about that countrys future.
choose one issue and write other responses the government might have made.
the conservative tide geography spotlight from rust belt to sun belt migration within the united states led to changing demographic patterns.
many americans left the north central and northeast regions which came to be called the rust belt because many of their aging factories had been closed.
these people moved to the south and southwest which became known as the sun belt due to their warm climate.
in the postwar decades the sun belt experienced an increase in job opportunities that attracted many new residents.
people also appreciated that these areas typically had a lower cost of living.
and with the widespread availability of air conditioning living in these states became more practical.
as people move from state to state and from region to region they gradually transform the balance of political and economic power in the nation.
each census in recent times has recorded how certain states have gained population and others have lost population.
if the gains or losses are large enough a state s representation in the u s house of representatives will increase or decrease commensurately.
the movement from the rust belt to the sun belt has caused a shift in political power within the united states.
regional exchanges between 1970 and 1975 the population center of the united states which had generally moved westward for 17 decades suddenly moved southward as well.
the arrows show the net number of americans who migrated and their patterns of migration in the early 1970s.
the west gained 311 000 from the northeast plus 472 000 from the north central region for a total of 783 000 people.
however it also lost 75 000 people to the south.
during the 1980s and 1990s the southward and westward shift continued.
below housing development near danville california 1990 846 chapter 26 main idea analyzing causes a what factors accounted for bushs decline in popularity.
the election of 1992 after the u s victory in the persian gulf war in 1991 republican president george bush s popularity had climbed to an 89 percent approval rating.
shortly after the war ended however the nation found itself in the grips of a recession.
in early 1992 bush s approval rating nose dived to 40 percent.
in his run for reelection president bush could not convince the public that he had a clear strategy for ending the recession and creating jobs.
throughout the presidential race bill clinton campaigned as the candidate who would lead the nation out of its economic crisis.
so did a third party candidate texas billion aire h ross perot.
perot targeted the soaring federal budget deficit as the nation s number one problem.
a budget deficit occurs when the federal government borrows money to meet all its spending commitments.
it s time perot declared in his usual blunt style to take out the trash and clean up the barn.
election day results however demonstrated that clinton s center of the road strategy had the widest appeal.
though clinton won he captured only 43 percent of the popular vote.
bush received 38 percent while perot managed an impressive 19 percent.
a new democrat bill clinton won the presidency in part by promising to move away from traditional democratic policies.
he also emphasized the need to move people off welfare and called for growth in private business as a means to economic progress.
in office clinton worked to move the democratic party toward the political center by embracing both liberal and conservative programs.
according to an ally clinton hoped to modernize liberalism so it could sell again.
by doing so he sought to create a new and more inclusive democratic party.
main idea analyzing causes si what factors led to the defeat of clintons health care plan.
william jefferson clinton 1946 born in hope arkansas at the beginning of the baby boom bill clinton had wanted to be president most of his life.
as a college student in the 1960s he had opposed the vietnam war and pulled strings to avoid being drafted.
after studying in england as a rhodes scholar and graduating from yale law school clinton returned to arkansas.
he taught at the university of arkansas school of law and dived into politics becoming governor in 1979 at the age of 32 moderate reform and economic boom president clinton demonstrated his willingness to pursue both liberal and conservative policies on health care the budget deficit crime and welfare.
health care reform clinton had pledged to create a plan to guarantee affordable health care for all americans especially for the millions of americans who lacked medical insurance.
once in office clinton appointed first lady hillary rodham clinton a skilled lawyer and child welfare advocate to head the team creating the plan.
the president presented the health care reform bill to congress in september 1993 congress debated the plan for a year.
intense lobbying and republican attacks on the plan for promoting big government sealed its doom.
in the end congress never even voted on the bill.
s hillary rodham clinton explains the hearth care reform plan to a senate subcommittee.
the united states in today s world injured victims after the april 1995 bombing of the alfred p murrah federal building in oklahoma city oklahoma.
balanced budget and an economic boom president clinton was more successful in his efforts to reduce the federal budget deficit.
clinton and the republican controlled congress agreed in 1997 on legislation to balance the federal budget by the year 2002 the bill cut spending by billions of dollars lowered taxes to win republican support and included programs aimed at helping children and improving health care.
a year later clinton announced that for the first time in nearly 30 years the federal budget had a surplus.
that is the government took in more than it spent.
surpluses were used in part to pay down the nation s debt which had soared to around 5 5 trillion.
perhaps the most effective tool in generating a surplus was the booming economy.
about the time clinton took office the economy rebounded.
unemployment fell and the stock market soared to new heights.
as a result the government s tax revenues rose and fewer people received public aid.
these factors helped slash the federal debt.
reforming welfare clinton and the congressional republicans cooperated to reform the welfare system.
in 1996 a bill was proposed to place limits on how long people could receive benefits.
it also put an end to a 61 year federal guarantee of welfare and instead gave states block grants set amounts of federal money they could spend on welfare or for other social concerns.
although liberal democrats feared the effects of eliminating the federal safety net for the poor the president backed the bill.
over the next few years states moved millions of people from welfare to jobs.
because of the strong economy the transition was more successful than some had been predicting.
crime and terrorism the improved economy along with enlargement of police forces combined to lower crime rates in the 1990s.
however fears were raised among americans by acts of violence and terrorism around the country.
a shocking crime occurred april 1999 when two students at columbine high school in colorado killed 12 students and a teacher and wounded 23 others and then shot themselves.
americans were appalled at copycat crimes that began to occur.
some called for tougher gun control while others argued that exposure to violent imagery should be curtailed.
violence had pervaded television news throughout the decade.
in 1993 terrorists had exploded bombs in the world trade center in new york city.
this was closely followed by a 1995 blast that destroyed a nine story federal office building in oklahoma city killing 168 children women and men.
timothy mcveigh an american veteran of the gulf war was found guilty in the oklahoma bombing.
he was executed in 2001 the first use of the federal death penalty in 38 years.
although american embassies and military targets abroad were subject to sporadic and deadly terrorist attacks during the decade the u s was in no way prepared for a devastating attack that took place on its own soil on the morning of september 11 2001 m main idea summarizing what acts of terrorism targeted americans in the decade preceding 2001.
862 chapter 26 main idea predicting effects what are the factors that will force an eventual restructuring of social security.
social security which pays benefits to retired americans was designed to rely on continued funding from a vast number of younger workers who would contribute taxes to support a small number of retired workers.
that system worked well when younger workers far outnumbered retirees and when most workers didn t live long after retirement.
in 1996 it took social security contributions from three workers to support every retiree.
by 2030 however with an increase in the number of elderly persons and an expected decline in the birthrate there will be only two workers contributions available to support each senior citizen.
few issues loomed as large in the recent presidential elections as what to do about social security.
if the government does not restructure the system social security will eventually pay out more money than it will take in.
some people suggest that the system be reformed by raising deductions for workers taxing the benefits paid to wealthier americans and raising the age at which retirees can collect benefits.
the shifting population in addition to becoming increasingly suburban and elderly the population of the united states has also been transformed by immigration.
between 1970 and 2010 the country s population swelled from 204 million to more than 309 million.
immigration accounted for much of that growth.
as the nation s newest residents yearned for u s citizenship however other americans debated the effects of immigration on american life.
a changing immigrant population the most recent immigrants to the united states differ from immigrants of earlier years.
the large numbers of immigrants who entered the country before and just after 1900 came from europe.
change in u s foreign born population 2000 2011 percentage increase in foreign born population 75 1 or greater 50 1 to 75 0 25 1 to 50 0 ez3 25 0 or less foreign born population increased nationally by 29 8.
source u s census bureau geography skillbuilder movement use the map to create a chart showing the percentage increase in foreign born population for each state.
then use the map and your chart to pose and answer a question about geographic distributions and patterns.
the united states in today s world 8l lowe shee miu of oakland california stands in front of a monument commemorating chinese immigrants at angel island the ellis island of the west.
in contrast more than 30 percent of immigrants since the 1960s have come from asia and about 50 percent from the western hemisphere primarily mexico.
in mexico for example during three months in 1994 1995 the mexican peso was devalued by 73 percent.
the devaluation made the mexican economy decline.
as a result almost a million mexicans lost their jobs.
many of the unemployed headed north in search of jobs in the united states.
this search for a better opportunity continued throughout the 1990s as thousands of legal and illegal immigrants arrived each day the vast majority from mexico.
to help those persons seeking more opportunity in america a temporary guest worker program for those immigrants residing illegally in the united states was proposed several times in the early 2000s.
by 2010 however this guest worker program had not been enacted into law.
census bureau data indicated that patterns of immigration are changing the country s ethnic and racial makeup.
by 2001 for example california had become a majority minority state with asian americans latinos african americans and native americans making up more than half its population.
by 2009 three other states hawaii new mexico and texas had also become majority minority states.
arizona georgia maryland mississippi and new york were close with minority populations of 40 percent.
debates over immigration policy the presence of such a large number of immigrants has also added to the continuing debate over u s immigration policies.
many americans believe that their country can t absorb more immigrants.
by the early 1990s an estimated 3 2 million illegal immigrants from mexico el salvador guatemala and haiti had made their way to the united states.
many illegal immigrants also arrived from canada poland china and ireland.
they took jobs many americans turned down as farm workers and domestic servants often receiving the minimum wage or less and no benefits.
by 2009 an estimated 10 8 million illegal immigrants resided in the united states.
hostility toward illegal immigration has increased in states such as california and arizona two states with high percentages of immigrants.
in 1994 california passed proposition 187 which cut all education and nonemergency health benefits to illegal immigrants.
by march 1998 proposition 187 was ruled unconstitutional.
in 2010 arizona passed a law that enhanced state and local police authority to enforce federal immigration laws.
these efforts to control immigration inspired political participation among hispanic voters who saw themselves as targets.
as more immigrants make their way to the u s and the nations ethnic composition changes debates about immigration will continue.
those who favor tighter restrictions argue that immigrants take desired jobs.
others however point to america s historical diversity and the new ideas and energy immigrantsbring.
background the u s census has asked a race question on every census since the first survey in 1790 since 1890 the categories and definitions have changed with nearly every census.
ain ipea comparing how are current arguments against immigration similar to those used in the past.
886 chapter 27 civil rights for all in the 21st century advocacy groups have become concerned that the constitutional rights of some americans are being violated.
gay rights groups are working to secure what they view as marriage equality for gay people.
groups who believe that some laws violate their right to bear arms are working to expand gun rights.
gay rights the gay rights movement in the united states has made great strides in recent years toward equal rights and opportunities.
for instance after years of protesting the u s military s policies regarding gay soldiers the don t ask don t tell policy that prevented openly gay individuals from joining the military was repealed in 2011 in addition gay rights activists and many other american citizens believe that gay people should have the same right to marry the people they love that straight or heterosexual people have.
marriage equality usa is one organization that is working to get same sex marriage legalized in the united states.
it does this through education outreach and media campaigns.
those supporting same sex marriage have seen progress at the state level and in federal court.
supporters of the traditional idea of marriage as the union of one man and one woman have fought back.
groups like the national organization for marriage oppose what they call the redefinition of the institution.
gun ownership rights in 1993 president bill clinton signed the brady act which called for states to place a five day waiting period on the sale of handguns.
during that period police check the potential buyer s background.
if they find a criminal record a gun permit is denied.
however four years later in june 1997 the brady act was substantially weakened when the supreme court ruled that the federal government could not force state or local officials to run background checks on potential buyers of handguns.
at the center of the gun control issue lies a long standing constitutional debate.
the second amendment to the constitution states this a well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.
the national rifle association nra which is opposed to tougher gun control laws argues that gun control laws violate this right to bear arms.
founded in 1871 the nra is an american non profit organization that promotes firearm ownership.
the group s involvement in politics centers on its belief that firearm ownership is a civil right protected by the second amendment.
others contend that the second amendment was not intended to guarantee a right to personal weapons.
rather its purpose is to protect the state s right to maintain military units.
however recent rulings from the supreme court have affirmed that it is an individual right.
1 summarizing what new rights did the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments guarantee to african americans.
3 evaluating analyzing effects how do you think increasing numbers of women in managerial and other professional roles help shape american culture.
explain your answer.
how is todays civil rights movement different from how it was in the past.
how is it similar.
think about rights that african americans analyzing causes now that about a third of the states have legalized same sex marriage do you think more states will follow.
explain your answer.
fought for in the past rights that african americans fight for today 5 categorizing identify and describe the organizations promoting civil rights for african americans hispanic americans women and other civil rights movements.
issues for the 21st century teks13b 22c 26a 26c immigration how does immigration affect the united states.
for hundreds of years immigrants have come to the united states from numerous places throughout the world.
the many immigrants who became u s citizens are held together by a common bond.
that bond is their shared belief in the self evident truths stated in the declaration of independence that all people are created equal and have the right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
immigrants who came to the united states looking for a better life have also helped shape the country.
latino ranchers developed many of the tools and skills of the american cowboy.
chinese laborers laid the tracks of the transcontinental railroad.
african americans though not voluntary immigrants labored to develop the agriculture of the south and the industry of the north.
farmers and workers of every origin built the nation we know today.
today s immigrants from latin america asia and other parts of the world continue to shape american culture.
they bring new ideas and new traditions.
they also affect america s demographic patterns which are the ways in which the nation s population changes.
historical perspective america has always been a nation of immigrants.
from 1900 into the 1940s economic troubles and rapid population growth spurred more than 16 million europeans to move to the united states.
the same pressures have more recently hit asia and latin america with the same effect on the united states.
between 1989 and 2009 more than 21 million new immigrants came to the united states.
many immigrants eventually choose to become naturalized citizens.
the pros and cons of immigration have been argued throughout american history.
in the 1700s benjamin franklin worried about the number of germans immigrating to pennsylvania.
sharp anti immigration sentiment spurred the nativist movement that developed in the 1830s and the america first campaign of the 1920s.
americans today are divided on the issue.
some agree with former new york city mayor rudolph giuliani that immigrants challenge us with new ideas and new perspectives.
they look at america s history of diversity and believe that immigrants bring new energy to the country.
others side with dan stein of the federation for american immigration reform who has said that large scale immigration is not serving the needs and interests of the country.
the debate over immigration complicating the debate over immigration has been the issue of immigrantswho enter the country illegally.
by 2009 the number of immigrants who have arrived 906 chapter 27 section 4 pages 906 909 and read the passage titled the debate over immigration.
read about the changing demographic patterns resulting from illegal immigration to the united states.
use a database to find out more about the geographic patterns of illegal immigration in the united states over the course of ten years.
then use the information in the database to write a summary of your findings.
1 choose your topic.
in this case your topic is geographic patterns of illegal immigration in the united states over the past decade.
2 identify a database you want to use to find information.
consider what database might be the best choice for your topic.
do you think the u s census bureau would have the data you need.
why or why not.
research your options.
3 identify the headings and entries.
study the headings and entries to be sure that you understand the information presented in the database.
what headings clarify the information in the database you found.
what entries exist to help you pose and answer questions about illegal immigration to the united states.
4 use the database to help you quickly find the information to answer your questions.
draft a few questions to help you write a summary that focuses on your topic.
include the answers in your summary.

chapter 5 european exploration and colonization 47 at first new netherland was a company owned and operated business run by the dutch west india company.
the intent of the company directors was to make a profit for the investors in the company.
dutch families settled in present day albany and new york city then known as new amsterdam.
new netherland became active in trading for furs.
beaver skins and other furs were highly valued by europeans.
the settlement of new amsterdam with its fine natural harbor became a leading center for trade.
the dutch welcomed people from other countries.
they also practiced religious toleration.
walking around new amsterdam in the 1660s a visitor might have seen irish british german or french people talking in the streets.
others there might be native americans or africans.
the dutch west india company introduced enslaved persons to the colony in 1625 most africans in new netherland had been brought from africa or the west indies as enslaved persons.
the earliest known view of new amsterdam 1651.
which european countries established colonies and where did they settle.
what role did the dutch west india company play in creating colonial settlements.
the colonization of america shifted wealth and power away from the mediterranean region to the countries of western europe.
spain was greatly enriched by american gold and silver.
protestant england became engaged in a series of wars against catholic spain.
englands rulers desired to stake a claim for lands and riches in the new world so that they could match spains wealth.
englands colonies were established for political economic religious and social reasons.
chapter 6 life in colonial america 65 new england the colonies of new england massachusetts new hampshire connecticut and rhode island had rocky soil and less fertile land.
since the new england colonies were the farthest north they had longer winters and a colder climate than the other colonies.
many new englanders had small farms where they grew crops for their own use.
others used the forests in the region for lumber and building ships.
these colonies were located near the ocean where there was an abundance of whales and fish.
large numbers of new englanders became sailors fishermen and merchants.
the practice of religion especially puritanism also remained important in new england.
new englanders frequently owned and manned ships.
they carried sugar from the west indies to new england where it was turned into rum.
the rum was carried to africa where it was traded for slaves.
new england merchants also carried sugar from the west indies to england.
their ships were then loaded with manufactured goods and sailed back to new england.
you will learn more about these triangular trades later in this chapter you have learned about life in colonial america.
now you will have an opportunity to study one of the english colonies in greater depth.
your teacher will divide your class into thirteen small groups.
each group will be assigned one colony to research using classroom resources the school library or the internet.
for your colony your group should complete the checklist below.
after your checklist is completed share your results with the other groups for a final overview of colonial america.
it colony name year it was founded it reasons the colony was founded it its climate major landforms and bodies of water it population of the colony in 1700 1750 1775 it number of enslaved people in the colony at these select dates it major ethnic groups living in the colony it main religious groups in the colony it major economic activities it how the colony was governed it important events in the history of the colony chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 95 learning with graphic organizers describe each of the milestones along the road to the american revolution.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 111 10 the american colonists used the slogan no taxation without representation to express their belief in the need for f economic interdependence h mercantilism c hist 4 a j g the consent of the governed j parliamentary supremacy use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
i challenge the warmest advocate for reconciliation to show a single advantage that this continent can reap by being connected with great britain.
i repeat not a single advantage is derived.
our com will fetch its price in any market in europe and our imported goods must be paid buy them where we will thomas paine 1776 11 in this statement paine suggested that the american colonies should a negotiate an end to the conflict with england b form an alliance with england c declare independence from england d boycott goods from england 12 which document included the idea first suggested by john locke that people have a right to overthrow a government that oppresses them.
f mayflower compact g declaration of independence h fundamental orders of connecticut j proclamation of 1763 use the chart and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
13 based on the chart what was a major effect of the stamp act.
a the colonists no longer needed british goods.
ttist 4 a b the british refused to sell certain products to the colonists.
c the law led to a decline in the value of colonial currency.
d many colonists participated in actions in opposition to the act.
chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 123 these two disagreements were eventually settled by the following compromises ill util ib 181.
saisasia 111 major constitutional compromises issue how should states be represented in the national legislature.
issue how should slaves be counted.
the great compromise larger states felt they should have a greater say in the national government.
smaller states felt each state should have an equal voice.
in this compromise a two house bicameral legislature was created congress.
in the house of representatives states were represented according to their population size.
this allowed states with a larger population to have a greater number of representatives.
in the senate each state no matter what its size would be represented by two senators.
senators were elected indirectly.
all laws needed the approval of both houses of congress.
the three fifths compromise southern states wanted slaves counted as part of their population to have more members in the house of representatives.
the states compromised by agreeing to count every five slaves as three free persons for both taxation and representation.
tti ffttf free persons slaves taxation and representation 5 the commerce compromise.
another dispute involved the taxing of trade.
southern landowners who sold cash crops to england feared taxes on exports of their tobacco and other crops.
in the commerce compromise the delegates agreed to prohibit all taxes on exports goods sold to foreign countries.
only imported goods could be taxed.
the delegates also agreed that congress could not regulate or limit the slave trade for at least the next twenty years until 1808.
fa the delegates to the constitutional convention probably agreed on more aspects of the new government than they disagreed on.
list several of the questions on which the delegates agreed.
create a poster about the constitutional convention.
show what the delegates agreed on where they disagreed and what compromises they made.
hold a mock constitutional convention in your classroom.
have your teacher assign different roles to members of your class.
as a result of the agreements and compromises reached at the constitutional convention the delegates created a new system of government.
the chart on the next page shows the organization of the constitution itself name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 141 19 what is the purpose of the checks and balances system in the u s constitution.
a to expand the presidents treaty making powers govt i b to divide power between the federal and state governments c to prevent any one branch of the government from becoming too powerful d to allow each branch of the government to veto those laws it objects to use the diagram and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the king is forbidden to introduce most new taxes without the permission of the council of his nobles.
magna carta english bill of rights 1689 the king is forbidden from imposing taxes on his subjects without the approval of parliament.
20 which statement best replaces the question mark in the diagram.
f the u s congress must pass all taxes.
i govt 15 a i g each year the president must submit a budget to congress.
h elections in the house of representatives occur every two years.
j the congress cannot spend more than is provided in its budget.
use the newspaper headlines and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
21 which best describes the purpose of the amending process shown in these two newspaper headlines.
a the nations needs change requiring revisions to the constitution.
i govt 16 a b the national governments power must be limited or it will become tyrannical.
c the states are the rightful enforcers of the provisions of the constitution.
d the constitution was created by the states to serve the states.
22 between 1787 and 1789 a major controversy between the federalists and the anti federalists focused primarily on f expansion of slavery into the territories govt 17 a g the wisdom of creating a two house legislature h division of power among different levels of government j the issue of ratification of the new u s constitution name lisbiiisiiisaiaiaiibi chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 179 the second president of the united states john adams was a federalist who continued many of washingtons policies.
in 1800 john adams lost the presidential election to thomas jefferson.
jefferson sought to show that he was one of the people.
the capital had just been moved from philadelphia to washington d c jefferson walked alone from his boardinghouse to the capitol to take the oath of office.
his inauguration marked the first transition of the executive branch from one party to another.
sometimes known as the revolution of 1800 this change occurred without violence.
jefferson s views on government jefferson saw his election as a turning point.
he believed the best government was one that governed least.
jefferson opposed special privileges for the wealthy and had strong sympathies for the common farmer.
as president he set about reducing the size of the army ending naval expansion and lowering government costs.
thomas jefferson acting as an amateur historian in his first inaugural address 1801 jefferson spoke of what he thought was necessary to make america a prosperous nation.
here is what he said with all these blessings what more is necessary to make us a happy and prosperous people.
still one thing more fellow citizens a wise and frugal government which shall restrain men from injuring one another which shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvement and shall not take from the mouth of labor the bread it had earned.
this is the sum of good government what did jefferson see as good government.
fc is what jefferson said 200 years ago still relevant to our nation today.
the louisiana purchase 1803 jefferson had always dreamed of extending the united states westward.
he sent envoys to france to negotiate the right to send goods down the mississippi river to new orleans.
in 1803 napoleon bonaparte the new ruler of france offered to sell the louisiana territory.
chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 191 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below.
for each event listed describe it and evaluate its impact on the united states.
war of 1812 description impact monroe doctrine description impact era of good feelings description impact chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 229 oregon territory 1846 in 1818 great britain and the united states had agreed to joint control of the oregon territory which reached as far north as the latitude 54 40.
in the 1840s large numbers of pioneers began moving along the oregon trail to the fertile wil liamette valley in oregon.
thousands caught oregon fever groups crossed the 2 000 mile trail in covered wagons.
after crossing the rocky mountains most of these pioneers moved to oregon but some moved southwest to california then still a part of mexico.
the trail was often treacherous over deserts rivers and mountains and more than 20 000 people died along the route.
the mormons in utah the mormons were founded in upstate new york in 1830 by joseph smith at the time of the second great awakening they moved from new york to ohio missouri and illinois but were driven out of these states because of their unique religious beliefs which included marrying several wives.
in 1847 their leader brigham young led them westward by covered wagon to the great salt lake in utah a seemingly desolate and barren region in the great basin which the move west by followers of joseph smith.
could be cultivated only through irrigation.
here they found comfort in their isolation.
by the time of youngs death in 1877 125 000 mormons lived in utah.
the annexation of texas 1845 in the 1820s a group of americans reached an agreement with the government of mexico to settle in the region of mexico known as texas as the number of anglo american settlers increased the mexican government feared losing control of the area.
in 1830 the mexican government announced a law prohibiting additional settlers from immigrating to texas from the united states.
name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 243 escaping along the underground railroad.
the underground railroad.
some slaves escaped from the south with the help of the underground railroad a vast network of people who helped fugitive slaves escape to the north or canada where slavery had been abolished.
people allowed the escaping fugitives to rest in their bams cellars or houses.
these safe places were called stations the fugitive slaves usually moved by foot at night helped on their journey by a conductor they took advantage of the protection offered by nature by hiding in swamps bayous forests and waterways.
they would generally travel 10 to 20 miles until they reached the next station.
there they would rest and eat hiding in bams and other out of the way places until they moved on to the next station.
some runaways sought refuge in cities such as baltimore and new orleans where they tried to blend in with free blacks living there.
acting as an amateur.
historian t this passage by frederick douglass was taken from his book my escape from slavery.
douglass was a gifted writer and speaker.
in this passage he describes his escape from slavery and how dehumanizing slavery was though i was not a murderer fleeing from justice i felt perhaps quite as miserable as such a criminal.
the train was moving at a very high rate of speed for that period of railroad travel but to my anxious mind it was moving far too slowly.
minutes were hours and hours were days during this part of my flight.
after maryland i was to pass through delaware another slave state where slave catchers awaited their prey for it was not in the interior of the state but its borders that these human hounds were most vigilant and active.
the border lines between slavery and freedom were the dangerous ones for the fugitives why did douglass fear when he came to a border crossing.
investigate the abolitionist movement on the internet and make a map showing some of the major stations of the underground railroad.
in your school library public library or on the internet read excerpts from harriet beecher stowes uncle toms cabin.
name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 289 impeachment hearing for president a ndrew johnson.
the grant presidency shortly after the attempt to remove johnson from office ulysses s grant 1869 1877 the republican candidate was elected president.
although grant had been a brilliant general his administration was characterized by weak presidential leadership and widespread corruption at the national and local levels.
his two terms in office coincided with the rest of reconstruction.
following the civil war the radical republicans in congress introduced three new constitutional amendments the thirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth amendments known as the civil war amendments.
their purpose was to abolish slavery provide citizenship to the freedmen and guarantee their civil rights.
the thirteenth amendment 1865 neither slavery nor involuntary servitude except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted shall exist within the united states or any plate subject to their jurisdiction.
lincolns emancipation proclamation has been called a hollow document since it freed no slaves the proclamation only freed persons held as slaves in rebelling states.
lincoln realized that as president he had no legal grounds to single handedly end the institution of slavery.
he recognized that the emancipation proclamation needed to be followed by a constitutional amendment in order to guarantee the abolition of slavery.
passed in 1865 the thirteenth amendment abolished slavery throughout the nation confirming the intent of the emancipation proclamation.
name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 295 african american leaders such as booker t washington author of the book up from slavery and w e b.
dubois founder of the n a a c p spoke out against these injustices.
but it would take another 80 years before these conditions were reversed by the civil rights movement of the 1960s and the efforts of leaders like dr martin luther king jr see acting as an amateur.
historian write a skit showing relations between a freedman and his for mer master during the reconstruction era.
use the internet or school library to conduct research on one of the southern states during the reconstruction era.
write a brief report on the problems faced by people in that state and how they tried i to overcome their problems.
z learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the key institutions and developments during the period of reconstruction.
freedmen s bureau black codes1 reconstruction acts key developments during reconstruction new south impeachment trial sharecropping system name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 301 learning with graphic organizers 4.
complete the graphic organizer below by summarizing the provisions of the homestead morrill and dawes acts and describing their effects.
homestead act 1862 major provisions of the act what effect did the act have dawes act 1887 major provisions of the act name chapter 14 the reconstruction era 303 immigration.
industrial growth also led to increased immigration.
the development of ocean going passenger vessels made the journey to america easier cheaper and faster for many immigrants.
immigrants continued to come from germany and ireland but they were now joined by newcomers from italy russia austria hungary and poland.
anti union cartoon showing a competent worker supporting an incompetent one on his back.
one of the main reasons for the rapid economic growth of the north following the civil war was the increasing exploitation of industrial workers.
gains in industrial productivity were made at terrible costs to workers.
working conditions at factories were often hazardous.
employers hired the cheapest possible laborers.
immigrants were willing to work for low wages.
factories often employed women and children at especially low pay.
the 1860s saw the emergence of labor as an organized force in the united states.
a trade union is an association of workers who act together in making demands to employers for higher wages and better working conditions.
the earliest unions were also mutual assistance societies.
members contributed part of their wages to create a fund to help members who became sick or died.
trade unions were formed on a national scale between 1861 and 1866 the first attempt to unite all trade unions into a single federation took place in 1866 with the formation of the national labor union.
however in 1872 this union disbanded because of internal friction.
in 1869 the national labor union was succeeded by the knights of labor.
by 1886 they had grown into a national organization with more than 700 000 members.
their policies pushed for state and national laws to improve conditions.
the knights demanded an 8 hour work day higher wages safety codes in factories an end to child labor and equal pay for women.
they backed restrictions on immigration which they saw as competition for their jobs.
in what ways did the further growth of industry contribute to the birth of a national labor movement at this time.
were labor unions justified in opposing immigration to the united states.
explain your answer.
why do you think the initial public reaction was hostile to labor unions.
chapter 14 the reconstruction era 305 bom in missouri mark twain 1835 1910 was the first major american writer bom away from the east coast.
two of his masterpieces adventures of tom sawyer and adventures of huckleberry finn chronicled life along the mississippi river.
his fictional characters spoke like real people and sounded distinctively american using local dialects newly invented words and regional accents.
his honest and candid approach revealed what life was really like for many african americans along the mississippi.
as he grew older his writings came to express the sad view that all human motives were selfish.
today he is best remembered as a humorist who used sharp wit comedy and exaggeration to attack false pride and self importance.
mark twain american music the music of america is the culmination of many different styles that have grown and changed over the years.
american music has been especially influenced by both african and european musical styles.
slave spirituals and work songs grew in popularity after the civil war.
chamber music and parlor songs were also quite popular in many american homes during this period.
stephen foster 1826 1864 was a noted composer whose songs were uniquely american in theme characterizing a love of home work politics battlefields slavery and plantation life.
his songs included my old kentucky home and oh.
susana in these years most small towns in america had an amateur brass or wind band.
many of these bands originated in the military.
brass bands were especially popular in parades.
john philip sousa was a key early composer who composed many marches.
he is most famous for the stars and stripes forever.
acting as an amateur historian select one of the artists writers or musicians mentioned in this section.
research that individuals work on the internet or at your school or local library.
then write a brief report specifically referring to at least two of that individuals works.
explain how those works are representative of this period in united states history.
name chapter.
search the internet or your school library for an issue that deals with each amendment.
the issue may include one settled by a case in the supreme court.
for example one issue often debated is the right of citizens to carry weapons under the second amendment.
amendment amendment issue issue how was the issue resolved how was the issue resolved name chapter 4 foundations background to american history 51 at the time of the american revolution some writers began noticing that america was a very different place from europe.
at that time most of europe was still divided into hereditary social classes.
nobles enjoyed special privileges while in many countries there were still serfs with no rights at all.
throughout most of europe land was owned by a few wealthy families there was very little free land available for people to settle or buy.
one of the first attempts to describe the new american culture was by a french immigrant hector st john de crevecoeur.
in 1755 he moved to new france in north america and in 1759 he moved to new york.
he was very intrigued by what he found in america.
he tried to define what it meant to be an american in 1782 he was greatly impressed by the mixing of peoples of different nationalities the rich resources of north america the absence of kings and nobles demanding a share of the workers labor and the willingness of americans to work hard out of their own self interest actins as an amateur historian in his letters to an american farmer crevecoeur 1735 1813 wrote about how this mixture of different peoples was being transformed by the american environment to create a new american society and culture what then is the american this new man.
he is either a european or the descendant of an european hence that strange mixture of blood which you will find in no other country.
he is an american who leaving behind him all his ancient prejudices and manners receives new ones from the new mode of life he has embraced the new government he obeys and the new rank he holds here individuals of all nations are melted into a new race of men whose labors and posterity will one day cause great changes in the world here the rewards of his industry follow with equal steps the progress of his labor his labor is founded on the basis of nature self interest can it want a stronger allurement.
wives and children gladly help their father to clear those abundant fields where crops grow to feed and clothe them all without any part being claimed either by a despotic prince a rich abbot or a mighty lord according to crevecoeur what were the chief differences between europeans and americans.
what do you think surprised him most about americans.
name chapter 5 industrialization and the gilded age 71 one important factor behind americas astonishing economic growth in the late nineteenth century was the increasing exploitation of its industrial workers.
long hours and low wages the average workday and work week were long by todays standards 10 to 14 hours a day for six days a week.
employers hired the least expensive laborers.
pay averaged from 3 to 12 weekly but immigrants were often willing to work for far less.
women and children were also frequently employed as low paid workers.
poor conditions boring and repetitive tasks as factories and work places grew larger workers lost all personal contact with their employers.
jobs were offered on a take it or leave it basis.
as industrialists sought to achieve greater speed and efficiency each worker became nothing more than a human cog in a vast machine.
work became less skilled more repetitive monotonous and boring.
industrial working conditions in the late nineteenth century were also often extremely hazardous.
safeguards around machinery were inadequate.
thousands of workers were injured or killed in industrial accidents each year.
acting as an amateur historian this poem the sweatshop was written by morris rosenfeld a russian polish immigrant who found work in the garment industry in new york city.
a sweatshop was a workshop like a small factory often in a city.
rosenfeld wrote this poem about how he felt at work the machines are so wildly noisy in the shop that i often forget who i am.
i get lost in the frightful tumult my self is destroyed i become a machine.
i work and work and work endlessly i create and create and create why.
i dont know and i dont ask.
what business has a machine thinking how would you summarize rosenfelds feelings about his work.
suppose you were going to interview morris rosenfeld.
prepare two questions you would ask him.
morris rosenfeld 1862 1923 what light does the poem shed on the experiences of american workers.
chapter 5 concept map name chapter 7 the progressive era 107 granger cooperatives grangers tried to eliminate middlemen by forming farmers cooperatives to buy machinery fertilizers and manufactured goods in large numbers at a discount.
the cooperatives also sold their crops directly to city markets.
because of a lack of business experience many of the granger cooperatives failed.
the granger laws farmers mainly blamed the railroads for their difficulties.
they felt they were being overcharged by railroads and by grain storage operators.
in several midwestern states grangers elected candidates to state legislatures who promised reforms.
these states passed laws regulating railroad and grain storage rates.
in munn v illinois 1877 the supreme court upheld the right of a state to regulate businesses that affected the public interest within the state.
however in 1886 the supreme court reversed itself in a case involving the state regulation of railroad rates.
the court ruled that only congress could regulate rates on interstate commerce.
this decision ended the state regulation of railroads.
the grangers then turned their attention to congress for help.
as you learned in the previous chapter 7 the progressive era 123 the progressive movement was accompanied by significant gains in womens rights for which women had been fighting for nearly a century.
in the early nineteenth century the united states was a patriarchal society men held positions of authority and women were considered to be inferior.
women lacked the right to vote to serve on juries or to hold public office.
they were excluded from public life and were left in charge of the home and children.
in most states once a woman married she lost control of her property and wages to her husband.
by the mid nineteenth century some women began to organize.
in 1848 they held a convention in seneca falls new york.
the convention passed a resolution paraphrasing the declaration of independence.
it proclaimed that women were equal to men and deserved the right to vote.
after the civil war women reformers hoped that freed slaves and women would be enfranchised at the same time.
women reformers were bitterly disappointed when the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments gave citizenship and the right to vote or suffrage to male freedmen but not to women.
susan b anthony in 1872 susan b anthony a prominent reformer attempted to vote in rochester new york on the grounds that she was citizen and had that right under the fourteenth amendment.
however a judge refused to grant her the right to vote.
in 1874 the supreme court then ruled that although women were citizens they could not vote.
voting according to the court was not necessarily a privilege of citizenship.
susan b anthony 1820 1906 the fact that women did not have suffrage continued to be seen as a symbol of their inferior status and a violation of basic democratic principles.
anthony and other women reformers were able to obtain suffrage in a number of western states but they could not succeed in introducing a constitutional amendment requiring all states to give women the vote.
by 1890 the failure to achieve womens suffrage led several womens groups to merge together into the national american woman suffrage association under the leadership of elizabeth cady stanton and susan b anthony.
name chapter looks at american foreign policy.
foreign policy refers to a country s policies towards other countries.
social scientists believe there are certain characteristics that make foreign policy special.
international anarchy.
each independent sovereign nation has its own laws that citizens must obey.
if citizens fail to obey these laws they can be punished.
sovereign countries however are not subject to such higher laws.
for this reason social scientists say that sovereign nations exist in a system of international anarchy.
each nation must depend on its own military and economic power to survive.
on the other hand countries usually follow some rules and customs to get along with one another.
balance of power.
when one country becomes too powerful other countries sometimes band together in an alliance or coalition to protect themselves and make sure the threatening power does not become any stronger.
this tendency is known as maintaining the balance of power.
control of u s foreign policy.
in the united states the constitution places control of foreign policy in the hands of both the president and congress.
while the president and secretary of state handle day to day diplomacy they need congress to vote funds to support their policies or to declare war.
traditional foreign policy.
for much of their early history americans felt safe behind their two oceans.
these oceans protected americans from attack.
president washington had warned americans to avoid entanglements with european nations who were frequently at war with each other.
instead he advised americans to focus on the western hemisphere.
for the first 150 years after independence americans largely followed washington s advice.
national interests.
in the conduct of foreign policy each nation is usually guided by its national interests.
for the united states these include security from attack protecting american investments and promoting american democracy and its way of life.
to evaluate a particular foreign policy you must determine how well it promotes these goals.
chapter 9 america in world war i 165 the u s senate rejects the treaty president wilson hoped that the league of nations would prevent future wars but his opponents in congress argued that it would drag the country into unnecessary military commitments.
wilson needed two thirds of the u s senate to ratify the versailles treaty but he rejected any compromise with the senate.
henry cabot lodge 1850 1924 had studied history and political science at harvard university.
he was a friend of theodore roosevelts and a strong supporter of imperialism.
lodge had been in charge of the congressional committee that had investigated the conduct of the u s army in suppressing rebels in the philippines.
he was a strong opponent of the league of nations.
he believed that if the united states joined the league it would lose its freedom of action.
henry cabot lodge acting as an amateur historian below is a speech by henry cabot lodge senate majority leader in 1919 he sets forth his objections to the league of nations the independence of the united states is not only more precious to ourselves but to the world than any single possession.
is there any country today on the face of the earth which can compare with our liberty our peace and our freedom.
i will go as far as anyone in world service but the first step to world service is the maintenance of the united states.
i have always loved one flag and i cannot share that devotion with a mongrel banner created for a league of nations.
i have never had but one allegiance and i cannot divide it now.
the united states is the worlds best hope but if you tie her to the interests and quarrels of other nations if you tangle her in the troubles of europe you will destroy her power for good and endanger her very existence what reasons does lodge give for opposing membership in the league of nations.
to overcome the senates objections president wilson decided to appeal directly to american voters for support he went on a national speaking tour but he had failed to gauge the feelings of most americans.
during his tour wilson suffered a stroke.
later the senate refused to ratify the treaty of versailles.
despite wilsons grand vision the united states never joined the league of nations.
america retreats into isolationism by 1919 most americans were disillusioned with world affairs.
the small gains they seemed to have made in world war i came at a terrible cost.
americans once again heeded george washingtons advice to avoid european entanglements and they turned their attention towards their material well being at home.
chapter 11 history 2 d explain the significance of the following years as turning points 1929 the great depression begins geography 12 a analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the dust bowl economics 15 e describe the emergence of monetary policy in the united states including the federal reserve act of 1913 and the shifting trend from a gold standard to fiat money.
economics 16 b identify the causes of the great depression including the impact of tariffs on world trade stock market speculation bank failures and the monetary policy of the federal reserve system.
economics 16 c analyze the effects of the great depression on the u s economy and society such as widespread unemployment and deportation and repatriation of people of european and mexican heritage and others.
economics 16 d compare the new deal policies and its opponents approaches to resolving the economic effects of the great depression.
economics 16 e describe how various new deal agencies and programs including the federal deposit insurance corporation the securities and exchange commission and the social security administration continue to affect the lives of u s citizens.
government 19 a evaluate the impact of new deal legislation on the historical roles of state and federal government.
government 19 b explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events including the great depression.
government 20 b evaluate the impact of relationships among the legislative executive and judicial branches of government including franklin d roosevelt s attempt to increase the number of u s supreme court justices culture 26 d identify the political social and economic contributions of women such as eleanor roosevelt to american society.
in this chapter 11 the great depression and the new deal 217 in your opinion was franklin roosevelt a hero to be admired or someone who wrongly overstepped his constitutional authority.
explain your answer.
learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by summarizing the most important legislation of roosevelts new deal refi orm chapter 12 america in world war ii 229 applying what you have learned use the internet or your library to research american attitudes in the 1930s to the rise of dictators like mussolini hitler stalin and the military leaders of japan.
in 1939 hitler made new territorial demands in poland.
fearing hitler intended to dominate europe britain and france refused to give in.
hitler responded by signing a nonaggression pact with stalin in which the two secretly agreed to invade and divide poland.
when germany invaded poland in september 1939 britain and france declared war on germany.
world war ii had begun.
in poland the german army unveiled a new type of warfare the blitzkreig which consisted of rapid coordinated movements by airplanes tanks troop carriers and infantry.
the germans quickly defeated the poles and before long they had also defeated the french and taken over much of europe.
while the main advantage in battle in world war i had been with the defense the use of airplanes tanks and mechanized transport brought the advantage in warfare back to the offense during world war il the germans and later the allies also bombed civilians in cities to increase the terrors of war.
the german blitzkrieg in action.
shi lisa a igllbbb america preserves a cautious neutrality in the early 1930s americans were too absorbed with recovering from the great depression to be very involved in affairs overseas.
as tensions in europe rose congress passed a series of laws to keep the country out of war.
americans had been drawn into world war i when german submarines had attacked american ships.
to avoid similar events the neutrality acts 1935 1937 prohibited americans from traveling on the ships of nations at war.
americans were also prohibited from selling arms to countries at war.
americans could sell nonmilitary goods to britain and other nations opposed to aggression but only on a cash and carry basis.
when japan invaded china in 1937 president roosevelt delivered his quarantine speech.
he warned americans of the growing unrest in the world and told them that peaceful nations had to act together to quarantine isolate aggressive nations.
fdr delivering his quarantine speech.
name l j chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 259 continued m in 1963 king and others led a march on washington where he delivered his i have a dream speech.
this led to the civil rights act of 1964 making it illegal for hotels restaurants and other business to practice racial discrimination.
n african americans faced hostility in the south sometimes leading to violence.
governors george wallace lester maddox and orval faubus and the southern democrats in congress all opposed desegregation.
o presidential actions and congressional legislation sought to address minority rights in the united states.
affirmative action programs required companies and institutions doing business with the federal government to actively recruit minority candidates.
key terms and people in this chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 271 president eisenhower gave control of foreign policy to his secretary of state john foster dulles a devoted anticommunist.
dulles sought to contain the spread of communism by preventing the soviets from gaining additional influence.
in 1957 eisenhower announced he would send u s forces to any middle eastern nation that requested help in defending against communism.
this extension of the containment policy became known as the eisenhower doctrine.
the united states also signed a series of treaties around the world to contain communism.
president dwight eisenhower the 1950s were a period of recovery and economic growth.
millions of veterans returned home from world war ii.
they benefited from special benefits for war veterans including low mortgage rates and educational grants.
people whose lives had been disrupted by the great depression and the war could now turn their attentions to work and raising families.
as in the 1920s products for consumers such as automobiles refrigerators washing machines and televisions helped stimulate economic growth.
eisenhower signed the interstate highway act 1956 which created a system of federal highways.
americans were not just producing for themselves but also for the rest of the world which was still recovering from wartime destruction.
because of the cold war defense spending remained high.
one result of this increased spending was a wave of prosperity and the growth of the middle class.
housing boom.
this was a time of high birth rates known as the baby boom.
this boom and the 6 1 bill servicemen s readjustment act of 1944 helping veterans led developers to build cheaper mass produced housing.
home ownership increased by 50.
the movement of middle income families to the suburbs led to a declining urban tax base and decaying inner cities.
domestic developments during the eisenhower presidency economic prosperity.
the demand for consumer goods reached all time highs.
millions of autos and tv sets were sold.
the use of refrigerators and other appliances became widespread.
the gross domestic product doubled between 1945 and 1960 america dominated world trade.
conformity.
in the 1950s there was a greater emphasis on conformity.
unusualideas were regarded with suspicion.
fear of communism strengthened the dislike of non conformist attitudes.
1 name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 279 civil rights act of 1964 on the plane ride back to washington d c vice president lyndon b johnson was immediately sworn in as president.
a texan johnson had been the democratic leader in the senate in 1957 and had helped to steer the civil rights act of 1957 through congress.
with the lobbying efforts of civil rights supporters president johnson was now able to push an even more important bill through congress.
the southern democratic bloc tried to stop the bill with ceaseless speeches but they were prevented by a vote of two thirds of the senate.
the resulting civil rights act of 1964 prohibited discrimination based on race color religion or ethnic origin in hotels restaurants and all places of employment doing business with the federal government or engaged in interstate commerce.
the act cut off federal aid to school districts with segregated schools.
finally the act gave the federal government the power to register voters and to establish the equal employment opportunity commission to enforce the acts provisions.
what this meant was that all businesses involved in interstate commerce could no longer discriminate.
the struggle to achieve voting rights after passage of the civil rights act of 1964 civil rights leaders turned their energies to registering african american voters and encouraging them to vote.
twenty fourth amendment 1964 eliminated poll taxes in federal elections.
the road to equal voting rights f selma marches.
in 1965 dr king went to selma alabama to organize a march demanding the vote for african americans.
when demonstrators were attacked president johnson reacted by introducing a voting rights bill.
voting rights act of 1965 this act ended poll taxes suspended literacy tests where they were used to prevent african americans from voting and led to a substantial increase in the number of african american voters.
affirmative action 1965 in 1965 president johnson signed an executive order requiring employers with federal contracts to take positive steps to raise the number of their minority employees to correct past imbalances.
later women were added.
this went beyond not discriminating companies and institutions were now required to actively recruit minority candidates.
affirmative action programs increased minority representation in colleges the professions and many businesses.
the act had some unintended consequences.
some critics challenged these programs as a form of reverse discrimination.
in regents of university of california v bakke the u s supreme court upheld affirmative action but not the use of racial quotas.
many affirmative action programs have been phased out over time as america has become a more pluralistic society.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 313 the difficulties of guerilla warfare most american soldiers were unfamiliar with the vietnamese language people or physical environment.
american forces were unable to tell who was friendly and who was the enemy.
the jungles of vietnam provided an ideal cover for guerilla warfare and secret enemy movements.
vietnams location made it easy for communists to send a steady flow of supplies through neighboring countries.
growing discontent the anti war movement the media newspapers radio television had a great influence in shaping public opinion.
it was the first time american audiences could watch the destructiveness of the war on their television sets while sitting at home.
president johnson told americans they were winning the war but journalists reported otherwise.
this created a credibility gap many americans lost faith in their governments reliability.
nowhere was this discontent more evident than among young americans who objected to the countrys involvement in protesters burn their draft cards to show their opposition to the war.
mass anti war movements occurred throughout the country from 1965 onwards.
young people burned their draft cards marched on the pentagon held rallies and staged demonstrations.
by 1968 millions of young people were actively protesting the war.
the anti war movement greatly influenced u s military policy.
american doves wanted the united states to withdraw since they saw the contest as a civil war between the north and south vietnamese.
they believed american leaders were acting immorally by bombing civilians and burning villages.
the hawks supported the war which they saw as an attempt to defend free vietnamese from communist repression.
division among democrats over the war the assassination of robert f kennedy younger brother of president kennedy and violence at the democratic national convention in chicago in 1968 led to the election of republican richard nixon as president.
during the campaign nixon a staunch anti communist promised americans peace with honor in vietnam.
however the war dragged on for five more years under nixon.
during these years nixon aided by henry kissinger adopted a complex approach in vietnam consisting of vietnamization increased bombing and diplomacy.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 315 vietnam battles japanese invaders france is forced out of vietnam the u s sends 16 000 advisers to vietnam 500 000 u s troops sent to fight in vietnam anti war protestors march on washington u s withdraws from vietnam v v v 7 7 1940 1954 1963 1967 1971 1973 by 1975 what remained of the south vietnamese army was incapable of preventing the advance of the north vietnamese.
in april 1975 saigon finally fell to north vietnamese forces.
the fall of saigon today called ho chi minh city marked the end of the vietnam war.
south vietnamese government officials military officers and soldiers who had supported the american presence in vietnam were sent to communist re education camps where they faced torture disease and malnutrition.
learned have your class stage a debate resolved americas leaders made a mistake in engaging in the war in vietnam.
appoint teams for and against the resolution.
or pretend to be having a debate between hawks and doves in 1969 the war in vietnam had many important effects death and destruction.
over 58 000 americans died and many others suffered physical and psychological injuries.
over a million vietnamese were killed while many more were left homeless.
impact of the war on the u s and abroad.
wartime expenses led to the end of some great society programs and brought rising inflation.
the war demonstrated that government actions can be greatly affected by public opinion.
it also led to a crisis of american self confidence.
next to the civil war the vietnam war was the most divisive war in u s history.
as a result americans became more aware of the limits of u s power and cautious about where they should act abroad.
limits on presidential power.
in both korea and vietnam presidents had sent american troops into extended combat without first obtaining a declaration of war from congress.
in 1973 congress attempted to re claim its constitutional powers by passing over nixons veto the war powers resolution.
this set limits on presidential power in a conflict without a formal declaration of war by congress.
the act requires the president to inform congress within 48 hours of sending troops to fight overseas.
if within 60 days the congress does not approve of the use of these overseas forces the president must withdraw them.
name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 331 first amendment rights.
during nixons presidency the supreme court continued to protect first amendment rights.
in tinker r des moines 1969 john tinker and his sister were suspended from school for wearing black armbands to protest the vietnam war.
the supreme court ruled that this violated the students first amendment rights and that students have the right to wear armbands to protest the war.
in wisconsin r yoder 1972 the u s supreme court struck down a wisconsin state law that required amish children to attend school beyond grade 8 the court found that this state law violated the parents freedom of religion since the states secondary education conflicted with amish values and beliefs and was contrary to their way of life.
the 1970s saw rising prices a new trade deficit and rising unemployment.
to combat inflation nixon cut spending on social programs and took america off the gold standard.
when these measures did not work he imposed the first peacetime wage and price controls.
all of these attempts to control inflation proved unsuccessful.
the environmental protection agency epa president nixon signed a law that created the environmental protection agency or epa to protect the environment.
the epa sets air and water pollution standards for cities and engages in monitoring and enforcement activities.
new construction projects must pass through detailed environmental impact reviews before being approved.
private citizens can file lawsuits against polluters under the epa.
nixon also signed the endangered species act 1973.
this law requires the fish and wildlife service to list species of plants and animals that are threatened with extinction and then to take further steps to protect them.
the equal rights amendment era in 1923 alice paul a suffragist leader and founder of the national womans party proposed the equal rights amendment equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of sex for almost fifty years the amendment was introduced in each session of congress but it failed to pass.
in 1972 the amendment was finally approved by congress and sent to the states with a seven year time limit for ratification.
the deadline was extended to 1982 but the amendments still fell three states short of the support needed for ratification.
it has been reintroduced into every congress since that time.
one outspoken critic of the womens liberation movement was phyllis schlafly.
her book attacking liberal republicans was used by goldwater supporters in his 1964 presidential campaign.
schlafly also campaigned against the equal rights amendment which she believed would reduce the rights of wives and harm family life.
schlafly further claimed it would deprive women of the right to be supported and protected by men.
for example schlafly believed the amendment might lead to unisex restrooms and require women to serve in combat roles.
name chapter 15 crisis and resurgence 1969 2000 361 use the graphs and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
united states budgets showing the percentage spent on defense 1940 1990 1940 1950 1960 1990 15 what does the trend shown in these graphs indicate.
a the cold war had a great impact on defense spending.
econ 17 c b the federal government was working to reduce the unfavorable balance of trade.
c increasing benefits to the military would be too expensive for american taxpayers.
d there has been little support for a reduction in defense spending.
16 what is the function of the environmental protection agency epa.
f to develop americas natural resources i geog u b g to reduce air and water pollution and protect the environment h to protect americans from acts of terrorism j to manage the nations parks and forests 17 what has been an important consequence of the invention of air conditioning the construction of federal highways and the building of dams and aqueducts.
a farmers have been unable to irrigate their crops.
geog 13 a b rust belt cities have been able to resume their manufacturing.
c the american population has shifted towards the south and west.
d the u s population has shifted from the south to the midwest.
18 which american entrepreneur helped to develop the software running most computers today.
f lionel sosa aeon is a g bill gates h robert johnson j sandra day oconnor 19 how did president ronald reagan believe he could tackle the problem of stagflation facing the american economy in 1980.
a increasing public spending on education and infrastructure hist io b j b raising the taxes of wealthier americans c reducing taxes and relaxing federal regulations so that producers would create a larger supply of goods d increasing tariffs so that consumers would be encouraged to buy american name america in the new millennium history 2 d explain the significance of the following years as turning points 2001 terrorist attacks on world trade center and the pentagon and 2008 election of the first black president barack obama.
history 10 c compare the impact of energy on the american way of life.
history 10 f describe significant societal issues of this time period.
history 11 a describe u s involvement in world affairs including 9 11 and the global war on terror.
history 11 d analyze the impact of third parties on presidential elections.
history 11 e discuss the historical significance of the 2008 presidential election.
geography 12 a analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the levee failure in new orleans after hurricane katrina.
geography 13 b analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from legal and illegal immigration to the united states.
economics 18 b identify the impact of international events multinational corporations government policies and individuals on the 21st century economy.
government 19 b explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events including 9 11.
government 19 d discuss the role of contemporary government legislation in the private and public sectors such as the usa patriot act of 2001 and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 government 20 b evaluate the impact of relationships among the legislative executive and judicial branches of government including the presidential election of 2000 culture 25 a describe how the characteristics and issues in u s history have been reflected in various genres of art music and film.
culture 25 c identify the impact of popular american culture on the world over time.
culture 25 d analyze the global diffusion of american culture through the entertainment industry via various media.
culture 26 c explain how the contributions of people of various racial ethnic gender and religious groups shape american culture.
culture 26 d identify the political social and economic contributions of women such as sonia sotomayor and oprah winfrey to american society.
science technology and society 27 a explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as computers on the economic development of the u s science technology and society 27 b explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture the military and medicine including vaccines.
science technology and society 27 c understand the impact of technological and management innovations and their applications in the workplace and the resulting productivity enhancements for business and labor such as time study analysis robotics computer management and just in time inventory management.
science technology and society 28 a analyze how scientific discoveries technological innovations and the application of these by the free enterprise system including those in transportation and communication improve the standard of living in the united states.
science technology and society 28 c understand how the free enterprise system drives technological innovation and its application in the marketplace such as cell phones inexpensive personal computers and global positioning products.


chapter in your discussion.
3od social studies skills synthesizing find the text of the iroquois constitution on the internet.
read parts 1 and 2 only.
then rewrite these parts of the constitution in your own words.
use standard grammar and cite the sources you used in your research.
share and compare your rewrites with those of other members of the class.
how are they similar.
how do they differ.
29a 3ob 3od thinking like a historian creating databases if you have collected information and kept some sort of list or file then you have created a database.
an electronic database is a collection of facts that are stored in files on the computer.
the information is organized in fields.
for example fields could be the name of a group where the group lived and information about their way of life.
create a database about three of the groups from the chapter to support your answer isc 3od social studies skills identifying bias analyze this poster which was created after the boston massacre.
create an alternative version that describes the event from the british point of view.
write a brief explanation of how your poster differs from the one shown here.
ask what words or images in your poster show bias.
29f 3od americans scab in remembrance the horrid massacre perpetrated in king fttcet.
new england.
on the evening of march the fifth 1770 when five of your fellow countrymen gray maverick caldwell.
attucks and carr.
lay wallowing in their gore being bvfety and moft inhumanly murdered an i uv xx t thinking like a historian drawing conclusions what three unalienable rights are identified in the declaration of independence.
what happens when one person s actions infringe on another person s unalienable rights.
write your response in a paragraph.
29b 3od visual literacy interpreting images this 1774 cartoon shows patriots pouring tea down the throat of a british tax collector.
what clues help you identify the time period or era of the cartoon.
how do the patriots seem to feel toward the tax collector.
what reaction would a loyalist have on seeing the cartoon.
7 spirit of independence assessment directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
checking for understanding explain the role that each of the following individuals played during the american revolution.
4b a john adams b benjamin franklin c crispus attucks d king george iii e thomas jefferson f thomas paine review the guiding questions explaining how did women such as mercy otis warren encourage colonists to oppose britain s policies.
4b critical thinking analyzing describe in your own words what no taxation without representation means.
how did the issue of representation contribute to the start of the american revolution.
ia 4a identifying ifgovernment does not protect the basic rights of the people what did the declaration of independence say that people had the right to do.
analyzing why did the tea act anger the colonists.
how did the colonists show their anger.
analyzing what was the stamp act.
how did it contribute to the start of the american revolution.
4a drawing inferences what factors led to the boston tea party.
how did this incident represent an act of civil disobedience.
20c 29b analyzing what part did the intolerable acts play in bringing about the american revolution.
4a explaining why did british troops march on the towns of lexington and concord.
how do these events mark the start of the american revolution.
4 explaining what happened at concord in april 1775 and why was it significant.
4c identifying points of view richard henry lee s resolution called for the colonists to form a separate nation.
why did some members of congress hesitate to declare independence.
ia 29d describing why did the second continental congress draft the declaration of independence.
ia identifying what policies of king george iii did the colonists condemn in the declaration of independence.
identify at least three of their grievances isc making connections read the declaration of natural rights in the declaration of independence.
select what you think is the most important idea and explain in a paragraph how this idea affects your life today.
300 drawing inferences the declaration of independence lists many complaints against king george iii.
one states that the king prevents the colonists from trading with all parts of the world.
why was the opportunity to trade voluntarily with other nations important to the colonists.
4b 29b speculating what role did benedict arnold play in the battle of fort ticonderoga.
why do you think he later became a traitor to the patriot cause.
290 interpreting why do you think the poet ralph waldo emerson described the americans at lexington and concord as having fired the shot heard round the world.
drawing conclusions what was the olive branch petition.
how did king george react to it.
did his reaction move the colonists farther away from or closer to declaring independence.
29b evaluating sources based on language many selections are written with a specific audience in mind.
review the writings of thomas paine and charles inglis in the chapter.
the american revolution q beginning 1776 1777 middle 1770 1779 ending 1780 1783 general george washington led the continental army in the war for independence.
samuel king the bridgeman art library getty images samuel king the bridgeman art library getty images 191 assessment continued in 1541 the spanish priest bartolome de las casas wrote primary source the pattern established at the outset has remained unchanged to this day and the spaniards still do nothing save tear the natives to shreds murder them and inflict upon them untold misery suffering and distress tormenting and persecuting them mercilessly.
a short account of the destruction of the indies by bartolome de las casas analyzing what does this passage suggest about spanish attitudes toward the native americans they encountered.
290 identifying bias why do you suppose the spanish treated the native americans the way las casas describes.
29f extended response j persuasive writing imagine you are a friend of christopher columbus.
he is frustrated by his failure to fund a voyage to find a water route around the world to asia.
columbus asks you to write a letter to king ferdinand and queen isabella of spain.
in the letter explain why it is important for columbus to make this voyage.
2a 29d 3od standardized test practice dbq analyzing documents identifying according to the map where is st augustine located.
29c a new spain b new granada c peru d rio de la plata identifying spanish settlements in north america include f lima.
h santiago.
i santa fe.
need extra help.
if you ve missed question review lesson 3 3 2 3 3 106 exploring the americas colonial america 1587 1770 networks there s more online about the people and events of early colonial america.
9sb sential questions how does geography influence the way people live.
do boh ideas change the way people live.
chapter 8 place and time united states 1777 1790 a few years after achieving independence the united states made plans to expand into some of the land to the west.
leaders put forward a plan to settle the northwest territory and over time form new states.
step into the place map focus the british gave up their claim to the northwest territory in the treaty of paris.
regions what geographical features made this territory desirable for settlement by people from the united states.
ioa iia place what present day states were made from the northwest territory.
3 at thinking drawing conclusions which areas of the territory do you think were likely to be settled first.
explain your answer.
iia 29b step into the time time line review the time line.
what years are covered in this time line.
identify two world events that might h networks there s more online.
bzf biographies john adams richard henry lee ef charts capitals ofthe united states articles of confederation and the constitution et game concentration game ef graphic organizer powers of national government sf map the northwest territory et self check quiz sf video lesson 1 the articles of confederation al question whydopeop eformjfwemments.
this texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting ofthe declaration of independence creation and ratification ofthe constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
4c explain the issues surrounding important events ofthe american revolution including declaring independence writing the articles of confederation fighting the battles of lexington concord saratoga and yorktown enduring the winter at valley forge and signing the treaty of paris of 1783.
5b summarize arguments regarding protective tariffs taxation and the banking system.
6a explain how the northwest ordinance established principles and procedures for orderly expansion ofthe united states.
14a explain why a free enterprise system of economics developed in the new nation including minimal government intrusion taxation and property rights.
15b summarize the strengths and weaknesses ofthe articles of confederation.
reading helpdesk it matters because after gaining independence americans faced the task of forming independent governments at both the state and national levels.
the making of a republic guidingquestioim what kind of government was created by the articles of confederation.
becoming independent caused the country to enter a neweraasa young republic.
after throwing oil british rule the independent states faced the challenge of governing themselves.
the 13 states needed a plan of government that would satisfy all their needs.
would the states be able to work together and still maintain their independence.
how would each individual state govern itself.
during the era of the early republic that followed the american revolution the young nation struggled to resolve these questions states write constitutions the continental congress took up this last question even before declaring independence.
in may 1776 congress asked the states to organize their governments.
each state adopted a state constitution or plan of government.
eight states had drafted constitutions before e end of the year.
new york and georgia followed in 1777 and assachuses in 1780 connecticut and rhode island decided to use their colonial charters as state constitutions.
tn nk er years bnhsh rule americans were determined not craftprk uc bower n the hands of one ruler or body.
they pennsvlvanw utlons t lat bruited the power of the governor.
anelectx cnstltution ced the office entirely with an elected 12 person council.
taking notes identifying as you read use a diagram like the one shown to identify the powers ofthe national government under the articles of confederation.
a more perfect union rowers of national government content vocabulary.
bicameral depreciate constitutional republic ordinance states also divided power between the governor or council and the legislature.
most states set up two house or bicameral legislatures to divide the work of government even further.
the first state constitutions aimed to keep power in the hands of the people.
for example voters chose the state legislators and states held elections often.
in most states only white males who were at least 21 years old could vote.
because state constitutions limited the powers of the governors the legislatures became the most powerful branch of government.
the state legislatures tried to make taxes fair for everyone but disagreements arose.
the shift from british colonies to self governing states held many challenges.
a new republic the american people also had to form a national government.
people agreed the new country should be a constitutional republic a government in which citizens rule through elected representatives.
these representatives would serve for a specific term of office and pledge to govern by the laws set down in a written constitution or plan of government.
at first most americans wanted a weak central government.
they expected that each state would remain free to act independently on most issues.
the states would rely on a central government only to wage war and handle relations with other countries.
capitals of the united states length of time as u s capital philadelphia pennsylvania may 10 1775 to december 12 1776 philadelphia pennsylvania march 4 1777 to september 18 1777 september 30 1777 to june 27 1778 june 30 1783 to november 1783 york pennsylvania princeton new jersey trenton new jersey philadelphia pennsylvania december 6 1790 to may 14 1800 washington d c november 1 1784 to december 24 1784 170c aunuct 17 non nine different cities have served as the capital ofthe united states.
identifying what was the first capital ofthe united states.
critical thinking drawing inferences why do you think the united states had so many different capital cities during the period shown.
bicameral having two separate lawmaking chambers constitutional republic a government in which citizens rule through elected representatives according to a plan of government jssjfc state house built i772 i779 gapitoloftiie united states november 26 1783 august i3 1784 in this state house oldest in the nation still ocmurn uy use general george washington bsoas amnsfissm w s jefferson minister plenipotentiary.
from on june 7 1776 virginia s richard henry lee moved that a plan of confederation be prepared and transmitted to the respective colonies for their consideration and approbation approval.
creating the articles of confederation in the summer of 1776 while also drafting the declaration of independence the second continental congress appointed a committee to write a plan for a new central government.
the result was the articles of confederation.
after much debate congress adopted the articles the nations first constitution in november 1777 the articles of confederation established a weak central government.
the states kept most of their power.
for the states the articles of confederation were a firm league of friendship in which each state retained its sovereignty freedom and independence the articles of confederation gave the congress the powerto conduct foreign affairs maintain armed forces borrow money and issue currency.
congress did not have the power to regulate trade force citizens to join the army or impose taxes.
if congress needed to raise money or troops it had to ask the states.
states were not required to contribute.
the new central government had no chief executive.
this is an official such as a president or a governor who carries out the laws and leads the government in its day to day operations.
under the articles of confederation government carried on its business such as selling western lands through congressional committees all the states had to approve the articles and any amendments.
yet not every state supported the articles of confederation at first.
under the new plan each state had one vote regardless of population.
states with large populations believed they should have more votes.
disputes over western lands delayed ratification of the articles by the 1780s seven of the original states laid claim to areas west of the appalachians.
maryland refused to approve the articles until new york virginia and other states abandoned their land claims and ceded or gave up such territory to the national government.
this done maryland joined the other 12 states in approving the articles.
on march 1 1781 the confederation formally became the government of the united states of america.
the confederation government the next several years were critical ones for the young republic.
it soon became clear that the new national government was too weak to handle the problems facing the united states.
the weak academic vocabulary abandon to give up skills practice write some questions about the most important ideas in a lesson or a shorter section of your text.
exchange papers with a partner and answer one another s questions.
ii a more perfect union weaknesses of the articles of confederation congress had no authority to raise money by collecting taxes.
congress had no control over foreign trade.
congress could not force states to carry out its laws.
all 13 states had to agree to any amendments making it nearly impossible to correct problems.
the articles of confederation had several key weaknesses.
0 summarizing summarize the basic problem with the articles of confederation.
congress could not pass a law unless nine states voted in favor of it.
changing the articles required the approval of all 13 states.
this made it hard for congress to pass laws or amend the articles when there was any disagreement.
even with these challenges the new government managed some key achievements.
under the confederation government americans negotiated a peace treaty with britain and expanded the countrys foreign trade.
the confederation also helped with settling and governing the countrys western lands.
critical thinking speculating why do you think getting 13 states to agree on decisions and actions was so difficult.
q reading progress check drawing inferences why do you think most americans in 1776 wanted a weak central government.
policies for western lands guiding question what process allowed new states tojoin the union.
the articles of confederation did not propose a way to add new states to the united states.
yet there were settlers living west of the appalachian mountains outside the existing states.
these western settlers wanted to organize their lands as states and join the union.
under the terms of the treaty of paris the british gave up control of the land north of the ohio river and west of the appalachian mountains.
many americans were eager to settle in this region.
the new united states government had to establish policies for settlement of these western lands.
another challenge was to come up with an orderly process by which new territories could achieve the status of statehood.
the ordinance of 1785 in 1785 the confederation congress passed an ordinance or law that set up a process to survey and sell the lands north of the ohio river.
the new law divided this large area into townships.
reading in the content area charts charts can take many forms.
the simple chart on this page lists a series of statements or facts.
it presents a clear short summary of key information.
the title of the chart indicates the common theme that unites the items in the chart.
lesson 1 229 under the articles of confederation congress could not tax citizens directly.
congress raised money by selling land in the northwest territory.
the ordinance divided land into townships 6 miles 10 km to a side.
this created 36 square miles or sections.
place which rivers acted as borders for the northwest territory.
critical thinking identifying central issues why do you think congress set up such a precise system for measuring out and dividing up the land.
ii each township was 6 miles long 9 7 km and 6 miles wide 9 7 km.
these townships were to be further divided into 36 sections of 640 acres 259 ha.
the government would sell each section at public auction or sale for at least a dollar an acre.
concerned about lawless people moving into western lands richard henry lee the president of the congress urged that the rights of property be clearly defined by the government.
congress drafted another law to protect the interests of hardworking settlers.
the northwest ordinance the northwest ordinance passed in 1787 guaranteed the property rights of settlers and provided a democratic model for national expansion.
it created a single northwest territory from lands north ofthe ohio river and east of the mississippi river.
the lands were to be divided into three to five smaller territories.
when a territory had 60 000 residents the people could seek statehood.
each new state would have the same standing as the original 13 states.
reading helpdesk ordinance a law academic vocabulary clause a special condition in a formal document a more perfect union the northwest ordinance had a bill of rights for the settlers in the territory.
it guaranteed freedom of religion and trial by jury.
it also stated there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in said territory this clause or condition added to a document marked the first attempt to stop the spread of slavery in the united states.
the ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance attempted to make possible the settlement of the northwest territory in a peaceful and orderly way.
in general the laws were successful.
the united states congress would later take a similar step in the south.
in 1798 it created the mississippi territory from land west of georgia.
congress organized the government of the territory in the same basic way as in the northwest territory except that slavery was allowed.
land act of 1800 the ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance aimed to encourage settlement in the northwest territory.
in time it became clear that people needed even more help.
in 1800 congress passed the land act.
the act made it possible for people to pay for land a little at a time.
under the terms of this law a person was required to buy at least 320 acres of land at a price of 2 per acre.
the buyer could pay half of the money at the time of purchase and the rest in four yearly payments.
h reading progress check explaining according to the northwest ordinance when could a territory apply for statehood.
much ofthe land in the west was sold to pay off debts from the revolutionary war.
the sale of these lands also provided opportunity for many settlers who eagerly moved west.
i money is any object widely accepted as payment.
tobacco leaves were once used as money in colonial virginia.
colonists also used other goods as well as coins as money.
eventually governments began issuing paper money to make exchanges of goods and business dealings easier.
ii critical thinking drawing conclusions why is it important to have a system of money that is recognized agreed upon and used by all people.
reading helpdesk depreciate to fall in value problems at home and abroad guiding question in whatways was the confederation government weak.
because of its weakness the confederation government had trouble with financial issues.
continentals paper bills the continental congress had printed during the war did not hold their value.
by 1781 the currency had depreciated dihpreeshee ayt ed or fallen in value so far that it was worth almost nothing.
as more continentals appeared people realized that congress could not exchange or trade in the bills for gold or silver.
the public began to doubt the money was worth anything.
in 1779 it took 40 continentals to buy a single spanish silver dollar.
by 1781 a person needed 146 continentals to buy that spanish coin.
not worth a continental became a common saying.
at the same time the price of food and other goods soared.
in boston and some other areas high prices led to food riots.
in the 1780s the continental congress faced a large debt.
during the revolutionary war congress had borrowed money from american citizens and foreign governments.
it still owed revolutionary soldiers pay for their military service.
without the power to tax the confederation could not easily raise money to pay its debts.
the continental congress asked the states for money but it could not force the states to pay.
in fact the states provided less than half of the money the federal government asked them to contribute.
plan for import tax congress faced a collapse of the countrys finances.
in 1781 it created a department of finance led by philadelphia merchant robert morris.
while serving in congress morris had proposed a 5 percent tax on imported goods to help pay the national debt.
the plan required a change to the articles of confederation.
twelve states approved the plan but rhode island opposed it.
under the articles the single no vote was enough to block the plan.
a second effort in 1783 also failed to win approval by all the states.
the financial crisis grew worse.
relations with britain trouble with foreign governments also revealed the weaknesses o the american government.
for example american merchants complained that the british were blocking americans from the a more perfect union west indies and other british markets.
in the treaty of paris of 1783 britain had promised to withdraw from the lands east of the mississippi river.
british troops however continued to occupy several forts in the great lakes region.
in 1785 congress sent john adams to london to discuss these problems.
adams found the british unwilling to talk.
they pointed to the failure of the united states to honor its promises made in the treaty of paris.
the british claimed that americans had agreed to pay loyalists for the property taken from them during the revolutionary war.
congress had proposed that the states pay the loyalists.
the states simply refused and congress could do nothing about it.
relations with spain the united states had even greater problems with spain.
this european power which controlled florida as well as lands west of the mississippi river wanted to stop american expansion into its territory.
to do this spain closed the lower mississippi river to american shipping in 1784 western settlers could no longer use the mississippi river which they relied on to ship goods to market.
in 1786 american diplomats reached a new trade agreement with spain.
representatives from the southern states however blocked the agreement because it did not include the right to use the mississippi river.
the weakness of the confederation and its inability to deal with problems worried many leaders including george washington.
americans began to agree that the country needed a stronger government.
o reading progress check explaining why did the national government under the articles of i confederation have difficulty raising money.
during the early years of the republic john adams served as an ambassador to great britain.
adams was unable to convince the british to honor their promises made in the treaty of paris of 1783 include this lesson s information in your foldable.
a more psf fect unw.
articles of tma anew ratifying the confederation constitution november 1777 1787 1799 lesson 1 review review vocabulary 1 use each of these words in a sentence about the newly independent united states.
3oa job a bicameral b constitutional republic answer the guiding questions 2 describing what caused america to enter a new era as a republic.
i 3 explaining what powers were granted to the congress under the articles of confederation.
1sb 4 summarizing what were some ofthe accomplishments of the national government under the articles of confederation.
15b 29b 5 analyzing view the chart that identifies weaknesses ofthe articles of confederation.
which ofthe weaknesses do you think was the most difficult for the national government to overcome.
explain your choice.
isb 29 persuasive writing you are a delegate to the second continental congress.
congress is debating whether to allow the central government to impose taxes.
take a stand on this issue and write a short essay defending your position.
give specific reasons for your opinion.
sb 29d job lesson 1 233 i networks there s more online.
ef biography george washington ef graph framers of the constitution ef game identification game ef graphic organizer plans for creating a new government ef primarysource plantation life ef self check quiz video la iw 1 lesson 2 forging a new constitution al question how do new ideas change the way people live.
it matters because bold action helped the nation overcome the serious shortcomings of the articles of confederation.
teo texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
the need for change guidingquestion iv jflf problems did the government face under the articles of confederation.
4d analyze the issues of the constitutional convention of 1787 including the great compromise and the three fifths compromise.
5a describe major domestic problems faced by the leaders of the new republic such as maintaining national security building a military creating a stable economic system setting up the court system and defining the authority of the central government.
7b compare the effects of political economic and social factors on slaves and free blacks.
15b summarize the strengths and weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
21c summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution.
29d identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
reading helpdesk a growing number of americans became convinced that the government under the articles of confederation was too weak to deal with the countrys problems.
among these problems were serious economic difficulties.
after the revolutionary war the united states went through a depression a period when economic activity slows and unemployment increases.
wartime damage to southern plantations led to a sharp drop in rice exports.
trade also fell off when the british closed the west indies market to american merchants.
the little money the government did have went to pay debts to foreign countries.
this resulted in a serious shortage of money in the united states.
shays s rebellion economic troubles hit farmers hard.
unable to sell their goods they could not pay their taxes and debts.
this led state officials to seize farmers lands and throw them in jail.
this treatment angered many farmers.
some began to view the new governmed as just another form of tyranny.
they wanted the government to taking notes comparing and contrasting as you read use a diagram like the one shown to take notes about each individual s role for creating a new government.
a more perfect union leader role edmund randolph james madison koqer sherman gouverneur morris content vocabulary depression compron l5 manumission proportional issue paper money and make new policies to help those in debt.
a group of farmers in massachusetts made this plea to state officials primary source w surely your honours are not strangers to the distresses problems of the people but know that many of our good inhabitants are now confined in jail for debt and taxes.
99 from petition from the town of greenwich massachusetts resentment boiled in massachusetts.
in 1786 angry farmers led by former continental army captain daniel shays forced courts in the western part of the state to close.
the goal was to stop judges from legally taking away farmers lands.
the farmers revolt grew.
in january 1787 shays led a force of about 1 200 supporters toward the federal arsenal or weapons storehouse in springfield massachusetts.
the farmers wanted to seize guns and ammunition.
the state militia ordered the advancing farmers to halt and then fired over their heads.
the farmers did not stop.
the militia fired again killing four farmers.
shays and his followers fled and the uprising was over.
still shayss rebellion frightened americans.
concern grew that the government could not handle unrest and prevent violence.
on hearing of the rebellion george washington wondered whether mankind when left to themselves are unfit for their own government slavery in the new republic the revolutionary war called attention to the clash between the american belief in liberty and the practice of slavery.
between 1776 and 1786 11 states all except south carolina and georgia outlawed or taxed the importation of enslaved people.
slavery existed and was legal in every state.
in the north however it was not a major source of labor.
people in that region began working to end slavery in america.
in 1774 quakers in pennsylvania founded the first american antislavery society.
shays s rebellion divided the young country during the difficult 1780s.
depression a period when economic activity slows and unemployment increases skills practice use the words who what when and where to ask questions.
use the words you know in the questions.
lesson 2 235 in the south much ofthe wealth came from large plantations that used enslaved labor to grow valuable crops such as tobacco rice and later cotton.
the reliance on slavery tended to keep southern states from investing in other parts of their economy.
southern cities remained smaller than those in the north because there were fewer businesses in the south.
the south also did not devote itself to improving its transportation systems or training its people to build new businesses and industries.
critical thinking identifying central issues why do you think the white south was so committed to keeping a slave based economy.
six years later pennsylvania passed a law that provided tor the gradual freeing of enslaved people.
between 1783 and 1804 connecticut rhode island new york and new jersey passed laws that gradually ended slavery there.
still free african americans faced discrimination.
they were barred from many public places.
only a few states gave them the right to vote.
most of their children had to attend separate schools from white children.
in response free african americans set up their own churches schools and aid groups.
slavery continued to spread south of pennsylvania.
the plantation system depended on enslaved labor and many white southerners feared their economy could not survive without it.
that fear did not stop a number of slaveholders from freeing enslaved people.
the number of free african americans increased in virginia after that state passed a law that encouraged manumission maneyuh mih shuhn the freeing of individual enslaved persons.
around this time american leaders were deciding that the articles of confederation needed to be strengthened.
the question of slavery would make those discussions more difficult.
reading helpdesk a reading progress check explaining why did farmers in massachusetts rebel in 1787.
manumission the freeing of individual enslaved persons 4 i6 a more perfect union the constitutional convention guiding question how did leaders reshape the government.
although the american revolution led to a union of 13 states it had not yet created a nation.
some leaders were satisfied with independent state governments that were similar to the old colonial governments.
others wanted a strong national government.
they demanded a change in the articles of confederation.
among the leading americans supporting reform were james madison a virginia planter and alexander hamilton a new york lawyer.
the convention begins in september 1786 hamilton called for a convention or meeting in philadelphia to discuss trade issues.
he also suggested that this convention consider what possible changes were needed to make the constitution of the federal government adequate to the exigencies needs of the union george washington at first was not enthusiastic about the meeting.
then news of shayss rebellion made washington change his mind.
he agreed to attend the philadelphia convention and the meeting took on greater importance.
the convention began in may 1787 and continued through one of the hottest summers on record.
the 55 delegates included planters merchants lawyers physicians generals governors and a college president.
three of the delegates were under 30 years of age and one benjamin franklin was over 80 many of the delegates were well educated.
at a time when few people went to college 26 of the delegates had college degrees.
native americans african americans and women were not represented at the convention.
these groups were not considered part of the political process at that time.
having washington and franklin at the convention guaranteed the public trust.
the 55 framers lawyers j merchants other politicians 12 8 4 fudges physicians planters philosopher professor surveyer source fifty five fathers the story ofthe constitutional convention ofthe 55 people attending the constitutional convention nearly half were college educated.
using math skills what was the most common occupation among the men who attended the convention.
critical thinking evaluating why do you think it is important for government leaders to have knowledge of the law.
reading in the content area circle graphs academic vocabulary circle or pie graphs show how a whole is divided into different parts.
to read a circle graph imagine that the circle is a pie.
compare the different sizes ofthe different pieces.
use any numbers or labels to help you measure and compare the sizes of each piece.
convention a meeting lesson 2 237 f trust was important because the convention did not just amend or revise the articles of confederation.
it produced an entirely new constitution.
some questioned whether the convention had such authority.
yet the work went on.
two men from philadelphia also had key roles.
james wilson did important work on the details ofthe constitution and gouverneur morris polished the final draft.
james madison who was a keen supporter of a strong national government kept a record of the conventions work.
madison is often called the father of the constitution because he was the author of the basic plan of government that the convention adopted.
the convention organizes the delegates chose george washington to lead the meetings.
delegates also decided that each state would have one vote on all questions.
decisions would be based on a majority vote ofthe states present.
sessions were not open to the public.
in fact the windows were closed in the sweltering heat to keep anyone from listening in.
this made it possible for the delegates to talk freely.
i f i ii the virginia plan edmund randolph of virginia opened the convention with a surprise.
he proposed the virginia plan which called for a strong national government.
the plan which was largely the work of james madison created a government with three branches a two house legislature a chief executive chosen by the legislature and a court system.
the legislature would have powers to tax regulate trade and veto state laws.
voters would elect members ofthe lower house of the legislature.
the members of the lower house would then choose members of the upper house.
in both houses the number of representatives would be proportional or corresponding in size to the population of each state.
this would give a state such as virginia many more delegates than delaware the state with the fewest number of people.
delegates from the small states objected.
they preferred a system in which all states had equal representation.
opponents of the virginia plan rallied around william paterson of new jersey on june 15 he presented another plan.
this plan amended the articles of confederation which was all the convention had the power to do.
4 reading helpdesk proportional having the proper size in relation to other objects or items academic vocabulary amend to change or revise a more perfect union virginia and new jersey plans virginia plan new jersey plan edmund randolph proposed the virginia plan.
william paterson proposed the new jersey plan.
legislativebrand powerful legislature two houses with membership proportional to state s population lower house elected by the people upper house elected by lower house executive branch chosen by legislature limited power could veto legislation subject to override judicial branch would serve for life could veto legislation subject to override legislative branch one house with equal representation from all states legislature could collect taxes from states executive branch chosen by congress would serve a single term subject to recall on request of state governors judicial branch appointed by executive branch would serve for life both plans were federal systems with three branches legislative executive and judicial gave the federal government more powers than it had under the articles of confederation the new jersey plan under this plan the legislature would have a single house with each state having one vote.
paterson argued that the convention should not deprive smaller states of the equality they had under the articles.
the new jersey plan gave congress the power to set taxes regulate trade and elect an executive branch made up of more than one person.
in sum the new jersey plan favored a more powerful government than existed under the articles but a less powerful government than the virginia plan proposed.
breading progress check explaining why did new jersey s delegates object to the virginia plan.
delegates at the constitutional convention considered different plans.
comparing in what ways were the two plans similar.
critical thinking explaining explain how proportional representation favored larger states.
skills practice before you read text build background by discussing the topic with a partner.
tell your partner what you know listen to what your partner knows and combine your background knowledge.
lesson 2 239 4 ii george washington 1732 1799 george washington s military service is well known.
he also became a key political leader in his later years.
washington did not want to attend the constitutional convention but he did because he worried that the nation would not survive under the weak articles of confederation.
the delegates unanimously chose him as the presiding officer or leader ofthe convention.
washington said very little during the debates but later became one ofthe new constitution s strongest supporters.
he argued that later generations could make any changes necessary.
chical thinking drawing inferences what can you infer from the fact that the other delegates chose washington as the leader of the convention.
reading helpdesk agreeing to compromise guiding question what compromises were reached in the new constitution.
the delegates had to decide whether to revise the articles of confederation or write a new constitution.
on june 19 the states voted to work toward a new constitution based on the virginia plan.
they still had to deal with the difficult issue of representation that divided the large and small states.
the great compromise the convention appointed a committee to settle the disagreement.
roger sherman of connecticut suggested what would later be called the great compromise.
a compromise is the settling of a dispute when each party agrees to give up some of its demands.
shermans compromise proposed different representation in the two house legislature.
in the upper house the senate each state would have two members.
that is the states would be equal in representation.
in the lower house the house of representatives the number of seats for each state would vary based on the states population.
larger states would have more representation.
the three fifths compromise delegates from the south and north disagreed on whether and how to count each states enslaved population.
including enslaved people as part of a states population would increase each southern states size.
this would give southern states more seats in congress.
the southern states liked this but the northern states did not.
at the same time larger populations would increase each southern states taxes because states were to be taxed based on their populations.
the south was not happy about this.
as a solution to this dispute delegates agreed to what was called the three fifths compromise.
as part of this compromise every five enslaved persons would count as three persons in the state s population total.
this population total would be the basis for setting taxes and determining representation in congress.
the question of the slave trade most northern states had already banned the slave trade.
they wanted to prohibit it nationwide.
southern states considered slavery central to their economy.
northerners agreed to keep the new congress from interfering with the slave trade until 1808 compromise a settlement of a dispute by each party giving up some demands a more perfect union 1 debating a bill of rights state constitutions such as those of virginia and massachusetts had a listing of key rights and freedoms.
these are known as a declaration of rights or a bill of rights.
at the convention some delegates worried that without a bill of rights the new national government might abuse its power.
george mason of virginia proposed a bill of rights to be included in the constitution.
the delegates rejected this idea.
most of the delegates believed that the constitution carefully defined government powers and provided enough protection of individual rights.
approving the constitution on september 17 1787 the delegates assembled to sign the constitution they had created.
three delegates refused to sign elbridge gerry of massachusetts and edmund randolph and george mason of virginia.
gerry and mason would not sign because the constitution did not have a bill of rights.
randolph who had put forth the virginia plan felt the final document strayed too far from his own beliefs.
the other delegates did sign the document.
the approved draft of the constitution went out to the states for their approval.
under the articles of confederation all 13 states would have had to agree to any change to the framework of government.
the drafters of the new constitution decided however that the document would go into effect with the approval of just 9 of the 13 states.
o reading progress check explaining what compromises were reached concerning enslaved people.
i i include this lesson s information in your foldable.
a more perfect union articles of tba al lew ratifying the confederation m constitution constitution november n77 ay segembec 1787 1799 i lesson 2 review review vocabulary 1 write a sentence about the constitutional convention that uses both of these terms.
3oa 3ob a proportional b compromise answer the guiding questions 2 summarizing what weaknesses in the national government did shays s rebellion reveal.
5a isb 29b 3 describing why did leading americans decide to create a new constitution.
ia 4 explaining what is the significance of the year 1787 in the nation s history.
ic 5 analyzing why did the constitutional convention adopt the three fifths compromise.
4d expository writing you have been asked to write a short announcement to inform your community about the great compromise.
summarize the key points ofthe agreement.
include any other details you think are important.
4d 21 29b 30d lesson 2 241 t what doyou think.
should the constitution be ratified.
after the delegates in philadelphia wrote the u s constitution it went before the american people for approval.
delegates in each state met at special conventions to decide whether to accept or reject the constitution.
in order for the constitution to become the new plan for the government of the united states 9 of the 13 states had to ratify or approve it.
those who opposed the constitution were called anti federalists.
mercy otis warren and the other anti federalist writers feared a strong national government would take away the rights of citizens.
federalists supported the constitution.
they believed that the constitution would give the national government power to manage the problems facing the united states.
at the same time the federalists argued the constitution would protect the rights of the individual.
primary source the constitutional convention met at independence hall.
mercy otis warren our situation is truly delicate critical.
on the one hand we are in need ofa strong federal government founded on principles that will support the prosperity union ofthe colonies.
on the other we have struggled for liberty made lofty sacrifices at her shrine and there are still many among us who revere her name too much to relinquish beyond a certain medium the rights of man for the dignity of government.
99 l ill iii a more perfect union the original constitution of the united states is on display in the rotunda for the charters of freedom in the national archives building.
james wilson i am satisfied that anything nearer to perfection could not have been accomplished.
if there are errors it should be remembered that the seeds of reformation are sown in the work itself and the concurrence of two thirds of the congress may at any time introduce alterations and amendments i am bold to assert that it is the best form of government which has ever been offered to the world.
99 what do you think.
dbq vocabulary revere deeply love and respect relinquish give up reformation change concurrence agreement 0 identifying according to warren why should people be cautious about the new government.
4e 15a 0 summarizing according to wilson how can the constitution be improved in the future.
4e ua 29b 0 analyzing what are the differences between warren s and wilson s views about ratification of the constitution.
4e lesson 2 243 networks there s more online.
biographies john locke baron de montesquieu et game identification sf graphic organizer branches of the federal government ef primary source the ninth pillar ef self check quiz video reading helpdesk lesson 3 a new plan of government i rial question how do governments change.
otff texas essential knowledge and skills 4e analyze the arguments for and against ratification.
15a identify the influence of ideas from historic documents including the magna carta the english bill of rights the mayflower compact the federalist papers and selected anti federalist writings on the u s system of government.
15c identify colonial grievances listed in the declaration of independence and explain how those grievances were addressed in the u s constitution and the bill of rights.
15d analyze how the u s constitution reflects the principles of limited government republicanism checks and balances federalism separation of powers popular sovereignty and individual rights.
17a analyze the arguments of the federalists and anti federalists including those of alexander hamilton patrick henry james madison and george mason.
20a explain the role of significant individuals such as thomas hooker charles de montesquieu john locke william blackstone and william penn in the development of self government in colonial america.
it matters because the constitution contains features that came from the best political thinkers and that have helped the nation survive and thrive.
the constitution s sources guidingquestion from where did the framers of the constitution borrow their ideas about government.
although an american document the constitution has roots in other civilizations.
the delegates who wrote the document studied the history of political thought in an effort to avoid the mistakes of the past.
many ideas found in the constitution came from european political institutions and writers.
the framers who shaped the document were familiar with the parliamentary system of britain.
many had taken part in their colonial or state assemblies.
they valued the individual rights guaranteed by the british judicial system.
although the americans broke away from british rule they respected many british traditions or cultural beliefs and practices.
european influences the english magna carta 1215 placed limits on the power of the monarch.
parliament englands lawmaking body became a force that the king or queen had to depend on to pay for wars and the royal government.
like parliament colonial assemblies controlled their colonies funds.
the assemblies had some control over colonial governors.
taking notes categorizing as you read use a chart like this one to identify the powers of each branch of the federal government.
a more perfect union branch example executive legislative judicial content vocabulary federalism legislative branch executive branch electoral college judicial branch checks and balan amendment the english bill of rights of 1689 was another model for americans.
in fact many people in the united states felt the constitution also needed a bill of rights.
the framers believed in the ideas about the nature of people and government put forth by european writers of the enlightenment.
the enlightenment was a movement of the 1700s that promoted knowledge reason and science as a means of improving society.
james madison and other framers of the constitution were familiar with the writings of john locke and baron de montesquieu mahn tuhskyoo two philosophers of the enlightenment.
the english philosopher locke wrote that all people have natural rights.
he stated that these natural rights include the rights to life liberty and property.
in his two treatises of civil government 1690 he wrote that government is based on an agreement or contract between the people and their government.
americans interpreted natural rights to mean the rights of britons defined in the magna carta and the english bill of rights.
the framers viewed the constitution as a contract between the american people and their government.
the contract protected peoples natural rights by limiting government power.
the french writer montesquieu declared in the spirit of laws 1748 that the powers of government should be separated and balanced against each other.
this separation would prevent any one person or group from gaining too much power.
the framers of the constitution carefully spelled out and divided the powers of government.
federalism the constitution created a federal system of government that divided powers between the national or federal government and the states.
under the articles of confederation the states held most powers.
under the constitution the states gave up some powers to the federal government and kept others.
federalism fe duh ruh lih zuhm or sharing power between the federal and state governments is one of the key features of the united states government.
under the constitution the federal government gained wide ranging powers to tax regulate trade control the currency raise an army and declare war.
it could also pass laws that were necessary and proper for carrying out its responsibilities.
this power would allow congress to make laws as needed to deal with new situations.
john locke influenced many of the framers of the constitution.
his views on natural rights are reflected in the constitution.
federalism sharing power between the federal and state governments academic vocabulary tradition a longstanding cultural belief and practice lesson 3 245 skills practice use sign language and gestures when you don t know enough words.
point to pictures to tell about your text.
the constitution left some important powers to the states.
the states kept the power to control trade inside their borders.
they also could set up local governments and schools and establish marriage and divorce laws.
the constitution also called for the sharing of some powers between the federal and state governments.
both federal and state governments would have the power to tax and to establish criminal justice systems.
while states had powers and shared others with the federal government the constitution and the laws of congress were to he the supreme law of the land no state could make laws or take actions that went against the constitution.
federal courts would settle disputes between the federal government and the states on the basis of the constitution.
q reading progress check identifying how were the principles of the magna carta reflected in colonial assemblies.
government structure guidingquestion how does the constitution limit the po wer ofthe government.
the declaration of independence had listed the many grievances or complaints americans held against king george iii and parliament.
the grievances included imposing taxes on us without our consent and opposed the rights ofthe people the framers ofthe constitution sought to address these grievances by limiting the power of government and protecting the rights ofthe citizens.
the framers of the constitution used montesquieu s idea of a separation of powers.
they divided the federal government federal and state powers the constitution gives exclusive powers to the state and federal governments and it also calls for some powers to be shared.
o identifying what is an example of a power shared by the federal and state governments.
o critical thinking making generalizations why do you think both the national and state governments have the powerto collect taxes.
national government national and state governments state governments reading helpdesk coin money maintain army and navy declare war regulate trade between states and with foreign nations carry out all expressed powers establish courts enforce laws collect taxes borrow money provide for general welfare regulate trade within a state protect public welfare and safety conduct elections establish local governments legislative branch the lawmaking branch of government executive branch the branch of government that executes or carries out the law headed by the president electoral college the special 0 of electors chosen to vote for president an vice president a more perfect union congress shown here listening to the president deliver the state of the union speech consists of both the house of representatives and the senate.
congress currently has 100 senators and 435 representatives.
into three branches legislative executive and judicial.
the first three articles or parts of the constitution describe each branchs powers and responsibilities.
government branches article i of the constitution declares congress to be the legislative branch or lawmaking branch of the government.
congress is made up of the house of representatives and the senate.
the powers of congress include establishing taxes coining money and regulating trade.
article ii of the constitution sets up the executive branch to carry out the nations laws and policies.
at the head of this branch are the president and vice president.
a special group called the electoral college elects the president and vice president.
today voters in each state choose the electors who make up the electoral college.
article iii deals with the judicial branch or court system.
the nations judicial power resides in one supreme court and any lower federal courts congress creates.
the supreme court and other federal courts hear cases involving the constitution federal laws and disputes between states.
checks and balances the constitution contains a system of checks and balances.
this means each branch of government has ways to check or limit the power of the other branches.
with this system no single branch can gain too much power in the government.
you will learn more about this system in another chapter.
people and economy 3 of the morth y people and economy of the south 423 chapter to draw conclusions about who in society today might be opposed to your cause and why.
29e thinking like a historian creating diagrams review the events related to the second great awakening.
create a diagram like the one to the right to show some changes that resulted from this period of reform.
add additional spokes if you need to.
then explain the role that religion had in promoting these reforms.
ia 2jd visual literacy interpreting images this picture is called the hunter s shanty in theadirondacks by currier and ives.
describe the subject ofthis image.
what kind of feeling or mood do you think the artists are trying to create.
is it an appealing image.
29b second great awakening 472 the spirit of reform assessment directions write your answers using standard grammar checking for understanding o explain the role each of the following individuals played in the reform movement.
22b a lyman beecher d william lloyd garrison b horace mann e susan b anthony c dorothea dix review the guiding questions 0 describing what concern led to the rise of religious revivals and the second great awakening.
ia 0 describing how did the hudson river school contribute to american culture.
2a 0 describing what contributions did frederick douglass make to the abolitionist movement.
24b 0 drawing inferences john quincy adams s efforts to abolish slavery were denounced by many members of congress.
why do you think this was so.
7d 0 identifying what rights did the delegates to the seneca falls convention advocate for women.
24b 0 describing how did emma willard and mary lyon help improve women s education.
24b critical thinking 0 analyzing why did henry david thoreau refuse to pay a tax.
how was his refusal an example of civil disobedience.
290 0 interpreting in his antislavery pamphlet david walker wrote that america is more our country than it is the whites we have enriched it with our blood and tears.
what does he mean by this claim.
290 0 evaluating why do you think delegates to the seneca falls convention modeled their declaration on the declaration of independence.
ia 23e spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
0 evaluating evaluate the success of the educational reform movement and its impact on education in the united states.
24b 0 making connections why is it not surprising that lucretia mott and elizabeth cady stanton met at an antislavery convention.
what did the antislavery movement have in common with the movement for women s rights.
23e 0 describing how was the underground railroad related to the movement to end slavery and how did it help enslaved persons.
24b comparing how did reformers use education to help people with disabilities and to create better conditions for prisoners.
24b 0 speculating why do you think most african americans rejected the plan of the american colonization society.
0 evaluating how might the second great awakening have helped create the temperance movement.
23d 24b 0 identifying bias in an 1858 speech to congress senator james henry hammond said in all social systems there must be a class to do the menial duties to perform the drudgery of life such a class you must have or you would not have that other class which leads progress civilization and refinement.
does hammond show bias in his speech.
provide evidence to support your view.
29f 0 evaluating the validity of sources reread the feature in the chapter 17 lesson 1 the search for compromise lesson 2 challenges to slavery lesson 3 secession and war iii js the story matters his is a complicated story that raises many questions about slavery and freedom.
dred scott was born into slavery in virginia.
he has been taken against his will to live in many places including places where slavery is illegal.
now scott is wondering did his time in free territory turn him into a free man.
he decides to take his question to a court for a judge to decide.
other people wonder if scott an enslaved african american even has the right to go to court.
the answers to these questions are of great interest to the people of the united states.
emotions run high as the debate over slavery rages.
foldables toed scott was at the center of o controversial supreme court tilling in the 1850s.
go to the foldables library in the back of your book to make a foldable that will help you take notes while reading this chapter lesson 1 the two sides 18 lesson 2 early years of the war lesson 3 life during the civil war lesson 4 the strain of war lesson 5 the war s final stages abraham lincoln was president during me nation s gre ibrarv of t c a esi the story matters in november 1860 voters elect a self educated lawyer from illinois named abraham lincoln to be president of the united states.
even before lincoln is inaugurated south carolina and six other southern states secede from the union.
as he waits to take office lincoln sees the nation he is to lead spiral downward toward civil war.
lincoln does not give up.
he believes a house divided against itself cannot stand and he guides the nation until it is once again united.
foldables go to the foldables library in the back of your book to make a foldable that will help you take notes while reading this chapter 18 place and time united states i86i to 1865 in december 1860 south carolina announced that it was seceding from the united states.
within a few months six other states had followed south carolina out of the union.
after the battle at fort sumter a total of 11 southern states joined together in the confederate states of america.
i step into the place map focus in 1861 soldiers fired the first shots of the civil war.
armies of the confederacy and the union did battle in locations all across the country.
location on this map which union states have civil war battle sites.
29c place what clue can you find on the map that might explain why so many battles took place in virginia.
29c critical thinking drawing conclusions why do you think most of the battles of the civil war took place in the confederate states.
29b i 1 union states ii union territories 1 1 confederate states major civil war battle site 1 300 km 300 miles l lambert azimuthal equal area projection step into the time timeline look at the time line.
for how many years after the emancipation proclamation did the civil war continue.
29c abraham lincoln 1861 1865 world events networks ef map explore the interactive version of i.
ore online.
this map on networks.
ef time line explore the interactive version ofthis time line on networks.
k1 networks there s more online.
ef chart army salaries graph resources in the north and south ef graphic organizer comparing north and south ef slideshows army organization civil war casualties ef self check quiz ef video union confederacy wuw kj lesson 1 j teks texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
1c explain the significance of the following dates 1607 founding of jamestown 1620 arrival of the pilgrims and signing of the mayflower compact 1776 adoption of the declaration of independence 1787 writing of the u s constitution 1803 louisiana purchase and 1861 1865 civil war.
8a explain the roles played by significant individuals during the civil war including jefferson davis ulysses s grant robert e lee and abraham lincoln and heroes such as congressional medal of honor recipients william carney and philip bazaar.
8b explain the causes of the civil war including sectionalism states rights and slavery and significant events of the civil war including the firing on fort sumter the battles of antietam gettysburg and vicksburg the announcement of the emancipation proclamation lee s surrender at appomattox court house and the assassination of abraham lincoln.
1oa locate places and regions of importance in the united states during the 17th 18th and 19th centuries.
reading helpdesk inm m pins 6 stmipofor k4 vtitl pit f i v the two sides question why does conflict develop.
x i i x it matters because both the north and the south had strengths and weaknesses that helped determine their military strategies.
two very different guidingquestion what were the goals and strategies of the north and the south.
the civil war which lasted from 1861 to 1865 profoundly changed the nation.
the war divided many families.
neither side imagined however that the four years of fighting would lead to so much suffering.
by the end of the war more than 600 000 americans had lost their lives.
many thousands more were wounded in battle.
division in the border states for most states choosing sides in the civil war was easy.
the border states of delaware maryland kentucky and missouri however were bitterly divided.
slavery existed in all four states though it was generally not as widespread as in the confederate states.
all four of these states had close ties to the north and the south.
the border states were vital to the strategy of the union.
missouri could control parts of the mississippi river and major routes to the west.
kentucky controlled the ohio river.
delaware was close to the key union city of philadelphia.
maryland perhaps the most important of the border states was close to richmond the confederate capital.
most significantly taking notes comparing and contrasting as you read note the differences and similarities between the north and the south in a venn diagram like this one.
502 content vocabulary border state enlist washington d c lay within the state.
if maryland seceded the norths capital would be surrounded.
president lincoln worked tirelessly to keep the four border states in the union.
in september 1861 he wrote primary source ii i think to lose kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game we would as well consent to separation at once including the surrender of this capitol.
99 from abraham lincoln his speeches and writings 22a analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders of the united states such as george washington john marshall and abraham lincoln.
22b describe the contributions of significant political social and military leaders of the united states such as frederick douglass john paul jones james monroe stonewall jackson susan b anthony and elizabeth cady stanton.
29d identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
in the end lincoln was successful.
still many border state residents supported the confederacy.
the president had to work hard to restrain these opponents of the war.
strengths and weaknesses when the war began each side had advantages and disadvantages compared to the other.
how each side used its strengths and weaknesses would determine the wars outcome.
the north had a larger population and more resources than the south.
the south had other advantages such as excellent military leaders and a strong fighting spirit.
also because most of the war was fought in the south the confederacy knew the land and had the will to defend it.
the goals of war each side had different goals in fighting the civil war.
the confederacy wanted to be an independent nation.
to do this it did not have to invade the north or destroy the union army.
it just needed to fight hard enough and long enough to convince i northerners that the war was not worth its cost.
the fighting forces 1861 1865 50 soldiers 1 platoon 2 platoons 1 company 10 companies 1 regiment 4 5 regiments 1 brigade 4 5 brigades 1 division 3 divisions 1 corps both the union and confederate armies were organized in roughly the same way.
o using math skills about how many times larger was the union army than the confederate army.
critical thinking hypothesizing why do you think the armed forces were divided into units.
border state a state on the border between acadcwi the north and south delaware maryland strategy a careful plan or method kentucky and missouri lesson 1 503 resources in the north and south the north and south went into the war with very different strengths and weaknesses.
100 80 summarizing how 1x1 i 60 would you summarize the status uj ofthe north and south at the 1x1 40 start of the war.
qu critical thinking 20 comparing in what areas did 0 the north have the greatest advantage over the south.
population railroad number of exports manufactured mileage farms goods source u s census bureau historical statistics of the united states in contrast the north wanted to restore the union.
in president lincolns view states had no constitutional right to secede from the union.
its forces had to invade the south and force the breakaway states to give up their quest for independence.
although slavery was an underlying cause of the war lincolns original aim was not to end slavery.
he wrote in 1862 primary source reading helpdesk m if i could save the union without freeing any slave i would do it and if i could save it by freeing all the slaves i would do it and if i could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone i would also do that.
99 from abraham lincoln his speeches and writer confederate strategies the basic strategy of confederate president jefferson davis was to conduct a defensive war.
this meant that it would hold as much territory as possible.
southerners felt that if they showed determination to be independent northerners would tire of the war.
the south also tried to win the support of great britain and france whose economies suffered when the war disrupted the export of southern cotton.
southerners hoped the british and french might pressure the north to end the war.
union strategies the norths war plan came from general winfield scott hero of the war with mexico.
he knew that the north would have to defeat the south completely.
enlist to formally join a military force academic vocabulary contrast to compare with respect to differences 504 the civil war reading in the content area bargrop bar graphs are often used to compare and contrast information about two groups.
the large bars and different colors make them easy to read and interpret.
to do this scott proposed the so called anaconda plan which took its name from a type of snake that squeezes its prey to death.
first the union would blockade or close southern ports.
this strategy would keep supplies from reaching the confederacy and prevent the south from exporting its cotton crop.
second the north would seek to gain control of the mississippi river.
this would split the confederacy in two and cut southern supply lines.
another goal of the union forces was the capture of richmond virginia the confederate capital.
reading progress check explaining why did the south use a defensive strategy.
americans against americans guidingquestion iv iot was war like for the soldiers ofthe north and the south.
the civil war was more than a war between the states.
it turned brother against brother and neighbor against neighbor.
kentucky senator john crittenden had two sons who became generals.
one fought for the confederacy the other for the union.
even president lincolns wife mary todd lincoln had relatives in the confederate army.
men of all ages rushed to enlist ihnlihst in or join the union or confederate army.
some did so out of patriotism.
others thought they would be called cowards if they did not serve.
still others were looking for excitement.
the sister of william stone of louisiana wrote that her brother was eager though they fought bitterly the two sides in the civil war shared close bonds.
often families had soldiers on each side of the conflict.
primarysource i to be off to virginia to join the confederate army.
he so fears hat the fighting will be over before he can get there.
99 from brokenburn the journal of kate stone though the average civil war soldier was in lis mid 20s many recruits on both sides were lardly adults.
tens of thousands of soldiers were inder 18 some were younger than 14 to get nto the army many teenagers ran away from tome or lied about their ages.
although teenage boys were accepted into service one group of men was not allowed to ight in the early days of the war.
the union efused at first to let free african americans nlist.
union leaders worried that white troops wuld not accept african american soldiers.
site mmsmsw si phm 6 mhltolaulp w 4 stit1 pm f swfill im 3so irawnsrcwtib 55 b fc atwggjf a soldier s pay 7 brum fiords.
s actweyowk men wanted rcgruitxng station zbnommmmnbst i cam vi53 although many volunteered to serve soldiers in both the union and confederate armies received monthly pay.
compare their pay rates to those in later wars.
describing what happens to a soldier s pay as he or she moves up in rank.
critical thinking making connections name some items you could buy today with a civil war private s monthly salary.
include this lesson s information in your foldable 2 ft reading helpdesk private b 50 14 66 17 78 85 1 203 1 543 20 261 1 854 2 339 10 138 486 until 1864 african americans in the civil war were paid only 7 per month source bureau of economic analysis princeton review to get more men to enlist union recruiters put up posters offering a sign up bonus or bounty.
later in the war the union army changed this policy.
the confederacy refused to consider having african americans fight until the wars final desperate days.
they did not want to give enslaved people weapons.
high hopes when the war began each side expected a quick victory.
northerners could not imagine the confederates holding out for long against the unions greater resources.
confederates believed the north could never subdue the fighting spirit of the south.
both sides were wrong.
in the end the war lasted far longer than most americans could have guessed.
who were the soldiers.
soldiers came from every region of the country and all walks of life.
most came from farms.
almost half of the norths troops and more than 60 percent of the souths had owned or worked on farms.
by the summer of 1861 the confederate army had about 112 000 soldiers.
they were sometimes called rebels.
the union had about 187 000 soldiers also known as yankees.
by the end of the war about 900 000 men had fought for the confederacy and about 2 1 million men had borne arms for the union.
the union army included just under 200 000 african americans.
about 10 000 mexican americans served in the war.
reading strategy finding the main idea skills practice suppose you do not understand something you read.
look for a picture that helps explain it.
paragraphs and sections have main ideas and details that support that main idea.
make an outline of the section a soldier s life by writing down the main idea and listing the supporting details under it.
506 the civil war a soldier s life soldiers of the north and the south described what they saw and how they felt in letters to family and friends.
many wrote about their boredom discomfort sickness fear and horror.
most of the time the soldiers lived in camps.
camp life had its pleasant moments of songs stories letters from home and baseball games.
at other times a soldiers life was a dull routine of drills bad food marches and rain.
between battles soldiers on both sides sometimes forgot they were enemies.
a private described his wartime experiences primarysource u a part of co company k and some of the enemy came together and stacked arms and talked for a long time.
our men cooked coffee and treated them and afterward each one took up his position again and they began to fire at each other again but not as hard as before.
99 from the life of billy yank the horrors of war in spite of fleeting moments of calm the reality of war was always close by.
thousands of casualties overwhelmed medical facilities.
after the battle of shiloh the wounded lay in the rain for more than 24 hours waiting for treatment.
a soldier recalled many had died there and others were in the last agonies as we passed.
their groans and cries were heartrending faced with these terrible realities many men deserted.
about 1 of every 11 union soldiers and 1 of every 8 confederates ran away because of fear hunger or sickness.
q reading progress check comparing and contrasting how did the expectations of the war compare with the reality for both sides.
then the picture above shows a union artillery unit during the civil war.
the photograph below shows a u s artillery unit in iraq in 2010 now critical thinking comparing and contrasting how is the artillery that soldiers used during the civil war like the artillery used today.
how is it different.
lesson 1 review review vocabulary 1 use the following terms in sentences about the civil war to demonstrate your understanding of the terms.
3o job a border state b enlist answer the guiding questions 2 contrasting how was the north s strategy different from the south s.
29b 3 comparing and contrasting compare and contrast attitudes in the union and the confederacy about enlisting african american soldiers.
2 d 4 evaluating what was the goal of the anaconda plan.
expository writing consider the crisis president lincoln faced when he took office in 1861 in a paragraph evaluate his leadership in responding to the situation.
22a 3od lesson 1 507 simiuitv sb pay per mouth m s1w1 ml i himlffl w 150 phuifflramssxp oaro hatiomsjfot briib gmrbs.
a soldier s pay army salaries monthly civil war world war ii 1942 vietnam war 1965 iraq war 2007 50 private fsergeant 17 78 85 1 203 1 543 20 261 1 854 2 339 10 until 1864 african americans in the civil war were paid only 7 per month source bureau of economic analysis princeton review to get more men to enlist union recruiters put up posters offering a sign up bonus or bounty.
although many volunteered to serve soldiers in both the union and confederate armies received monthly pay.
compare their pay rates to those in later wars.
cl describing what happens to a soldier s pay as he or she moves up in rank.
critical thinking making connections name some items you could buy today with a civil war private s monthly salary.
include this lesson s information in your foldable v4 later in the war the union army changed this policy.
the confederacy refused to consider having african americans fight until the wars final desperate days.
they did not want to give enslaved people weapons.
high hopes when the war began each side expected a quick victory.
northerners could not imagine the confederates holding out for long against the unions greater resources.
confederates believed the north could never subdue the fighting spirit of the south.
both sides were wrong.
in the end the war lasted far longer than most americans could have guessed.
who were the soldiers.
soldiers came from every region of the country and all walks of life.
most came from farms.
almost half of the norths troops and more than 60 percent of the souths had owned or worked on farms.
by the summer of 1861 the confederate army had about 112 000 soldiers.
they were sometimes called rebels.
the union had about 187 000 soldiers also known as yankees.
by the end of the war about 900 000 men had fought for the confederacy and about 2 1 million men had borne arms for the union.
the union army included just under 200 000 african americans.
about 10 000 mexican americans served in the war.
reading helpdesk reading strategy finding the main idea paragraphs and sections have main ideas and details that support that main idea.
make an outline ofthe section a soldier s life by writing down the main idea and listing the supporting details under it.
506 the civil war skills practice suppose you do not understand something you read.
look for a picture that helps explain it.
a soldier s life soldiers of the north and the south described what they saw and how they felt in letters to family and friends.
many wrote about their boredom discomfort sickness fear and horror.
most of the time the soldiers lived in camps.
camp life had its pleasant moments of songs stories letters from home and baseball games.
at other times a soldiers life was a dull routine of drills bad food marches and rain.
between battles soldiers on both sides sometimes forgot they were enemies.
a private described his wartime experiences the picture above shows a union artillery unit during the civil war.
the photograph below shows a u s artillery unit in iraq in 2010 primarysource k part of co company k and some of the enemy came together and stacked arms and talked for a long time.
our men cooked coffee and treated them and afterward each one took up his position again and they began to fire at each other again but not as hard as before.
99 from the life of billy yank the horrors of war in spite of fleeting moments of calm the reality of war was always close by.
thousands of casualties overwhelmed medical facilities.
after the battle of shiloh the wounded lay in the rain for more than 24 hours waiting for treatment.
a soldier recalled many had died there and others were in the last agonies as we passed.
their groans and cries were heartrending faced with these terrible realities many men deserted.
about 1 of every 11 union soldiers and 1 of every 8 confederates ran away because of fear hunger or sickness.
q reading progress check critical thinking comparing and contrasting how is the artillery that soldiers used during the civil war like the artillery used today.
how is it different.
comparing and contrasting how did the expectations ofthe war compare with the reality for both sides.
lesson 1 review review vocabulary 1 use the following terms in sentences about the civil war to demonstrate your understanding of the terms.
joa 3ob a border state b enlist answer the guiding questions 2 contrasting how was the north s strategy different from the south s.
29b 3 comparing and contrasting compare and contrast attitudes in the union and the confederacy about enlisting african american soldiers.
2 d 4 evaluating what was the goal of the anaconda plan.
expository writing consider the crisis president lincoln faced when he took office in 1861 in a paragraph evaluate his leadership in responding to the situation.
22 300 lesson 1 507 networks there s more online.
sf biography robert e lee gf game fill in the blank graphic organizer civil war battles maps war in the west war in the east primary source virginia and monitor sf self check quiz ef slide show the battle of antietam video teks texas essential knowledge and skills 8a explain the roles played by significant individuals during the civil war including jefferson davis ulysses s grant robert e lee and abraham lincoln and heroes such as congressional medal of honor recipients william carney and philip bazaar.
8b explain the causes of the civil war including sectionalism states rights and slavery and significant events of the civil war including the firing on fort sumter the battles of antietam gettysburg and vicksburg the announcement of the emancipation proclamation lee s surrender at appomattox court house and the assassination of abraham lincoln.
10c analyze the effects of physical and human geographic factors on major historical and contemporary events in the united states.
22a analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders of the united states such as george washington john marshall and abraham lincoln.
22b describe the contributions of significant political social and military leaders of the united states such as frederick douglass john paul jones james monroe stonewall jackson susan b anthony and elizabeth cady stanton.
27a explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations such as the steamboat the cotton gin and interchangeable parts.
reading helpdesk taking notes sequencing as you read about the early civil war battles them on a time line and take notes on what happened during each of them.
508 the civil war lesson 2 early years of the war rial question why does conflict develop.
it matters because neither side gained a strong advantage during the war s early years.
war on land and at sea guiding question whatwastheoutcomeofthefirstmajorbattleofthewar.
while the union and the confederacy mobilized their armies the union navy began operations against the south.
in april 1861 president lincoln announced a blockade of all confederate ports.
the stage was set for fighting at sea as well as on land.
first battle of bull run tension mounted in the summer of 1861 leading to the first major battle of the civil war.
on july 21 about 30 000 union troops commanded by general irvin mcdowell attacked a smaller confederate force led by general p g t.
beauregard.
the fighting took place in northern virginia near a small river called bull run.
hundreds of spectators from washington d c watched the battle from a few miles away.
both sides lacked battle experience.
at first the yankees drove the confederates back.
then the rebels rallied inspired by general thomas jackson.
another confederate general noted that jackson was holding his position like a stone wall this earned him the nickname stonewall jackson.
the confederates then unleashed a savage counterattack that broke the union lines.
as they retreated union troops ran into civilians fleeing in panic.
1861 1862 1862 note content vocabulary tributary emancipation ironclad proclamation casualty the loss shocked northerners who now realized that the war could be long and difficult.
president lincoln named a new general george b mcclellan to head the union army in the east called the army of the potomac and to train the troops.
although dismayed over bull run president lincoln was also determined.
he put out a call for more army volunteers.
he signed two bills requesting thousands to serve in the infantry cavalry and navy for up to three years.
in addition victories in the west would soon give a boost to northern spirits and also increase enlistment.
control of the west in the west the major union goal was to control the mississippi river and its tributaries trih byuh tehr eez the smaller rivers that fed it.
with control of the river union ships could prevent louisiana arkansas and texas from supplying the eastern confederacy.
union gunboats and troops would also be able to use the rivers to move into the heart of the south.
the battle for the rivers began in february 1862 union forces captured fort henry on the tennessee river.
naval commander andrew foote and army general ulysses s grant led the assault.
soon afterward grant and foote moved against fort donelson on the cumberland river.
the confederates realized they had no chance of saving the fort.
they asked grant what terms he would give them to surrender.
grant replied no terms except an unconditional and immediate surrender can be accepted unconditional surrender grant became the norths new hero.
a battle between ironclads the union blockade of confederate ports posed a real threat to the confederacy.
southerners hoped to break it with a secret weapon the merrimack.
the merrimack was a damaged frigate that had been abandoned by the union.
the confederates rebuilt the wooden ship and covered it with iron.
they renamed their new ironclad eye uhrnklad the virginia.
on march 8 1862 the virginia attacked union ships in the chesapeake bay.
union shells just bounced off its sides.
some union leaders feared the virginia would destroy the union navy steam up the potomac river and bombard washington d c by this time however the north had an ironclad of its own.
the monitor rushed southward to face the virginia.
on marc the two ironclads met in battle.
neither ship won but the stirring clash raised spirits in both the north and the sout to create the virginia the confederate navy took what remained of a burned union warship covered it in iron and equipped it with 10 guns.
on its bow they placed an iron ram so the ship could steer into another ship and puncture its hull.
tributary astreamorsmaller riverthatfeeds flcadeniicyombulary into a larger river abandon to leave behind or give up ironclad a warship equipped with iron plating for protection lesson 2 509 just two months after their march 1862 battle the crew ofthe virginia on the right destroyed their ship rather than let it fall into union hands.
the monitor sank in a storm in december 1862 critical thinking analyzing visuals why do you think neither ship was able to seriously damage the other.
the battle of shiloh meanwhile in the west general grant and about 40 000 troops headed south toward corinth mississippi a major railroad junction.
in early april 1862 the union army camped at pittsburg landing 20 miles 32 km from corinth near shiloh church.
additional union forces joined grant from nashville.
confederate leaders decided to strike before more troops arrived to reinforce the union.
early on the morning of april 6 generals albert sidney johnston and p g t.
beauregard led confederate forces in a surprise attack.
the battle lasted two days.
it was a narrow victory for the union but the losses were enormous.
together the two armies suffered more than 23 000 casualties ka zhuhl teez people killed wounded captured or missing.
after shiloh union troops laid siege to corinth forcing the confederates to withdraw.
the union army occupied the town on may 30 memphis tennessee fell to union forces on june 6 the north seemed well on its way to controlling the mississippi river.
reading helpdesk casualty a soldier who is killed wounded captured or missing in battle capturing new orleans a few weeks after shiloh the north won another key victory.
on april 25 1862 union naval forces under david farragut captured new orleans louisiana the largest city in the south.
farragut who was of spanish descent grew up in the south but remained loyal to the union.
the capture of new orleans meant that the academic vocabulary reinforce to make stronger 510 the civil war confederacy could no longer use the mississippi river to carry its goods to sea.
the citys fall also left the confederate stronghold of vicksburg mississippi as the only major obstacle to the unions strategy in the west.
b reading progress check explaining how did the loss of new orleans affect the confederacy.
war in the eastern states guiding question how did the union respond to important defeats in the east in 1862.
while the two sides fought for control of tennessee and the mississippi river the union was trying to capture the confederate capital at richmond virginia.
close to the union richmond was vulnerable to attack.
confederate armies fought hard to defend it.
confederate forces in the east enjoyed much more success than their western counterparts.
confederate victories southern victories in the east were largely the result of the leadership of robert e lee and stonewall jackson.
the two generals knew the terrain and could move forces quickly.
they were also expert at inspiring troops.
as a result confederate forces managed to defeat much larger union forces.
z geography connection gaining control of the west was a key part ofthe union s war strategy.
place where did the south win battles in the west.
critical thinking drawing infentices what important cities remained for the north to capture after 1863.
1 mr z war in the west 1862 1863 io si ince tsville r i union states lj confederate states union victory r jjjt confederate victory i misso bizi fij ft xe indian territory red r mississippi wizzzzf fz w z z i 4tzzz t a oallazzm kdabargl may july 1863 port hi may july 1863 z j lr k baton a ne iz.
ontgomeryf oil houston gulf of mexico 0 galveston oct 4 1862 90 w 0 200 kml albers equal area projecq 85w 200 miles j 95w l 1 a northern newspaper ran this cartoon in 1863 it shows lady liberty warding off an attack of the peace democrats or copperheads.
critical thinking identifying points of view what does this cartoon suggest about the artist s view of copperheads.
explain your answer.
the coiteriiead party ix favor of a vigorous prosecution peace.
later that included men from ages 17 to 50 some exceptions were allowed.
a man with money could hire a substitute to serve for him.
later a man with 20 or more enslaved people did not have to serve.
at first the north offered a bounty bauntee or a sum of money to encourage volunteers.
in march 1863 it also passed a draft.
men aged 20 to 45 had to register.
as in the south a man could avoid the draft by hiring a substitute or paying 300.
many workers earned less than 500 a year and could not afford these options.
people in several northern cities rioted to protest the draft.
the new york city draft riots in july 1863 were the worst.
as the first names were drawn rioters attacked government and military buildings.
then mobs turned their attacks against african americans.
many white workers had opposed the emancipation proclamation fearing freed african americans would take their jobs.
after four days more than 100 people were dead.
federal troops finally stopped the riots.
skills practice as you read turn the subheadings into questions.
look for the answers and write them in your notes.
war and the economy foldables8 study organizer include this lesson s information in your foldable reading helpdesk bounty a reward or payment the war strained the economies of the north and the south.
however the north with its greater resources was better able to cope with the costs of the war.
the two sides had three ways of paying for the war.
first they borrowed money.
second they passed new taxes including income taxes.
third they printed money.
1 northern bills became known as greenbacks because of their color j in the north industry profited from the war effort.
it made guns j ammunition shoes and uniforms.
farmers prospered too.
they sold their crops to feed the troops.
because goods were in high demand j prices went up.
this inflation caused hardship for working people.
5 visual vocabulary greenback paper money issued by the united states government academic vocabulary substitute an alternate or replacement 520 the civil war the white south felt the economic strain even more sharply than the north.
many of the battles of the civil war took place on confederate soil destroying farmland and railroad lines.
the union naval blockade prevented the shipping of trade goods.
vital materials could not reach the confederacy.
salt was in such short supply that women scraped the floors of smokehouses to recover it.
food shortages led to riots in atlanta richmond and other cities.
the south also suffered much worse inflation.
as early as 1862 citizens were begging confederate leaders for help.
positive changes to honor service in the war president lincoln created the medal of honor in 1861 it is awarded to members of the armed forces for acts of bravery.
jacob parrott a 19 year old private was the first to receive the medal.
surgeon mary edwards walker was the only woman to receive the medal during the civil war.
sergeant william harvey carney an african american was awarded the medal for his role during the attack on fort wagner south carolina.
more than 3 400 people have received the medal of honor.
then in 1862 lincoln signed two laws that encouraged population growth and educational opportunity.
the homestead act allowed individuals to claim for a small fee up to 160 acres of land on the great plains.
the homesteader could receive title to the land after living and making improvements on the land for five years.
through the morrill act of 1862 the federal government gave huge land grants to states to establish colleges.
these new educational institutions which included the colleges that are now texas a m university and the historically african american prairie view a m university greatly expanded access to higher education in the united states.
h reading progress check comparing and contrasting how did the war affect the economies of the north and the south.
analyzing and interpreting information inflation a rise in prices hurts people by reducing the buying power of money.
the graph below shows that with just 3 5 percent inflation the buying power of 1 000 drops sharply.
in 20 years the 1 000 will have about half its original buying power.
inflation graph purchasing power of 1 000 at 3 5 percent inflation purchasing power of 1 000 with no inflation ub iimm tiwi rwwii jr lesson 3 review review vocabulary 1 use each of these terms in a complete sentence that explains the term s meaning.
joa 3ob a habeas corpus b draft c bounty answer the guiding questions 2 identifying in what ways did women contribute to the war effort.
23e 3 differentiating how did the civil war affect the economies of the north and the south.
ia 4 comparing what challenges and threats did prisoners and wounded soldiers face.
ia 5 summarizing who were the copperheads.
what was their position on fighting the war.
21a persuasive writing president lincoln and president davis suspended habeas corpus to deal with opponents of the war.
do you think suspending civil liberties such as the freedom of speech is sometimes justified.
write a short essay in which you state and defend your position.
8a 23e jod 3 521 t across five aprils by irene hunt irene hunt 1907 2001 was born in pontiac illinois more than 40 years after the civil war ended.
her father died when she was seven years old.
hunt graduated from the university of illinois in 1939 she taught french and english in illinois public schools until she retired to write full time in 1969 she wrote many books for young people and won a newbery medal for her second novel up a road slowly.
hunt died in 2001 first published in 1965 across five aprils was irene hunts first novel.
it is the story of jethro creighton a nine year old boy living in indiana during the civil war.
in this excerpt he and his mother are at home when a letter arrives from one of jethros older brothers who is fighting for the union.
miss yore good cookin ma.
you tell jeth that hein a soljer aint so much.
from irene hunts across five aprils h union soldier might wear a cap like this.
in february 1862 brigadier general ulysses s grant demanded and received unconditional surrender of confederate fort donelson on the cumberland river.
u finally one day ed turner brought them a letter from tom.
ed looked pinched with cold after his long drive but he wouldn t stop for coffee.
a fam ly needs to be alone when one of these letters comes he said in answer to ellen s invitation.
i d be pleased if you d let me know what the boy has to say later on when matt has the time to drop over.
jenny had gone with her father to see about some stock and jethro was alone in the cabin with his mother.
when ed turner was gone she handed the letter to jethro.
my hands is shakin son she said.
they were indeed but both she and the boy knew that the real reason she was forced to hand the letter over was the fact that she could not read.
the envelope was crumpled and stained the letter written in pencil in a round childish hand.
it was probably among the first three or four letters that young tom had ever written.
vocabulary stock livestock derefokes i take pencle in hand to let you no that eb and me is alright.
i expect you no by now how we took fort henry down here.
mebby i oughtnt say we took it becus it was the ironclads that done it.
old admiral foote had what it took and he give the rebs a dressin down but some of his iron dads got hit hard.
a boy i no was on the essex and he was burned so bad he dide when that boat got nocked out of the fite.
us boys didn t do much fitin at fort henry but at donelson i can tell you we made up fer it.
we had done a foolish thing on our way to donelson and i will rite you about it.
when we was marchin tord the fort the weather was like a hot april day back home.
we was feelin set up about fort henry and when some of the boys got tard of carryin hevey blanket rolls they jest up and throwed em away.
then more and more of us acted like crazy fools and we throwed away hevey cotes and things to make our lodes a littel liter.
as soon as we got to donelson the wether turned cold as billy sideways and some of the boys that was sick or bad hurt they froze to deth in the snow.
things was awful bad with so many kilt and others froze.
i felt sick when hooked at them and so i am not so proud about donelson as mebby i ought to be.
i miss yore good cookin ma.
you tell jeth that hein a soljer aint so much.
dressin down incorrect spelling of dressing down a serious punishment or scolding literary element dialect refers to the language speech patterns spelling grammar and sounds used by people from a particular area or from a particular social or economic group.
as you read note the ways irene hunt uses dialect to reveal information about her characters.
if you have trouble following the dialect try reading the text aloud.
analyzing literature dbq yrstruley tom 0 drawing inferences based on the excerpt what was life like for soldiers during the war.
26b 0 analyzing what does the dialect used in tom s letter reveal about him.
use examples from the text to support your answer.
26b 0 evaluating consider what you know about the author s childhood and about the civil war.
do you think the description of life during the civil war for both soldiers and families is valid.
why or why not.
26b 1 networks there s more online.
biography stonewall jackson et game crossword puzzle graphic organizer union and confederate victories et map the battle of gettysburg day 3 ef primary source recruiting african american soldiers et self check quiz et video i am teks texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
8a explain the roles played by significant individuals during the civil war including jefferson davis ulysses s grant robert e lee and abraham lincoln and heroes such as congressional medal of honor recipients william carney and philip bazaar.
8b explain the causes of the civil war including sectionalism states rights and slavery and significant events of the civil war including the firing on fort sumter the battles of antietam gettysburg and vicksburg the announcement of the emancipation proclamation lee s surrender at appomattox court house and the assassination of abraham lincoln.
8c analyze abraham lincoln s ideas about liberty equality union and government as contained in his first and second inaugural addresses and the gettysburg address and contrast them with the ideas contained in jefferson davis s inaugural address.
22a analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders of the united states such as george washington john marshall and abraham lincoln.
reading helpdesk taking notes categorizing as you read use a chart like this one to keep track of who won which battles.
524 the civil war lesson 4 the strain of war ial question why does conflict develop.
it matters because union victories at gettysburg and vicksburg marked a turning point in the war.
southern victories guiding question what factors contributed to the early success ofthe confederate forces.
the military leadership of generals robert e lee and stonewall jackson was a key factor in the confederates military success in the east.
with their knowledge of the land and ability to inspire troops these two generals often defeated larger union forces.
the battle of fredericksburg after antietam robert e lee moved his army out of maryland into virginia.
this encouraged the newly named union commander general ambrose burnside to march his troops toward the confederate capital at richmond.
lee intercepted the union army near fredericksburg.
lees forces dug trenches in hills south of the town.
this gave them the advantage of higher ground from which to fight.
on december 13 1862 union forces attacked.
lees entrenched ihn trehncht troops drove them back with heavy losses.
devastated burnside resigned.
victory at chancellorsville in may 1863 lee met union forces led by general joseph hooker in the battle of chancellorsville.
general lee again showed daring and a brilliant command of tactics.
although hooker had union victories confederate victories content vocabulary entrench flank twice as many men lee divided his forces.
some confederate troops confronted the main union force.
others under the leadership of stonewall jackson secretly marched to a spot at the far end of the union line.
the risky plan worked perfectly.
jacksons army surprised the union force with a crushing attack on its flank flangk or side.
lee struck from the front.
caught between the two confederate forces hooker eventually withdrew his men.
the confederate victory came at a high cost.
in the confusion of battle confederate soldiers fired on and wounded stonewall jackson by mistake.
surgeons amputated jacksons arm prompting lee to say he has lost his left arm and i have lost my right worse jackson developed pneumonia.
after a week of suffering he died.
his death cost the south one of its great leaders.
it also affected the morale of its army and its citizens.
problems with union leadership in contrast union leadership in the east disappointed the president.
in less than a year a frustrated lincoln saw three different generals try and fail to lead the union to victory.
the first major general george mcclellan commanded the union forces at the battle of antietam in march 1862 although he was expert at preparing for battle he was overly careful and slow to act.
said lincoln if mcclellan doesnt want to use the army id like to borrow it for a while the last straw came when after victory at antietam mcclellan failed to obey lincolns order to follow the retreating confederate troops and destroy them.
lincoln pushed his next commander general ambrose burnside to take aggressive action.
burnside quickly lost the presidents favor after his crushing loss at fredericksburg.
next lincoln appointed major general joseph hooker who had often been critical of other generals.
hooker s attitude matched the presidents.
may god have mercy on general lee for i will have none he declared.
despite hooker s confidence lees much smaller army crushed hooker s forces at chancellorsville.
hooker soon resigned.
lincolns next commander needed to prove himself quickly.
major general george meade took command three days before one of the wars great battles at gettysburg pennsylvania.
d reading progress check explaining why was lincoln frustrated with the union generals.
biography thomas jonathan stonewall jackson 1824 1863 thomas jackson was born in virginia.
at the age of 18 he moved north to attend the military academy at west point.
he went on to a short and unremarkable career in the united states army.
during the 1850s he taught at the virginia military institute.
at that time he showed more interest in art than in war.
when the civil war started jackson was not widely known in the military.
that changed at the first battle of bull run when jackson won his nickname stonewall.
by 1863 he had become one of the confederacy s top leaders.
critical thinking describing how did jackson contribute to confederate victories in the war.
22b describe the contributions of significant political social and military leaders of the united states such as frederick douglass john paul jones james monroe stonewall jackson susan b anthony and elizabeth cady stanton.
entrench to place within a trench or ditch for defense to place in a strong defensive position flank the side or edge of a military formation build vocabulary metaphor entrench is often used metaphorically to refer to ideas that are firmly held and cannot be easily changed.
here s an example thanks to my parents the belief that i would succeed as long as i studied hard became entrenched in my mind.
lesson 4 525 connections to today african american soldiers beginning with the revolutionary war african americans have had a long history of serving with distinction in the u s military.
when the draft ended in 1973 african american enrollment in the armed forces increased.
today african americans make up about 17 percent of the active forces and 15 percent of the reserves and national guard.
imco toannsi ttwwl now or never fewolke.
wlgmtoi li r.
african americans in the civil war guidingquestion what role did african americans play in military efforts.
at first both the north and the south barred african americans from serving in their armies.
as time passed the north relaxed its rules.
excluded in the south even though african americans made up more than 30 percent of the smaller southern population confederate leaders would not allow them to enlist.
only in the last days of the war when defeat drew near did they consider it.
confederate leaders feared that once armed african american soldiers would attack their fellow troops or even begin a general revolt.
enlisted in the north at first president lincoln resisted calls to enlist african americans in the union army.
he feared that such a policy would be unpopular in the border states.
by 1862 though it was clear that the north needed more soldiers in order to defeat the confederacy.
many african americans were eager to fight.
as a result congress decided to reverse past policy and allow the formation of all african american regiments.
these new union soldiers were in a tough position.
many white union regiments doubted their fighting ability.
others resented them.
many southern troops also especially hated the unions african american soldiers.
they often focused their fiercest fire on african american regiments.
despite this african americans joined.
by the end of the war they made up about 10 percent of the union army.
some were freed people from the north.
others had fled enslavement in the south.
these men fought hard and effectively too.
as one white union officer wrote about an all african american kansas regiment primarysource the union army actively recruited african americans through posters like this.
reading helpdesk academic vocabulary reverse to go in the opposite direction 526 the civil war they make better soldiers in every respect than any troops i have ever had under my command union general james fi.
bw the 54th massachusetts the best known african american regiment was the 54th massachusetts.
founded in 1863 the 54th was under the command of colonel robert gould shaw who came from a boston abolitionist family.
later that year the 54th served on the front lines in an assault on fort wagner in south carolina.
confederate gunfire caused nearly 300 casualties in the 54th alone including colonel shaw.
though the union could not capture the fort the 54th became famous for the courage and sacrifice of its members.
it would also serve with distinction in other battles such as the battle of olustee in florida.
h reading progress check identifying cause and effect why did lincoln hesitate to enlist african americans.
the tide turns guidingquestion howwasthe battle of gettysburg a turning point in the war.
in spring of 1863 the confederates had the upper hand.
their victory at chancellorsville ruined union plans to attack richmond.
lee was emboldened.
he decided to take the war once more into the north hoping to impress france and britain.
the confederate strategy was similar to that of the colonies in the revolutionary war.
though far outnumbered the colonies won the support of france and the war.
now france and britain missed the goods especially cotton that southern planters had once supplied.
if the confederates appeared to be winning those nations might help their cause.
lesson 4 527 geography connection after two days of heavy fighting at gettysburg the confederates mounted a heavy attack on the union tines.
location where did the confederates concentrate their attack.
critical thinking drawing conclusions what about the union position as shown on this map might have given union forces an advantage.
the battle of getty.
day 3 zl general 5 lee y 11 pickett s charge cemeter ml cub w 1 mile 1 km aibersffiuol area projection reading helpdesk 528 the civil war academic vocabulary encounter to meet to come face to face with 1 i general meade confederate troops union troops confederate troop movements the battle of gettysburg in july 1863 a small town in southern pennsylvania became the site of one of the most decisive battles in the civil war.
gettysburg was not a capital a key port or the location of a fort.
it was almost an accident that such serious fighting took place there.
the confederates entered the town looking for supplies.
general lee hoped to avoid fighting in a landscape he did not know well.
it was there however that he encountered the enemy.
when lees troops crawled out of gettysburg four grueling days later they had suffered 25 000 casualties.
the union the victor lost 23 000 the battle started at 7 30 a m on july 1 outnumbered union troops retreated to a section of high ground called cemetery ridge.
reinforcements arrived for both sides.
on the second day of fighting southern generals tried to drive union forces from hills named big round top and little round top.
in furious fighting union forces under general george meade held their positions.
skills practice before reading your text look for bold faced terms.
find their definitions in the selection or the glossary.
then use a thesaurus to find other meanings for the words.
the next day lee ordered an attack designed to create a panic and virtually destroy the union army first the confederates fired nearly 140 cannons at the union lines.
then general george pickett led thousands of confederate troops in an attack on the unions position at cemetery ridge.
putting themselves directly in the line of fire they advanced across open land in what came to be remembered as picketts charge.
at first it seemed that picketts charge might work.
the confederates broke the first line of union defense.
in the end however half of those who started the attack lay dead or wounded on the ground.
lee later wrote the army did all it could.
i fear i required of it impossibilities gettysburg ended the confederates hope of gaining help from britain and france.
the south had hoped to receive two ironclads from the british and use them to sweep union shipping from the atlantic.
however in october 1863 the british government decided not to release the ships.
the battle of vicksburg on july 4 the day that lee retreated from gettysburg the confederacy suffered another major blow.
the important river city of vicksburg mississippi fell under the control of union troops led by ulysses s grant.
grant had first attacked vicksburg in april.
his army surrounded the 30 000 confederate troops there.
in may grant began a siege of the town preventing food and supplies from reaching the confederates.
union gunships on the river supported grants 77 000 troops by firing thousands of shells into the city.
this painting shows union forces fighting their way to the confederate lines at vicksburg mississippi in may 1863 critical thinking analyzing visuals do you think this painting was meant for a union audience or a confederate audience.
explain your answer.
the siege lasted 47 days.
there were more than 9 000 confederate and 10 000 union casualties and many soldiers died of disease or starvation.
despite heavy losses of soldiers fewer than 20 citizens of vicksburg were killed in the long siege.
a few days after vicksburg fell the confederacy lost port hudson in louisiana its last stronghold on the mississippi river.
the union had split the south in two.
arkansas louisiana and texas were now cut off.
the tide of the civil war had turned.
lincoln s address at gettysburg on november 19 1863 officials and citizens gathered to dedicate the soldiers national cemetery at gettysburg.
at the ceremony former governor of massachusetts edward everett delivered a two hour speech.
after him president abraham lincoln spoke for about two minutes.
in 272 words lincoln honored the soldiers and their cause and stated his vision for the country.
primarysource m four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
these dead shall not have died in vain government ofthe people by the people for the people shall not perish from the earth.
from the gettysburg address include this lesson s information in your foldable.
reactions to lincolns gettysburg address were mixed.
everett along with the new york times chicago tribune and springfield mass.
republican thought the speech was a success.
it remains one of the most enduring and powerful speeches in american history.
h reading progress check summarizing how did the events at vicksburg change the tide ofthe war.
lesson 4 review review vocabulary 1 use each of the following terms in a sentence about the civil war.
3oa 3ob a entrench b flank answer the guiding questions 2 explaining why was the battle of chancellorsville important.
ia 3 drawing inferences why do you think some leaders called for african americans to be allowed to fight in the civil war.
29b 4 explaining why was gettysburg a turning point for the south.
bb narrative writing you are a soldier who fought at gettysburg.
write a letter to a loved one at home describing the battle scene how you felt and what the outcome was.
290 530 the civil war r networks there s more online.
gf biography uhseaghun gf chart thvlost of u s wars gf game f i lnt ihiat h n gf graph a mei h m war s 1 r ut dk uhs gf graphic organizer n i id hij b hr ind of war g sf map 111 hu il b mirs lesson 5 the war s final stages al question w iy does conflict develop.
gf self check quiz gf slideshow hi fhunud f video it matters because with each side determined to win the bloodiest months ofthe civil war were still to come.
the union closes in prfff texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
8a explain the roles played by significant individuals during the civil war including jefferson davis ulysses s grant robert e lee and abraham lincoln and heroes such as congressional medal of honor recipients william carney and philip bazaar.
8b explain the causes of the civil war including sectionalism states rights and slavery and significant events of the civil war including the firing on fort sumter the battles of antietam gettysburg and vicksburg the announcement of the emancipation proclamation lee s surrender at appomattox court house and the assassination of abraham lincoln.
16b describe the impact of 19th century amendments including the 13th 14th and 15th amendments on life in the united states.
22a analyze the leadership gualities of elected and appointed leaders of the united states such as george washington john marshall and abraham lincoln.
guidingquestion iv iflf events occurred at the end ofthe war.
by 1864 union forces had the south surrounded.
union ships blocked the confederate coast reducing the trade goods getting out and supplies getting in.
the union also controlled the mississippi river cutting off the western confederate states from those in the east.
the south seemed ready to fall if the union could come up with the right plan of attack.
general grant would be the one to draw up such a plan.
general grant takes charge ulysses s grant had been only an average student.
he failed as a farmer and in business.
yet he became a brilliant soldier.
he led union troops to victory at shiloh and vicksburg and at another key battle in chattanooga tennessee.
in march 1864 president lincoln put general grant in charge of all the union armies.
president lincoln liked that grant was a man of action.
now in charge grant wasted little time coming up with a plan to finish the war.
he would deliver killing blows from all sides.
his armies would move on to richmond the confederate capital.
at the same time general william tecumseh sherman would lead attacks across the deep south.
heading helpdesk taking notes identifying cause and effect as you read keep track ofthe chain of events that led to the end ofthe civil war using a diagram like this one.
content vocabulary resistance total war lesson 5 531 biography ulysses s grant 1822 1885 j 1 ulysses s grant was born and raised in georgetown ohio.
as a young man his father pressured him to attend the u s military academy at j west point.
grant was not interested in military service but he went 1 because it was his only chance at further education.
yet grant became j a fearless soldier and an expert rider at a time when soldiers rode horses in battle.
grant s military strategy seemed ruthless at times but he j said i have never advocated war except as a means of peace.
critical thinking analyzing what do you think grant meant in the quotation.
26a describe developments in art music and literature that are unique to american culture such as the hudson river school artists john james audubon battle hymn of the republic transcendentalism and other cultural activities in the history of the united states.
26b identify examples of american art music and literature that reflect society in different eras.
29d identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
grant soon put his strategy into action.
in may and june of 1864 grants army confronted lees smaller force in a series of three battles near richmond virginia.
these were the battles of the wilderness spotsylvania court house and cold harbor.
at each battle confederate lines held at first but grant quickly renewed the attack.
whatever happens there will be no turning back grant promised lincoln.
he was determined to march southward attacking lees forces relentlessly and in spite of heavy losses until the confederacy surrendered.
grant moves south toward richmond the wilderness was a densely wooded area about halfway between washington d c and richmond virginia.
here on may 5 1864 the six bloodiest weeks of the war began.
for two days union and confederate forces struggled among a tangle of trees through which they could hardly see.
a union private said it was a blind and bloody hunt to the death at the battle of the wilderness lee had only about 60 000 men while grant had more than 100 000 both sides suffered huge casualties.
grant who lost 17 000 men cried in his tent at the end of the second day.
meanwhile brushfires raged through the forest.
the fires burned alive 200 wounded men.
on the morning of the third day with no clear winner grant moved his forces south toward richmond.
the next battles took place at nearby spotsylvania court house and at cold harbor.
on june 2 the night before the third battle began a union general observed that men were writing their names and home addresses on slips of paper and pinning them to the backs of their coats to help people identify their bodies.
the war seemed hopeless.
grant however was determined.
he explained to the white house i propose to fight it out on this line if it takes all summer in a space of 30 days grant lost 50 000 of his troops.
his critics in the north called him a butcher lincoln however stood by his general.
i cant spare this man lincoln is reported to have said.
he fights as he fought the confederates were also losing men losses their smaller army could not survive.
siege at petersburg grant made steady progress.
he next arrived at petersburg a railroad center vital to the confederate movement of troops and supplies.
if grant could take petersburg richmond would be academic vocabulary skills practice series events that occur one after the other write key words during class lessons.
after the lesson work with a partner to write sentences about how the words were used.
1 reading helpdesk 532 the civil war geography connection during the final year of the war union troops moved through the heart of the confederacy.
location where did sherman s march to the sea begin and end.
cut off from the rest of the confederacy.
grant laid siege.
the confederates defended the city but they could not break the unions grip.
trains brought food and more troops to the union side.
the confederates could get neither.
determined they refused to give up.
sherman in georgia meanwhile william tecumseh sherman headed for georgia.
in early july his troops circled atlanta.
there they faced the brilliant confederate general john hood.
hoods forces put up major resistance rih zihstuhnts.
sherman laid siege finally forcing hood to abandon the city on september 1 among white southerners the mood became desperate as the prospect of defeat became more certain.
mary chesnut a south carolinian who kept a diary throughout the war wrote there is no hope but we will try to have no fear critical thinking analyzing visuals what information on the map helps explain why sherman was able to cause such destruction on his march to the sea.
skills practice resistance the refusal to give in write new vocabulary words on cards.
review your cards often until you can read the words quickly on sight.
lesson 5 533 david farragut led the u s navy to some of its greatest victories in the civil war.
farragut blockades mobile bay the highest ranking officer in the union navy was david farragut.
the son of a spanish military man farragut had joined the navy when he was only 12 years old.
in august 1864 he led a fleet of 18 ships through a narrow channel into mobile bay in alabama.
his mission was to gain control of the bay.
faced with stiff resistance farragut prepared for battle.
to make sure he had a good view he climbed high into the ships rigging and had himself tied in place.
the confederates had forts on both sides of the channel and they had mined the water with torpedoes.
unwilling to back down farragut shouted his famous order damn the torpedoes full speed ahead the mission succeeded in blocking the last southern port east of the mississippi.
the election of 1864 in the north opposition to the war grew stronger through much of 1864 it seemed unlikely that lincoln could win reelection in november.
his loss could mean an end to the war and recognition of the confederacy as an independent country.
white southerners clung to this hope.
after union troops captured atlanta and blocked mobile bay however weary northerners began to believe again that victory was possible.
in november president lincoln won a second term.
he took 55 percent of the popular vote and 212 to 21 electoral votes over the democratic candidate general george b mcclellan.
many interpreted lincolns reelection as a clear sign from the voters they wanted a permanent end to slavery.
on january 31 1865 congress passed the thirteenth amendment which banned slavery in the united states.
reading progress check explaining in the early part of 1864 why did it seem unlikely that lincoln would be reelected.
total war a strategy of bringing war to the entire society not just the military the war ends guidingquestion what is total war.
from the beginning of the war a goal of the union was to capture the confederate capital at richmond.
petersburg had been the last roadblock in grants path.
after a nine month siege grant o finally drove lees army out of that city.
jefferson davis knew that j richmond was doomed.
academic vocabulary interpret to find meaning in something reading helpdesk 534 the civil war sherman s march to the sea still the confederacy fought on.
the union was determined to break the souths will to continue the fight.
to break this will sherman burned much of the city of atlanta in november 1864 sherman then had his troops march across georgia toward the atlantic burning cities and crops as they went.
this trail of destruction is known as shermans march to the sea.
sherman continued his march through the carolinas to join grants forces near richmond.
union troops took food tore up railroad lines and fields and killed livestock.
general shermans march was part of a strategy called total war.
total war involves targeting not only the enemys army but also its land and people.
sherman hoped that by bringing the horrors of the war to the southern population he could help end the war.
white southerners were outraged by shermans march.
thousands of african americans however left their plantations to follow the protection of his army.
for them the march to the sea was a march to freedom.
richmond falls meanwhile grant continued the siege of petersburg.
lee and his troops defended the town but sickness casualties and desertion weakened them.
on april 2 1865 the confederate lines broke and lee withdrew.
word of lees retreat soon reached the confederate president.
as the union army marched toward richmond davis and his cabinet prepared to leave.
they gathered documents and ordered that bridges and weapons useful to the enemy be burned.
then they fled the city.
an observer wrote when the union army marched into the confederate capital after the 11 month siege they found the city in ruins and still burning.
primarysource the trains came and went wagons vehicles and horsemen rumbled and dashed to and fro as night came on rioting and robbing took place.
m from battles and leaders ofthe civil war the armory with its stores of ammunition exploded.
boom after boom rang through the city and fires raged out of control.
on april 3 president lincoln visited the captured town of petersburg.
later lincoln confided to naval officer david porter thank god i have lived to see this.
it seems to me that i have been dreaming a horrid nightmare for four years and now the nightmare is gone president lincoln his son tad and a group of military officials arrived in richmond on april 4 to tour the fallen confederate capital.
as lincoln walked through the streets joyful african americans followed singing laughing an reaching out to touch the president.
lesson 5 535 american wars battle deaths global war on terror mexican war revolutionary war korean war vietnam war world war i world war ii civil war 107 000 407 000 700 000 number of american deaths as of 2 1 2011 the civil war was by far the most costly war in terms of lives lost of any conflict in american history.
using math skills how many more americans died in the civil war than in the second most costly war.
critical thinking analyzing what makes the civil war different from the other wars in this graph besides the higher number of war dead.
when one man knelt down to thank him lincoln told him dont kneel to me.
you must kneel to god only and thank him for your freedom at the home of confederate president davis lincoln sat wearily for a while on a chair in the presidents office.
after visiting two prisons for confederate prisoners lincoln replied to a question about what to do with captured confederates if i were in your place id let em up easy let em up easy as a child dallas tucker witnessed the arrival of union troops in his hometown of richmond virginia.
he later recalled primary source m there was a tremendous shock which rocked the house and rattled the windows.
at first we thought it was an earthquake but very soon concluded it must be an explosion of some kind it was in fact the blowing up of the government powder magazine just beyond the city limits richmond was on fire in sheer despair warehouse after warehouse was thrown open and the gathered crowd of hungry despairing people were told to go in and help themselves.
just as i reached the washington monument i saw the troops entering capital square it was then only a few minutes later that i saw the united states flag appear on the flag pole above where the stars and bars the confederate flag had floated for years.
99 reverend dallas tucker writing in the richmond dispatch february 3 1.
build vocabulary word origins the word compassion was first used in the fourteenth century.
its origin is a compound word from latin compati.
the prefix com means with and the rootpati means suffer or bear.
536 the civil war reading helpdesk a meeting at appomattox court house the formal end of the war came on april 9 1865 two days earlier grant had asked lee to surrender writing the result of last week must convince you of the hopelessness of further resistance.
at first lee had believed he must fight on.
then the union captured the train carrying food to his starving troops and completely surrounded his army.
lee knew it was over.
grant met lee in the courthouse of appomattox virginia.
grant offered his terms lees officers could keep their small firearms and any soldier with a horse could keep it.
grant also gave 25 000 rations to feed lees troops.
americas deadliest war had ended.
throughout the war music was important to both sides.
the song the battle hymn of the republic which referenced biblical support for the union cause as a war for human liberty became the unions battle cry.
dixie written by daniel decatur emmett was the song adopted by the confederacy.
it is said that lincoln asked dixie to be played after general lee surrendered to union forces.
the toll of war more american lives were lost in the civil war than in any other conflict in american history.
the war cost billions of dollars and left many southern cities and farms in ruins.
the norths victory saved the union.
the war also made clear that the national government was more powerful than the states.
finally the war freed millions of african americans.
as you will read however the end of slavery left unsettled many of the problems that newly freed african americans were to face.
many questions remained.
no one yet knew how to bring the southern states back into the union nor what the status of african americans would be in southern society.
americans would struggle to answer these questions in the years ahead an era known as reconstruction.
q reading progress check explaining why did general lee finally surrender.
nearly 4 million people served in the military forces during the civil war.
include this lesson s information in your foldable 3 h lesson 5 review review vocabulary 1 how did total war affect civilians of the confederacy.
joa answer the guiding questions 2 explaining how did events on the battlefield affect lincoln s reelection.
29b 3 identifying cause and effect why did sherman burn and destroy the south s land.
29b 4 evaluating why did the war leave the u s government stronger than ever before.
ia narrative writing you are a reporter covering lee s army at the time of his surrender.
write a brief article describing the events surrounding his meeting with grant sb lesson 5 537 activities a3 directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
use your to explore the essential question.
expository writing write a short essay that identifies the political economic and social contributions civilian men and women made to the war effort.
include references to the north and the south.
23e 3od social studies skills evaluating assume the point of view of an adviser to president lincoln.
write an argument describing the political economic and social factors that favor the enlistment of african americans in the union cause.
290300 thinking like a historian explaining in an essay explain the significance ofthe years 1861 1865 in the history of the united states.
describe both the causes and effects ofthe civil war.
ia ic 300 visual literacy interpreting images look at the political cartoon and read the caption.
what do the men on either side of lincoln represent.
what are the two difficulties the president faces.
290 538 the civil war assessment directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
checking for understanding o identify the contributions of and explain the roles played by eac h of die following individuals during the civil war a.
abraham lincoln e mary edwards walker b jefferson davis f rose o neal greenhow c stonewall jackson g william harvey carney d ulysses s grant h robert e lee review the guiding questions 0 comparing which states were the border states.
what did they have in common with the confederate states.
29b 0 explaining what was confederate president jefferson davis s basic strategy during the war.
sa 0 explaining according to lincoln for what constitutional principle did the union fight the civil war.
sa 0 explaining why did lincoln issue a call for more volunteers after the first battle of bull run.
sa analyzing why was control ofthe mississippi river an important goal of the union strategy in the west.
ik evaluating why did abolitionists urge lincoln to make the war a fight against slavery.
do you think their reasons were effective.
29b speculating how do you think the announcement ofthe emancipation proclamation affected the way southerners thought about the war.
290 identifying cause and effect how did the war affect the democratic party in the north.
what new political positions emerged.
sc 2ia evaluating was lincoln s decision to suspend habeas corpus during the war justified.
explain your response.
contrasting why did the war strain the economy ofthe south more than that of the north.
ua identifying what is the significance ofthe morrill act of 1862.
9d 0 identifying what new innovation did the confederacy use to threaten the union blockade of southern ports.
27a 0 contrasting why did the war affect life in the south more than in the north.
29b 0 identifying how did women contribute to the war effort in the north and the south.
sa 0 explaining where is vicksburg.
why was its capture by union forces significant.
sb ioa 10c explaining why was the battle of gettysburg a turning point in the war.
sb describing what did the thirteenth amendment accomplish.
how is that related to the causes ofthe civil war.
ub explaining what happened at appomattox court house in april 1865.
ba 8b critical thinking contrasting what were the strengths and weaknesses of the north and the south when the war began.
which side do you think had the greater advantage.
29b identifying how did the homestead act encourage settlement of the great plains.
90 evaluating the validity of sources in tom s letter in across five aprils he describes the fighting at fort henry.
tom writes that the union was victorious admiral foote was a union leader and ironclad ships were involved in the battle.
research to find two valid sources about the battle of fort henry.
explain whether the sources corroborate or support tom s version of the battle.
29g describing what basic sentiment is expressed in the battle hymn ofthe republic.
why do you think the song was important to union soldiers.
26a 26b analyzing in his gettysburg address lincoln said that the war was fought so that government ofthe people by the people for the people shall not perish from the earth.
how does this statement reflect his ideas about equality liberty and unity.
k drawing inferences what leadership qualities do you think lincoln valued in general grant.
ba 22a evaluating do you think general sherman was justified in pursuing a strategy of total war.
why or why not.
29b 539 assessment icon d short response primarysource all knew that this interest slavery was somehow the cause of the war fondly do we hope fervently do we pray that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away.
yet if god wills that it continue until all the wealth piled by the bondsmen s two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid by another drawn with the sword as was said three thousand years ago so still it must be said the judgments of the lord are true and righteous altogether.
abraham lincoln s second inaugural address march 4 1865 using context clues who are the bondsmen.
3oa analyzing based on the excerpt did lincoln view the war as a fight for liberty and equality.
explain sc extended response expository writingwfte an essay explaining the causes of the civil war including states rights and slavery and how the war settled those issues.
i 8b 3od standardized test practice dbq analyzing documents frederick douglass led the movement to allow african american men to enlist in the union armed forces.
primarysource once let the black man get upon his person the brass letters u s and a musket on his shoulder and bullets in his pocket and there is no power on earth that can deny that he has earned the right to citizenship.
quoted in james m mcpherson battle cry of freedom describing according to douglass why is it important that african americans be enlisted as soldiers.
22b a he believes they would enjoy having a uniform to wear.
b he believes that it will earn african americans the right to citizenship.
c he thinks that only african americans can free enslaved people.
d serving in the army will give them the experience to fight slaveholders.
0 drawing inferences from this excerpt you can infer that douglass believes that african americans 22b f have not earned the right to citizenship.
need extra help.
6 must fight to prove themselves worthy of citizenship.
ifyou ve h will prove to be an unstoppable force in battle.
missed question 1 already deserve citizenship.
review lesson 4 4 1 5 4 4 540 the civil war the reconstruction era 1865 1896 essential question how do new ideas change the way people live 5.
ie i vi f rv s k iv x v l fe v v 7 h v x a me r j wh.
job frederick douglass had done as much as anyone in winning freedom for african americans.
formerly enslaved douglass became a powerful voice for the abolitionist cause.
now he is looking forward to the rebuilding of the nation.
he says whether the tremendous war so heroically fought and so victoriously ended shall pass into history a miserable failure must be determined one way or another by the present session of congress.
in this chapter you will read about congress s response to douglass s challenge.
kgwmih go to the foldables uw lis library in the back of your book to make a foldable that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
frederick douglass was a leading voice for african american righty j h m bettmann.
corhis s i what was what was happening m the south.
positive and ce9at veen es st chapter and research how that union s leaders would likely have solved the problem for your workers.
write a paragraph stating the problem the union leader s position and their possible solution.
32a writing presentations research the work of thomas edison alexander graham bell or another inventor in the field of communications during the industrial revolution write a script for a short play about their impact on america.
27a 3oa standardized test practice supporters of laissez faire believe which ofthe following ideas.
15b a industry should be regulated to ensure a safe workplace.
b if left alone free enterprise leads to higher prices.
c government should not intervene in the economy.
d government should support big business with high tariffs and subsidies.
how did the railroads contribute to the closing ofthe frontier.
15a f they shipped goods between the east coast and the west coast.
g they offered cheap land and credit to settlers.
h they gave farmers rebates on crops they shipped to eastern cities.
j they bribed government officials for more land grants.
need extra help.
32 33 34 35 36 37 go to page 135 131 133 119 121 124 io urban america 1865 1896 essential questions why do people migrate.
how is urban life different from rural life.
networks there s more online about urban america at the end ofthe nineteenth century.
chapter 14 assessment jbb directions on a separate sheet of paper answer the questions below.
make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
lesson review lesson 1 0 describing what impact did the decrease in military spending have on the economy and business cycle after world war ii.
17c 0 explaining what impact did the taft hartley act have on organized labor.
0 analyzing how did the gi bill boost the postwar economy.
17b 0 identifying how did the democratic party split when truman ran in the 1948 presidential election.
0 summarizing summarize the actions by the eisenhower administration that improved transportation both on land and waterways.
17b lesson 2 0 explaining why did economist john kenneth galbraith believe that america s postwar economy was a new phenomenon.
17b 0 describing identify the new popular music of the 1950s and some of the most popular performers.
how did this music reflect both the characteristics and issues of the era.
what was its positive and negative impact.
25a 25b 0 describing describe the business philosophy behind franchises.
has this viewpoint shifted or remained the same.
27c 0 evaluating in what ways did beat poets express the characteristics and issues of the 1950s.
what was the positive and negative impact of the beat movement.
25b explaining what contributions did women perfori make to the shaping of american culture in the 195c 21 identifying which significant medical breakthrou were made in the 1950s.
27b explaining how did african american singers coni to american culture in the 1950s.
what obstacles di they face.
26c lesson 3 comparing and contrasting explain how the live minorities differed from those of white middle das americans during the 1950s.
economics what factors negatively affected the economy of appalachia in the 1950s.
describing describe the conditions for native americans in the mid 1900s as well as the governn policies implemented and the struggles that followed implementation.
analyzing what were some factors that people bi contributed to a rise in juvenile delinquency and h they try to solve the problem.
exploring the essential questions presenting information design a poster titled prosperity in the 1950s.
use text graphs and illustrations to show how prosperity of the era affei the lives of many americans and how it did not bei others.
17b need extra help.
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 critical thinking making connections the rise of large corporations increased white collar jobs and some sociologists thought it increased conformity as well.
why might a culture of conformity result from the rise of large multi national corporations.
what types of business or fields of work would be less likely to develop a culture of conformity.
making generalizations what generalizations can you make about televised entertainment and the american public s interests based on the popularity of early television shows.
25a analyzing use the example ofjet engine technology to explain how the free enterprise system drives technological innovation.
describe how the technology was applied in the marketplace and how this in turn improved the standard of living for americans.
27a 28a 28c 0 evaluating summarize truman s legislative goals during his first term as president and the proposals in the fair deal that were enacted by the time truman left office.
why do you think some policies were not adopted.
0 describing how did the management s introduction of the business computer impact the workplace and enhance productivity for both business and workers.
27c analyzing what impact did american popular culture in the 1950s have on the rest of the world.
what contributed to the diffusion of american culture around e lobe.
q explaining who invented the polio vaccine and why was it needed.
how did vaccines and antibiotics change american society.
27b identifying central issues what action did president truman take to address the rights of minorities in the military.
9f social studies skills understanding relationships among events what conditions in the postwar united states contributed to the baby boom.
how did the baby boom contribute to the prosperity of the era.
17b identifying cause and effect what changes in the private sector created new economic opportunities for americans in the 1950s.
17d sequencing make a timeline of important events of the 1950s postwar america as reflected in the chapter 17 place andtime vietnam 1954 1975 the united states wanted to stop the spread of communism after the french defeat by communist forces in 1954 american involvement in vietnam would result in eight years of war and the loss of thousands of american lives.
step into the place read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map.
8d 8e 29a 29b 29f analyzing historical documents how do these statements by ho chi minh and general william westmoreland demonstrate the varying beliefs regarding how vietnam should be controlled.
dbq primary source a w e members of the provisional government of the democratic republic of viet nam solemnly declare to the world that viet nam has the right to be a free and independent country and in fact it is so already.
the entire vietnamese people are determined to mobilize all their physical and mental strength to sacrifice their lives and property in order to safeguard their independence and liberty 99 ho chi minh from the declaration of independence of vietnam 1945 primary source the objective of the united states government in vietnam was made clear by the truman doctrine of 1947 the truman doctrine came after world war ii had been concluded the fighting had stopped and international arrangements were in disarray.
it became very clear that the soviet union was going to grab as much real estate as possible in the aftermath of that great war.
thus the truman doctrine said in essence we will not allow a little country to be pushed around and be taken over by the communists.
somebody has to come to their rescue and we will do that.
99 general william c westmoreland from vietnam in perspective 1987 eisenhower 1953 1961 step into the time g predicting consequences iimijmijfflwi rww choose an event from the time line and write a paragraph that ke 196 1955 u s military aid and advisers are sent to a south vietnam i map explore the isli interartivp uprcim interactive version of this map on networks.
e s more online.
april 30 1975 the last americans left the u s embassy and south vietnam officially surrendered to the north.
110e 100e 1964 congress passes gulf of tonkin resolution 1965 u s combat troops land in vietnam nixon 1969 1974 1973 last u s troops leave vietnam january 1968 tet offensive begins august 1968 antiwar protest in chicago april 1970 nixon orders invasion of cambodia may 1970 national guard troops kill student protesters at kent state university networks academic vocabulary strategic traditional content vocabulary wyconflktdmdepeople government during iwvtiii it matters because in the late 1940s and early 1950s most americans knew little about indochina france s colony in southeast asia.
during the cold war however american officials became concerned that the region might fall to communism.
american involvement in vietnam guidingquestion why did the united states provide military aid to the french in indochina.
domino theory napalm guerrilla agent orange taking notes key ideas and details organizing complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by providing the reasons the united states aided france in vietnam.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 8d explain reasons and outcomes for u s involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the domino theory including the vietnam war 8e analyze the major issues and events of the vietnam war such as the tet offensive the escalation of forces vietnamization and the fall of saigon continued on p 502 in 1940 japan invaded vietnam becoming one of a series of foreign nations to rule the asian country.
the chinese had controlled the region for hundreds of years.
then from the late 1800s until world war ii the french ruled vietnam laos and cambodia a region then known as french indochina.
the growth of vietnamese nationalism by the early 1900s nationalism had become a powerful force in vietnam.
several political parties pushed for independence or for reform of french colonial rule.
among the leaders of the nationalist movement was nguyen that thanh better known by his assumed name ho chi minh.
after years in europe china and the soviet union he returned to southeast asia.
there he helped found the indochinese communist party in 1930 and worked for independence.
ho chi minhs activities forced him to flee indochina and spew several years in exile in the soviet union and china.
in 1941 he returned to vietnam.
by then japan had seized control of the country.
ho chi minh organized a nationalist group called the vietminh which united communists and non communists in the effort to expel the japanese.
soon afterward the united states began sending aid to the vietminh.
america aids the french when japan surrendered to the allies in 1945 it gave up control of indochina.
ho chi minh quickly declared vietnams independence.
france had no intention of losing its former colony however.
french troops returned to vietnam in 1946 and drove the vietminh into hiding 500 the vietminh fought back against the french dominated regime and slowly gained control of large areas of the country.
as the fighting escalated france appealed to the united states for help.
the request put american officials in a difficult position.
the united states opposed colonialism.
it had pressured the dutch to give up their empire in indonesia and supported the british decision to give india independence in 1947 american officials however did not want vietnam to be communist.
chinas fall to communism and the outbreak of the korean war helped convince president truman to aid france.
president eisenhower continued trumans policy and defended his decision with what became known as the domino theory the idea that if vietnam fell to communism the rest of southeast asia would follow like a line of dominoes falling over.
domino theory the belief that if one nation in asia fell to the communists neighboring countries would follow defeat at dien bien phu despite aid from the united states the french continued to struggle against the vietminh who used hit and run and ambush tactics.
these are the tactics of guerrillas irregular troops who blend into the civilian population and are difficult for regular armies to fight.
rising casualties and a lack of victories made the war unpopular with the french public.
the turning point came in the mountain town of dien bien phu.
by seizing the town the french planned to cut the vietminhs supply lines and force them into open battle.
soon afterward a huge vietminh force surrounded dien bien phu and began bombarding the town.
on may 7 1954 the french forces fell to the vietminh.
the defeat convinced the french to make peace and withdraw from indochina.
guerrilla member of an armed band that carries out surprise attacks and sabotage rather than open warfare geography connection several factors contributed to american involvement in vietnam.
places and regions ivhflf aspects of a communist vietnam threatened japan s economy.
ho chi minh communist leader of north vietnam was determined to reunite vietnam and began arming vietcong guerrillas to seize power in south vietnam.
critical thinking analyzing why did american involvement in vietnam grow after the geneva accords.
strategic important to the conduct or success of a larger plan traditional set by custom handed down from one generation to another continued from p 500 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 20a describe the impact of events such as the gulf of tonkin resolution and the war powers act on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government 26f discuss the importance of congressional medal of honor recipients including individuals of all races and genders such as vernon j baker alvin york and roy benavidez n gohaho to end the conflict were held in geneva switzerland.
the resulting geneva accords provided for a temporary division of vietnam along the 17th parallel ho chi minh and the vietminh controlled north vietnam and a pro western regime led by the fiercely anti communist ngo dinh diem ehn.
goh dihn deh ehm held the south.
french troops soon left and the united states became the principal protector of the new government in south vietnam.
the accords called for elections to be held in 1956 to reunite the country under a single government.
diem refused to permit the elections however fearing ho chi minh would win.
eisenhower approved of diems actions i a z j 4 aof n o m h reading progress check analyzing why did the united states protect south vietnam.
american involvement deepens guiding question how did american involvement in vietnam change during the kennedy and johnson administrations.
after ngo dinh diem refused to hold national elections ho chi minh and the communists began an armed struggle to reunify the nation.
they organized a new guerrilla army of south vietnamese communists which became known as the vietcong.
eisenhower sent hundreds of military advisers to train south vietnams army but the vietcong continued to grow more powerful because many vietnamese opposed diems government.
by 1961 the vietcong had established control over much of the countryside.
kennedy takes over when president kennedy took office in 1961 he continued to support south vietnam believing the country was vital in the battle against communism.
from 1961 to late 1963 the number of u s military personnel in south vietnam jumped from about 2 000 to around 15 000 yet they failed to shore up the floundering diem regime.
for example the south vietnamese created special fortified villages known as strategic hamlets.
they then moved villagers to these hamlets despite the peasants resentment at being uprooted from their villages.
the program proved to be extremely unpopular.
the overthrow of diem american officials blamed diem.
he made himself even more unpopular by discriminating against buddhism one of the countrys most widely practiced religions.
in the spring of 1963 he banned the traditional religious flags for the buddhas birthday.
when buddhists protested in the streets diems police killec nine people.
in response a buddhist monk poured gasoline over his robes and set himself on fire the first of several to do so.
images of their self destruction horrified americans as they watched the footage on television news reports.
in august 1963 u s ambassador henry cabot lodge arrived in vietnam.
he learned that several vietnamese generals were plotting to overthrow the unpopular diem.
when lodge expressed u s sympathy for their cause the generals launched a military coup seizing power on november 1 1963 they executed diem soon after.
despite his unpopularity diem had been a respecte nationalist.
after his death south vietnams government weakened.
johnson and vietnam just three weeks after diems death kennedy was assassinated.
the presidency and the growing problem of vietnam now belonged to ent lyndon b johnson.
although he approached vietnam cautiously 502 at first johnson wanted to keep the country from falling to the communists.
additionally some had blamed democrats when china became communist in 1949 should the democrats lose vietnam johnson feared it might shatter my presidency kill my administration and damage our democracy on august 2 1964 johnson announced that north vietnamese torpedo boats had fired on two u s destroyers in the gulf of tonkin.
two days later he reported another attack.
insisting that these were unprovoked he ordered american aircraft to attack north vietnamese ships and naval facilities.
johnson then asked congress for the authority to defend american forces and allies in southeast asia.
congress readily agreed and on august 7 1964 it passed the gulf of tonkin resolution.
this authorized the president to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the united states and to prevent further aggression soon after the vietcong began to attack bases where american advisers were stationed in south vietnam.
after one particularly damaging attack johnson sent american aircraft to bomb north vietnam.
analyzing primary sources should america fight in vietnam.
as the war in vietnam dragged on americans became increasingly divided about the nation s role in the conflict.
in january 1966 george w ball delivered an address to indicate how we got into vietnam and why we must stay.
george f kennan a former ambassador to the soviet union argued that american involvement in vietnam was something we would not choose deliberately if the choice were ours to make all over again today.
yes u t he conflict in viet nam is a product of the great shifts and changes triggered by the second world war t he soviet union under stalin exploited the confusion to push out the perimeter of its power and influence in an effort to extend the outer limits of communist domination by force or the threat of force the bloody encounters in vietnam are thus in a real sense battles and skirmishes in a continuing war to prevent one communist power after another from violating internationally recognized boundary lines fixing the outer limits of communist dominion in the long run our hopes for the people of south viet nam reflect our hopes for people everywhere.
what we seek is a world living in peace and freedom from a speech delivered january 30 1966 george w ball undersecretary of state no vietnam is not a region of major military industrial importance e ven a situation in which south vietnam was controlled exclusively by the vietcong would not present in my opinion dangers great enough to justify our direct military intervention.
and to attempt to crush north vietnamese strength to a point where hanoi could no longer give any support for vietcong political activity in the south would have the effect of bringing in chinese forces at some point our motives are widely misinterpreted and the spectacle of americans inflicting grievous injury on the lives of a poor and helpless people produces reactions among millions of people throughout the world profoundly detrimental to the image we would like them to hold of this country from testimony before the senate foreign relations committee february 10 1966 george f kennan former diplomat dbq analyzing historical documents q identifying central ideas why does ball believe that the united states is justified in fighting in vietnam.
comparing and contrasting what is the fundamental difference between the views of ball and kennan.
the vietnam war 503 biographies helicopters allowed u s troops to get in and out of jungles and mountainous areas in vietnam.
critical thinking determining cause and effect how did the vietnamese landscape make troop movements difficult.
roy p benavidez 1935 1998 roy p benavidez received the medal of honor the nation s highest award for heroism for action in the vietnam war.
in may 1968 benavidez went to the aid of special forces team members who were wounded and surrounded unable to get to a helicopter.
benavidez ran 80 yards through enemy fire.
wounded three times in getting to the men he stayed with them some eight hours preparing an evacuation.
during that time he was wounded two more times.
while carrying men to the rescue helicopter he was attacked from behind but managed to kill his attacker in hand to hand combat.
only after loading all the dead and wounded did benavidez board the helicopter.
his actions saved the lives of at least eight other men.
both the american public and johnsons advisers generally supported these actions.
some officials disagreed however.
undersecretary of state george ball initially supported involvement in vietnam but later turned against it.
he warned that if the united states go.
too involved it would be difficult to get out.
once on the tigers back he warned we cannot be sure of picking the place to dismount.
other advisers such as national security advisor mcgeorge bundy believed that success in vietnam was important to protect american interests and maintain stability in southeast asia.
in a memo to the president he argued primary source the stakes in vietnam are extremely high.
the american investment is very large and american responsibility is a fact of life which is palpable in the atmosphere of asia and even elsewhere the international prestige of the u s and a substantial part of our influence are directly at risk in vietnam quoted in the best and the brightest 191 in march 1965 johnson again expanded american involvement by ordering a sustained bombing campaign against north vietnam.
that same month he sent the first u s combat troops into vietnam.
b reading progress check describing what event weakened the government of south vietnam.
a bloody stalemate guiding question what military tactics were used by the vietcong and how did american troops respond.
by the end of 1965 more than 180 000 u s combat troops were fighting in vietnam.
in 1966 that number doubled.
the u s military entered vietnam with great confidence.
america seemed omnipotent then wrote one ofth first marines to arrive philip caputo in his prologue to a rumor of war.
w saw ourselves as the champions of a cause that was destined to triumph lacking the firepower of the american forces the vietcong used ambushes booby traps and other guerrilla tactics.
these techniques could be greatly destructive.
ronald j glasser an american army doctor described the devastating effects of one booby trap primary source three quarters of the way through the tangle a trooper brushed against a two inch vine and a grenade slung at chest high went off shattering the right side of his head and body nearby troopers t hold of the unconscious soldier and half carrying half dragging hin pulled him the rest of the way through the tangle.
m quoted in vietnam 4 history the vietcong also frustrated american troops by blending in with the general population and then quickly vanishing.
it was a sheer physical impossibil to keep the enemy from slipping away whenever he wished explained one american general.
search and destroy to counter these tactics american troops tried tc ind enemy troops bomb their positions destroy t eir supply lines and force them out into the of for combat.
american planes dropped napalm a jellied gasoline that explodes on contact.
they also used agent orange a chemical that strips leaves from trees and shrubs turning farmland and forest into wasteland.
american military leaders underestimated the vietcongs strength.
they also misjudged the enemys stamina and the support they had among the south vietnamese.
american generals believed that bombing and killing large numbers of vietcong would destroy their morale and lead them to surrender.
the guerrillas however had no intention of surrendering and they were willing to accept huge losses to achieve their goals.
the ho chi minh trail in the vietcongs war effort north vietnamese support was a major factor.
although the vietcong included many south vietnamese north vietnam provided arms advisers and leadership.
as vietcong casualties mounted north vietnam began sending north vietnamese army units to fight.
north vietnam sent arms and supplies south by way of a network of jungle paths known as the ho chi minh trail.
the trail wound through cambodia and laos bypassing the border between north vietnam and south vietnam.
north vietnam itself received weapons and other support from the soviet union and china.
johnson feared directly attacking north vietnam would bring china into the war as had happened in korea.
yet johnsons limits made winning the war very difficult.
instead of conquering territory american troops had to fight a war of attrition defeating enemy forces by wearing them down.
this strategy led troops to conduct grisly body counts after battles to determine how many enemy soldiers had been killed.
the american military began measuring progress in the war by the number of enemy dead.
bombing from american planes killed many thousands of vietnamese.
american soldiers were also dying in increasing numbers.
the notion of a quick and decisive victory grew increasingly remote.
as a result many citizens back home began to question the nations involvement in the war.
chemicals such as napalm and agent orange devastated the landscape of vietnam.
critical thinking drawing conclusions how might the use of chemical weapons have encouraged the south vietnamese populace to support the vietcong.
napalm a jellied gasoline used for bombs agent orange a chemical defoliant used to clear vietnamese jungles during the vietnam war d reading progress check explaining what two chemical weapons did the united states use in vietnam.
lesson 1 review reviewing vocabulary 1 explaining what are guerrilla tactics.
8e 2 defining what was the domino theory.
8d using your notes 3 summarizing use the notes you completed during the lesson to summarize the reasons the united states aided france in vietnam answering the guiding questions 4 evaluating why did the united states provide military aid to the french in indochina.
8d 8e 5 describing how did u s involvement in vietnam change during the kennedy and johnson administrations.
8d 8e 20a 6 analyzing what military tactics were used by the vietcong and how did u s troops respond.
8e writing activity argument take on the role as a member of congress in 1964 write a statement supporting or opposing the gulf of tonkin resolution.
8e 20a the vietnam war 505 networks there s more online.
sf biography robert f kennedy ef biography william westmoreland ef graphic novel the lottery ef primarysource vietnam political cartoons ef video the peace movement ef interactive self check quiz is djj ptoprkewar ff vietnam now.
lesson 2 vietnam divides the nation tmilitaiy conflict divide people the government during wartime.
reading helpdesk academic vocabulary media disproportionate content vocabulary it matters because as casualties mounted in vietnam many americans began to protest the war.
the conflict over the war increasing violence and the apparent lack of progress in vietnam led president johnson to decide not to run again.
the antiwar movement emerges guiding question why did americans disagree about the vietnam war.
credibility gap dove teach in hawk i taking notes.
key ideas and details j organizing fill in a graphic organizer j similar to the one below listing reasons j for opposition to the vietnam war.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 8e analyze the major issues and events of the vietnam war such as the tet offensive the escalation of forces vietnamization and the fall of saigon 8f describe the responses to the vietnam war such as the draft the 26th amendment the role of the media the credibility gap the silent majority and the anti war movement continued on the next page when the first u s combat troops arrived in vietnam in the spring of 1965 about 66 percent of americans approved of u s policy in vietnam.
as the war dragged on however public support began to wane.
media accounts seemed to contradict government reports.
for example the american commander in south vietnam general william westmoreland reported that the enemys hopes are bankrupt and the end begins to come into view yet millions of people saw images of american casualties on television in their living rooms each day as vietnam became the first television war for many people a credibility gap had developed they had a hard time believing what the johnson administration said about the war.
congress which in the gulf of tonkin resolution had granted johnson a great deal of power to conduct the war began to seek greater involvement.
beginning in february 1966 the senate foreign relations committee held educational hearings on vietnam.
they called in policy makers and critics to discuss the administrations military strategy.
teach ins begin in march 1965 a group of faculty members and students at the university of michigan joined together in a teach in.
they discussed the issues surrounding the war and reaffirmed their reasons for opposing it.
in may 1965 122 colleges held a national teach in by radio for more than 100 000 antiwar demonstrators.
people opposed the war for different reasons.
some saw the conflict as a civil war in which the united states should not 506 interfere.
others saw south vietnam as a corrupt dictatorship and believed defending it was immoral.
anger at the draft thousands of demonstrators held protests against the war.
students for a democratic society sds organized a march on washington d c that drew more than 20 000 people.
a rally at the lincoln memorial drew tens of thousands of protesters as well.
many protesters focused on what they saw as an unfair draft system.
until 1969 college students could often defer military service until after graduation.
young people from working class families unable to afford college were more likely to be drafted.
draftees were most likely to be assigned to combat units and they commonly made up more than half of casualties.
most who served in vietnam however enlisted voluntarily.
nevertheless a disproportionate number of working class and minority youths went to war.
between 1961 and 1966 african americans constituted about 10 percent of military personnel.
because african americans were more likely to be assigned to combat units however they accounted for almost 20 percent of combat related deaths.
this skewed death rate angered african american leaders.
in april 1967 dr martin luther king jr publicly condemned the conflict i speak for the poor of america who are paying the double price of smashed hopes at home and death and corruption in vietnam the great initiative in this war is ours.
the initiative to stop it must be ours in response military officials tried to reduce african american casualties.
by wars end african americans made up about 12 percent of americas dead.
as the war escalated an increased draft call put many college students at risk of being drafted.
an estimated 500 000 draftees refused to go.
some burned their draft cards did not show up for induction or fled the country.
from 1965 to 1968 officials prosecuted over 3 000 americans who refused to serve.
in 1969 a lottery system was instituted so only those with low numbers were subject to the draft.
many draftees argued that if they were old enough to fight they were old enough to vote.
in 1971 the twenty sixth amendment to the constitution was ratified giving all citizens age 18 and older the right to vote in all state and federal elections.
hawks and doves in the face of growing opposition to the war president johnson remained determined to continue fighting recognizing the effort as resistance to communism.
he assailed his critics in congress as selfish men who want to analyzing supreme court cases tinker v des moines in 1965 students in des moines iowa expressed their opposition to the vietnam war by wearing black armbands to school.
the school district then banned the wearing of black armbands and subsequently expelled three students who violated the policy.
the students challenged their expulsion as a violation of their first amendment right to free speech.
in 1969 the supreme court ruled 7 to 2 in favor of the students holding that the wearing of black armbands was a form of symbolic expression covered by the first amendment.
as long as their symbolic protest was not disruptive they had a right to express their opinion.
dbq significance how does the tinker decision affect your right to wear a t shirt supporting a cause you believe in.
opposition to the vietnam war as the vietnam war progressed opposition to the conflict generally increased.
5 ljjt analyzing during which two years qj was opposition to the war lowest.
s what event occurred around that jg predicting consequences in what s year did opposition to the war peak.
what consequence might you expect this to have.
source gailup news service.
continued from p 506 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 21a analyze the effects of landmark u s supreme court decisions including brown v board of education and other u s supreme court decisions such as plessy v ferguson hernandez v texas tinker v des moines wisconsin v yoder and white v regester 21b discuss historical reasons why the constitution has been amended 23a identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process including lobbying non violent protesting litigation and amendments to the u s constitution 23b evaluate various means of achieving equality of political rights including the 19th 24th and 26th amendments and congressional acts such as the american indian citizenship act of 1924 the vietnam war 507 media a means of expression or communication especially in reference to the agencies of mass communication newspapers radio television and the internet credibility gap lack of trust or believability teach in an extended meeting or class held to discuss a social or political issue advance their own interests and was dismissive of the college protesters johnson was not alone in his views.
in time the natron seemed to be drnded into two camps.
doves wanted the united states to leave vietnam.
hawks however wanted the nation to stay and fight.
some saw communism as a threat and challenged the patriotism of the doves.
as the two groups debated the war appeared to take a dramatic turn for the worse.
b reading progress check explaining what was the effect of the vietnam war being a television war.
disproportionate being out of proportion lacking in proper relation 1968 the pivotal year guiding question why was 1968 considered the most turbulent year of the 1960s.
dove a person in favor of the united states withdrawing from the vietnam war the most turbulent year of the chaotic 1960s was 1968 the year saw a shocking political announcement two traumatic assassinations and a political convention held amid strident antiwar demonstrations.
first however the united states endured a surprise attack in vietnam.
hawk someonewho believed the united states should continue its military efforts in vietnam antiwar demonstrators protest in new york city in 1969 critical thinking analyzing information what can you learn about war protesters from this photograph.
thetet offensive on january 30 1968 during tet the vietnamese new year the vietcong and north vietnamese launched a massive surprise attack.
in what was called the tet offensive guerrilla fighters attacked most american airbases in soutl vietnam and most of the souths major cities.
vietcong even blasted their way into the american embassy in saigon.
after about a month of fighting u s and south vietnamese soldiers repelled the enemy troops inflicting heavy losses on them.
but less tangibh damage had been done.
the american people were shocked that an enemy supposedly on the verge of defeat could launch such a large scale attack.
the media openly criticized the war.
the american people should be getting ready to accept if they havent already the prospect that the whole vietnan effort may be doomed declared the wall street journal.
television newscast walter cronkite said that it seemed more certain than ever that the blood experience in vietnam is to end in a stalemate slopfflcmlrw vietnam now9 johnson leaves the race both johnson and the war had become increasingly unpopuk with the presidential election of 1968 on the horizon some democratic politicians made surprising moves.
in november 1967 eugene mccarthy a little known liberal senator from minnesota declared that he would challenge johnson for th democratic presidential nomination.
at first his candidacy was mostly dismissed but he attracted support from those who opposed the war.
in march 1968 mccarthy made a str showing in the new hampshire primary winning more than 40 percent of the vote.
realizing that johnson was vulnerable senator robert kennedy who also opposed the war quickly entered the race for the democratic nomination.
with both the country and his own party deeply divided jo nson appeared on television on march 31 1968 he announc ave concluded that i should not permit the presidency to nme invlve d in the partisan divisions that are developii in this political year.
accordingly i shall not seek and i wil no accept t e nomination of my party for another term as your president.
a season of violence more shocking events followed johnsons announcement.
on april 4 dr martin luther king jr was assassinated in memphis by james earl ray.
on june 5 robert kennedy who appeared likely to win the democratic nomination was gunned down by sirhan sirhan an arab nationalist.
the violence that seemed to plague the country in 1968 culminated with a chaotic and well publicized clash between antiwar protesters and police at the democratic national convention in chicago.
thousands of young activists surrounded the convention center to protest the war.
despite these protests the delegates selected vice protests at the democratic national convention in 1968 were nationally televised.
critical thinking president hubert humphrey as the democratic nominee.
meanwhile in a park not far from the convention hall protesters and police began fighting.
demonstrators taunted police with the chant the whole world is watching as the officers tried to force them to disperse.
violence between protesters and police aired on national television.
o nixon wins the presidency at a much more sedate convention republicans selected former vice president and 1960 presidential hopeful richard nixon as their candidate.
a third candidate governor george wallace of alabama decided to run in 1968 as an independent.
an outspoken segregationist wallace sought to attract americans who felt threatened by the civil rights movement and urban social unrest.
public opinion polls gave nixon a wide lead over humphrey and wallace.
nixons campaign promise to unify the nation and restore law and order appealed to americans who feared their country was spinning out of control.
he claimed to represent a silent majority of americans who sought to maintain law and order but had been overshadowed in recent years by social and political turmoil.
he promised that he had a secret plan to bring peace with honor in vietnam.
humphreys campaign faced significant challenges but by october 1968 his increasingly antiwar stance and strong campaigning helped turn his numbers around.
a week before the election president johnson announced that the bombing of north vietnam had halted and that a cease fire would follow.
these boosts came too late for humphrey however.
nixon defeated him by more than 100 electoral votes although he only won the popular vote by a slim margin of 43 percent to 42 percent.
b reading progress check drawing conclusions how might the protests at the convention have affected voters opinions of democrats.
skills practice look at the protest signs in the pictures in this lesson.
look for words you know on the signs.
think about what the words mean.
evaluating why was the tet offensive a turning point in the vietnam war.
lesson 2 review reviewing vocabulary 1 defining what was the credibility gap.
8f 2 contrast how did doves and hawks differ.
8e 8f using your notes 3 summarizing use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a paragraph that summarizes the reasons that many people opposed the vietnam war.
8e 8f answering the guiding questions 4 identifying why did americans disagree about the vietnam war.
5 describing why was 1968 considered the most turbulent year of the 1960s.
8e 8f writing activity argument suppose that you were living in 1968 write an article for a student newspaper in which you present opposing views about the vietnam war.
8e 8f the vietnam war 509 networks there s more online.
c v a biography henry kissinger t biography maya lin gf graphic novel may day gf primary source excerpts from new york times v united states sf video the fall of saigon gf interactive self check quiz lesson 3 the war winds down military conflict divide people the government during irartii reading helpdesk academic vocabulary it matters because shortly after taking office president nixon moved to end the nation s involvement in vietnam.
the final years of the confh yielded more bloodshed and turmoil as well as growing cynitis generation unresolved content vocabulary linkage vietnamization taking notes key ideas and details organizing as you read use the following graphic organizer to list the steps that president nixon took to end american involvement in vietnam.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 8d explain reasons and outcomes for u s involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the domino theory including the vietnam war 8e analyze the major issues and events of the vietnam war such as the tet offensive the escalation of forces vietnamization and the fall of saigon continued on the next page nixon moves to end the war guiding question whatpolides did nixon employ to end the war.
as a step toward ending the war nixon appointed henry kissingei as special assistant for national security affairs.
kissinger embarkei upon a policy called linkage or improving relations with the sovi union and china to try to persuade them to reduce their aid to north vietnam.
in august 1969 kissinger also entered into secret negotiations with north vietnams representative he due tho.
meanwhile nixon began vietnamization.
th is process involv the gradual withdrawal of u s troops while the south vietnamese assumed more of the fighting.
he announced the withdrawal of 25 000 soldiers on june 8 1969 at the same time however nixon increased air strikes against north vietnam and began secretly bombing vietcong sanctuaries in neighboring cambodia.
turmoil at home continues in late 1969 americans learned that in the spring of 1968 an american platoon under the command of lieutenant william calley had massacred unarmed south vietnamese civilians in the hamlet of my lai.
most of the victims were old men women and children.
calley eventually went to prison for his role in the killings.
jan barry a founder of the vietnam veterans against the war viewed my lai.
a symbol of the dilemma his generation faced in the conflict primary source to kill on military orders and be a criminal or to refuse to kill and be a criminal is the me agony of americas vietnam war generation.
it is what has forced upward of sixty thousand young americans draft resisters and deserters to canada and created one hundred thousa military deserters a year.
quoted in who spoke up.
american protest against the war in vietnam 1963 t97s 510 the u s invasion of cambodia led to mass protests and to the tragic killing of four students by national guard troops at kent state university in may 1970 in april 1970 nixon announced that american troops had invaded cambodia to destroy vietcong bases there.
many believed this invasion expanded the war which set off many protests.
on may 4 ohio national guard soldiers armed with tear gas and rifles fired on demonstrators at kent state university killing four students.
days later police killed two student demonstrators at jackson state college in mississippi.
an angry congress began to work to end the presidents control of the war.
in december 1970 it repealed the gulf of tonkin resolution which had given the president nearly complete power in directing the conflict.
the following year a former employee of the department of defense daniel ellsberg leaked what became known as the pentagon papers to the new york times.
the documents contained details about decisions to expand the war and confirmed what many americans had long believed the government had not been honest with them.
the united states pulls out americans were increasingly ready for the war to end as the presidential election of 1972 approached.
nixon faced democratic challenger george mcgovern an outspoken critic of the war.
less than a month before the election however kissinger emerged from his secret talks with le due tho to announce that peace is at hand nixon soundly defeated mcgovern.
soon kissingers peace negotiations broke down over disagreements about the presence of north vietnamese troops in the south.
in december 1972 to force north vietnam to resume negotiations the nixon administration began the most destructive air raids of the war.
in what became known as the christmas bombings american b 52s dropped thousands of tons of bombs on north vietnamese targets for 11 straight days.
then negotiations resumed.
on january 27 1973 the warring sides signed an agreement ending the war and restoring the peace in vietnam the united states promised to withdraw its troops and both sides agreed to exchange prisoners of war.
after almost eight years of war the nation ended its direct involvement in vietnam.
the domino effect peace did not last.
in january 1975 cambodia fell under the control of the communist group the khmer rouge.
in march 1975 the north vietnamese army invaded south vietnam.
nixon had resigned in august 1974 following watergate a scandal that broke as the war was winding down.
when the new president gerald ford asked for funds to aid the south vietnamese congress refused.
on april 30 the north vietnamese captured saigon south vietnams capital.
they then renamed the city ho chi minh city.
laos another country in the region was also greatly affected by the vietnam war.
though laos was run by a neutral coalition government during most of the war the constant effects of bombings on the parts of the ho chi minh trail in laos destabilized that neutrality.
communists took over in laos after the fall of saigon.
thus the domino effect played out as predicted.
b reading progress check sequencing how did the christmas bombings help to put an end to u s involvement in the vietnam war.
critical thinking determining cause and effect how did the invasion of cambodia lead to the shootings at kent state university.
linkage policy of improving relations with the soviet union and china in hopes of persuading them to cut back their aid to north vietnam vietnamization the process of making south vietnam assume more of the war effort by slowly withdrawing american troops from vietnam generation a group of individuals who were born and who live during the same period of time continued from p 510 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 8f describe the responses to the vietnam war such as the draft the 26th amendment the role of the media the credibility gap the silent majority and the anti war movement 20a describe the impact of events such as the gulf of tonkin resolution and the war powers act on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government the vietnam war 511 the legacy of vietnam guiding question 1 1 previous international conflicts.
the lessons of the past in vietnam president ford declared in 1975 have already been learned learned by presidents learned by congress learned by the american people and we should have our focus on the future vietnam had a profound effect on america.
the war s human toll america paid a heavy price for its involvement in vietnam far more than the estimated 173 billion in direct costs.
approximately 58 000 young americans died and some 300 000 were injured.
an estimated 1 million north vietnamese and south vietnamese soldiers died as did millions more civilians.
back home some soldiers had trouble readjusting.
army specialist doug johnson recalled primarysource it took a while for me to recognize that i did suffer some psychological problems in trying to deal witl my experience in vietnam one evening i went to see a movie on post.
i don t recall what it was about but i remember there was a sad part and that i started crying uncontrollably.
it hadn t dawned on me before this episode that i had succeeded in burying my emotions.
quoted in touched by the dragon 195 because many people considered the war a defeat and wanted to put it behind them the veterans sacrifices often went unrecognized.
they received relatively few welcome home parades and celebrations.
liiiiiii analyzing supreme court cases new york times v united states 1971 background to the case in 1971 daniel ellsberg leaked classified documents known as the pentagon papers to the new york times and the washington post.
when the newspapers attempted to publish these documents the nixon administration argued that publication would threaten national security.
the case centered on the first amendment guarantee of a free press.
how the court ruled daniel ellsberg leaked the classified documents known as the pentagon papers.
the new york times went to court to battle for its right to print the pentagon papers.
in a 6 to 3 per curiam opinion per curiam meaning that the decision was issued by the whole court and not specific justices the court found that the nixon administration had failed to prove that publication of the pentagon papers would imperil the nation in any way.
the new york times and the washington post could publish the pentagon papers.
dbq analyzing historical documents q drawing conclusions why do you think daniel ellsberg leaked the pentagon papers to the press.
defending do you think the government can ever justify media censorship even based on national security concerns.
512 the war remained unresolved for the american families whose relatives and friends were classified as prisoners of war pows or missing in action mia.
despite many official investigations these families were not convinced that the government had told the truth about pow mia policies.
vietnam remained on the nations mind nearly a decade later.
in 1982 the nation dedicated the vietnam veterans memorial in washington d c a large black granite wall inscribed with the names of those killed and missing in action in the war.
the war s impact on the nation the war also left a mark on national politics.
in 1973 congress passed the war powers act as a way to reestablish some limits on executive power.
the act required the president to inform congress of any commitment of troops abroad within 48 hours and to withdraw them in 60 to 90 days unless congress explicitly approved the troop commitment.
no president has recognized this limitation however and the courts have tended to avoid the issue.
nonetheless every president since the laws passage has asked congress to authorize the use of military force before committing ground troops to combat.
in general the war shook the nations confidence and made some begin to question american foreign policies.
on the domestic front the vietnam war increased americans cynicism about their government.
together with watergate vietnam made many americans feel that the nations leaders had misled them.
reading progress check assessing how did the american public treat returning vietnam veterans.
the vietnam veterans memorial is inscribed with the names of the more than 58 000 people killed or missing in vietnam.
critical thinking making generalizations how does the vietnam veterans memorial symbolize u s involvement in the war.
unresolved not cleared up not dealt with successfully skills practice make a speech to your class giving your opinion about the vietnam war.
as you prepare the speech make a list of the academic vocabulary words and content vocabulary words used in this chapter 18 lesson 1 students and the counterculture lesson 2 the feminist movement lesson 3 latino americans organize the story matters the civil rights movement that began in the 1950s inspired other groups in american society to stage protests in the 1960s and 1970s.
students women and latinos all formed organizations and began demanding changes in how american society treated them.
betty friedan wrote her 1963 book the feminine mystique to describe a dissatisfaction many women felt about their social roles.
the book also inspired many women to fight for equal rights.
photo bettmann corbis 517 chapter is assessment directions on a separate sheet of paper answer the questions below.
make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
lesson review lesson 1 0 making connections describe the connection between american prosperity college attendance and youth protest movements.
0 drawing inferences what might the name students for a democratic society have suggested about this organization s goals.
0 identifying central issues what was the major belief about society that drove many people into the counterculture.
0 defining what aspects ofthe counterculture were expressed in the rock and roll music ofthe 1960s.
what are some of the positive impacts of counterculture rock and roll music.
what are some of its negative impacts.
25a 25b lesson 2 0 describing what role did betty friedan play in the women s rights movement.
9c 0 speculating what was the role of now and why do you think the members of now included men and not just women in their founding conference.
9b 0 summarizing what were the educational amendments and how did school athletics tie to these amendments.
17d 0 comparing what strategies and techniques did the feminist movement adopt from the civil rights movement.
9b lesson 3 0 comparing and contrasting contrasting describe the roles of lulac mayo and la raza unida in the chicano civil rights movement.
how are these groups similar.
how are they different.
9b 0 identifying cause and effect how did a national grape boycott impact workers rights.
what role did cesar chavez play in the boycott.
9c making inferences what organizations did cesar chavez and dolores huerta create.
why do you think they chose to merge their unions to form the ufw.
what was the role ofufw.
9c 26d identifying what led dolores huerta to help found the cso.
what did heurta do in the cso.
9c 26d exploring the essential questions drawing conclusions what actions did women s groups and latinos use to expand their economic opportunities and political rights.
9b 9c 26a drawing conclusions what were the effects of the social changes for students women and latinos.
critical thinking theorizing theorize about why music and musicians held such a significant place within the counterculture movement ofthe 1960s.
does music remain as significant to the youth of today.
0 analyzing what was the effect ofthe supreme court s ruling in the case hernandez v texas.
21a summarizing what was the outcome of the delgado v bastrop i s d supreme court case.
9i 0 describing what role did phyllis schlafly play in the defeat ofthe equal rights amendment.
what were some of her reasons for opposing this amendment.
1oe 0 analyzing identify how title ix created economic and social opportunities for women and describe any unintended consequences ofthe legislation.
17d need extra help.
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 go to page 1520 1 520 1 522 522 1 525 525 1527 5241 5311532153215 1524151715 15 53 5261 534 evaluating write a brief description ofthe chicano mural movement.
how did this movement reflect some ofthe characteristics and issues ofthe time and help shape american culture.
what are some ofthe positive aspects of the chicano mural movement.
what are some of its negative aspects.
25a 25b 26c social studies skills 0 categorizing refer to the various amendments acts or rights gained during this period and categorize them according to the group in society for whom they most impacted.
analyze the information noting balances or imbalances or whether or not the change is still significant today.
29b evaluating decisions what new movement arose from the roe v wade decision and how does that movement influence politics today.
explain whether the supreme court s decision was based on strict construction or a judicial interpretation of the constitution.
21c identifying central issues what was one ofthe major issues that lead to the growth ofthe feminist movement in the 1960s.
1of evaluating events how did the success of mayo contribute to increased participation of latinos in the political process in the united states.
9h creating written presentations conduct research at the library or online to learn the impact on students of the educational amendments passed in 1972 focus on how they changed the opportunities for girls and young women.
assemble a report describing landmark events and specific stories you find during youn esea ch.
analyzing write an essay that explains why there was such a dramatic increase in the number of protests by students women and latinos in the 1960s.
9b 26a creating maps in the late 1960s states near the united states mexico border had a strong latino rights movement presence.
research the cities in the united states with high latino populations during the late 1960s and early 1970s.
compare with populations today.
present this information in a map citing your sources.
analyze whether there has or has not been a shift in regions of the united states with a strong latino presence.
31a analyzing primary sources use the photo to answer the following questions.
this photo was published in life magazine in 1965 it shows feminist leader and future cofounder of ms magazine gloria steinem holding a sign with a phrase made popular by the civil rights movement we shall overcome.
drawing conclusions on steinem s sign why is the word shall underlined.
26a 26c 26d 29a making connections how does the message of this photo relate to the work that steinem did to help promote title vii ofthe 1964 civil rights act and make it popular with the public.
26a 26c 26d 29a e analyzing visuals in this photo steinem is seated indoors against a white background.
how does this setting affect the message and impact of the photo.
need extra help.
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 gotopage sitt 527 524 532 517 sn 5171 1535 l5351 535j the politics of protest 535 analyzing visuals use the graph to answer the following questions.
year source historical statistics ofthe united states earliest times to the present volume 1.
0 analyzing geographic distributions which nationality makes up the majority of latino americans.
what questions would you need to ask in order to explain the national origins of latinos other than those from mexico and cuba.
31b q analyzing geographic patterns why did the number of people of cuban nationality begin to rise in the 1960s.
why did the growth ofthe mexican population slow between 1960 and 1970.
what questions do you need to pose to explain why latino numbers in general began to rise rapidly from 1970 onward.
31b extended response question analyzing changing demographics write an essay describing the causes and effects of legal and illegal immigration to the united states and explain how it has changed the demographics ofthe united states.
the essay should have an introduction at least three paragraphs and a conclusion.
be sure to use correct social studies terminology when discussing key concepts about immigration and changes in american society.
13b 30a 30b standardized test practice what role did hector p garcia play in the latino movement.
9c a he founded the gl forum.
b he founded the lulac.
c he co founded the ufw.
d he founded the mayo.
how were minority rights protected in the case of mendez v westminster.
9i f it kept mexican american school children from having to attend segregated schools.
g it kept mexican migrant workers from having to work long hours for low pay.
h it made it more difficult for the government to deport mexican americans.
j it gave mexican americans the right to vote.
need extra help.
31 32 33 34 35 go to page 1 530 530 517 531 531 politics and economics 1968 1980 networks there s more online about the nixon administration and how society changes overtime.

chapter has a list of vocabulary words found in the chapter 1 you try it.
the following passage shows you how some specialized vocabulary is defined in context.
from chapter review visual summary the americas and the old world each had complex societies trade routes and economies.
reviewing vocabulary terms and people complete each sentence by filling in the blank with the correct term or person.
1 during the ice age a narrow strip of land called the was exposed.
2 the of paleo indians from north to south america took thousands of years.
3 native americans living in the pacific northwest carved on tall poles.
4 the first political confederation of native americans in north america was the.
5 the most famous ruler of mali was.
6 while mali s leader was on a or pilgrimage to mecca he introduced his empire to the world.
7 the most famous ruler of songhai took the name.
describes an ideal society based on justice in republic.
comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 6 9 9 a describe how did early peoples in the americas get their food.
b analyze what led to the development of different culture groups in the americas.
c elaborate what features did the early civilizations of mesoamerica and south america have in common.
section 2 pages 10 15 10 a identify which early native american society built cliff dwellings and which built mounds.
b analyze how did native americans religious beliefs affect their lives in north america.
c evaluate do you think it was easier for native americans to live in the dry climates of the southwest where rainfall was unpredictable or in the north where the cold climate presented a constant challenge.
the world before the opening of the atlantic 31 section 3 pages 16 20 11 a describe how did geography contribute to ghana s wealth.
b compare what characteristics did mansa musa and askia the great have in common.
c elaborate how did west africa develop a large slave trade network.
section 4 pages 22 27 12 a recall what role did greek and roman traditions play in the development of the united states.
b summarize how did the crusades in southwest asia and the travels of marco polo in asia contribute to the growth of trade in europe.
c evaluate which do you think contributed the most to the advances in learning that occurred during the renaissance writing in the common language of a people or inventing the printing press.
reviewing themes 13 geography how did changes in climate lead to migration to the americas.
14 economics describe the development of the european economy during the middle ages.
using the internet 15 activity compare and contrast what causes large groups of people to migrate.
factors that influence why people migrate can be labeled as push and pull.
for example lack of resources pushed paleo indians from asia while herds of animals pulled paleo indians to north america.
through your online textbook compare and contrast push pull factors involved in paleo indian migration with the factors influencing immigration to the united states today.
create an illustrated chart to display your research.
reading skills specialized vocabulary of social studies use the reading skills taught in this chapter.
then complete the activities below.
conquest of the aztec empire moctezuma ruled the aztec empire which was at the height of its power in the early chapter 2 1500s.
moctezuma s capital tenochtitlan p 46 was built in the middle of lake texcoco near the present day site of mexico city.
tenochtitlan was a large city with temples a palace and buildings that were built on an island in the middle of the lake.
the buildings and riches of the city impressed the spaniards.
they saw the aztec empire as a good source of gold and silver.
they also wanted to convert the aztec to christianity.
the aztec had thousand of warriors.
in contrast cortes had only 508 soldiers about 100 sailors 16 horses and some guns.
cortes hoped that his superior weapons would bring him victory.
after you read the passage complete the following activities.
1 complete this outline based on the passage you just read.
i moctezuma and the aztec empire were at the height of power in the 1500s.
a tenochtitlan was the capital 1 built in lake texcoco 2 once you have completed the outline organize the information into topics to research.
then write a question you want to answer about each topic.
3 interpret the information in your outline list of topics and list of questions to determine the main ideas that you would write into chapter 2 2 human environment interaction why do you think columbus saw only the coastal area of mesoamerica.
maps and sailed into uncharted seas.
after more than a month with no sight of land the crew grew restless.
soon the crew saw signs of land birds and floating tree branches.
columbus promised a reward to him who first sang out that he saw land.
on october 12 1492 a lookout cried land.
ending the long journey from the canary islands.
the ships landed on an island in the bahamas.
columbus thought he had found a new route to asia.
instead he had reached another continent that was unknown to him.
columbus called the island san salvador which means holy savior.
columbus also visited another island he called hispaniola.
there he met the taino ty noh.
at that time europeans called asia the indies so columbus believing he was in asia called these native american people indians.
the taino lived in small farming communities.
in his journal columbus wrote that the taino were so generous that no one would believe it who has not seen it.
however columbus and his crew were not interested in taino culture but in gold.
after three months of exploring looking for gold and collecting exotic plants and animals columbus returned to spain.
columbus made three more journeys to the americas during his lifetime.
in 1504 he returned to spain in poor health.
columbus died two years later still believing that he had reached asia.
impact of columbus s voyages the voyages of columbus changed the way europeans thought of the world and their place in it.
a new era of interaction between europe and the americas had begun.
columbuss discovery also created conflict between european countries.
both spain and portugal wanted to add these lands to their growing empires.
in 1493 pope alexander vi originally from spain issued a decree that drew a new boundary for spain and portugal.
new empires in the americas 43 primary source letter christopher columbus 1494 two years after discovering the island of hispaniola columbus wrote a letter to the spanish king and queen outlining his ideas of its colonization.
most high and mighty sovereigns in the first place as regards the island of espanola inasmuch as the number of colonists who desire to go thither there amounts to two thousand owing to the land being safer and better for farming and trading 1 that in the said island there shall be founded three or four towns 2 that for the better and more speedy colonization of the said island no one shall have liberty to collect gold in it except those who have taken out colonists papers that each town shall have its alcalde mayor that there shall be a church and parish priests or friars to administer the sacraments to perform divine worship and for the conversion of the indians.
christopher columbus letter to the king and queen of spain 1494 analysis skills analyzing primary sources what were columbus s main concerns in founding a colony on hispaniola.
this imaginary line of demarcation divided the atlantic ocean.
spain could claim all land west of the line.
the portuguese king believed that this arrangement favored spain.
to prevent war the leaders of the two nations signed the treaty of tordesillas which moved the line of demarcation 800 miles further west.
this gave portugal more opportunity to claim lands unexplored by other europeans.
reading check.
identifying points of view why did columbus want to sail across the atlantic.
other explorers sail to the 1 americas j columbus s discoveries inspired others to sail i across the atlantic ocean.
in 1501 explorer i amerigo vespucci vuh spoo chee led a spanish fleet to the coast of present day j south america.
he was convinced the land he reached was not asia.
instead vespucci believed he had found a new world.
a ger man mapmaker labeled the continents across the ocean america in honor of vespucci.
europeans began using the names north america and south america for these lands.
in a spanish settlement in present day panama another explorer vasco nunez de balboa noon yays day bahl boh uh heard stories from local native americans about another ocean farther west.
balboa set out to find it.
for weeks he and his men struggled through thick jungle and deadly swamps.
in 1513 they reached the top of a mountain.
from this spot balboa saw a great blue sea the pacific ocean stretching out before him.
in 1519 ferdinand magellan muh jehl uhn a portuguese navigator set out with a spanish fleet to sail down the east coast of south america.
after sailing around the southern tip of the continent magellan continued into the pacific even though his ships were dangerously low on food and fresh water.
magellan s fleet sailed across the pacific ocean.
in the philippines magellan was killed in a battle with native peoples.
down to three ships the expedition continued sailing west into the indian ocean.
in 1522 the voyage s only remaining ship returned to spain.
only 18 members of magellan s original crew survived.
these sailors were the first people to circumnavigate or go all the way around the globe.
their entire journey was some 40 000 miles long.
european explorers and settlers took plants and animals with them to the americas.
they also brought back a variety of new plants and animals to europe asia and africa.
44 chapter you will learn about english colonies in the americas.
slave culture in the americas slaves in the americas came from many different parts of africa.
they spoke different languages and had different cultural backgrounds.
but enslaved africans also shared many customs and viewpoints.
they built upon what they had in common to create a new african american culture.
families were a vital part of slave culture.
families provided a refuge a place not fully under the slaveholders control.
however slave families faced many challenges.
families were often broken apart when a family member was sold to another owner.
in latin america there were many more enslaved males than females.
this made it difficult for slaves there to form stable families.
religion was a second refuge for slaves.
it gave enslaved africans a form of expression that was partially free from their slaveholders control.
slave religion was primarily christian but it included traditional elements from african religions as well.
religion gave slaves a sense of self worth and a hope for salvation in this life and the next.
spirituals were a common form of religious expression among slaves.
slaves also used songs and folktales to tell their stories of sorrow hope agony and joy.
section 5 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a recall why did so many native americans die after coming into contact with europeans.
j b summarize why did plantation owners turn to enslaved j africans as a labor force.
how did this lead to the creation j of the transatlantic slave trade.
2 a identify what was the middle passage.
b describe explain how enslaved africans were treated i after they reached the colonies in the americas j 3 a explain what are spirituals.
s b analyze how did religion and family provide a i refuge from the harsh life enslaved africans were forced to endure.
critical thinking f 4 identifying cause and effect review your notes on the slave trade.
use a chart like the one below to explain the causes and the effects of the slave trade.
5 writing about slavery add information about the f beginnings of slavery in the americas to your notes j include notes about slave culture.
what refuges did t enslaved people have from their suffering.
new empires in the americas 61 111 the slave system that arose in the american colonies was strongly influenced by geographic forces.
the climate of the southern colonies was suited to growing certain crops like cotton tobacco and sugarcane.
these crops required a great deal of labor to grow and to process.
to meet this great demand for labor the colonists looked to one main source enslaved africans.
v 1 tth america.
colonial slave ports slave ships sailed to slave ports where they unloaded their human cargo.
slave ports like boston newport and charleston were located near farming areas and the mouths of rivers.
south amerfc t1 the middle passage the terrifying and deadly voyage across the atlantic was known as the middle passage.
enslaved africans were chained and crowded together under ships decks on this long voyage as this drawing shows.
20 s the west indies africans were brought to the west indies to work on large sugar plantations.
sugarcane thrived in the west indies but it required huge amounts of labor to grow.
1 i slave forts began as trading posts.
r they were built near river mouths to provide easy access to both the sea and inland areas.
luis de senegal j africa james fort accra hl il l why assinie new england traders exchanged goods for slaves on the west african coast and then transported the slaves to the american colonies or to the west indies.
elmina slave fort west africa africa a slaves brought to the americas u 1493 1810 i kidnapped and taken to a slave ship mahommah 6 baquaqua was captured and sold into slavery as a young man.
in this 1854 account he recalls being taken to the african coast to board a slave ship.
i was taken down to the river and placed on board a boat the river was very large and branched off in two different directions previous to emptying itself into the sea we were two nights and one day on this river when we came to a place where the slaves were all put into a pen and placed with our backs to the fire when all were ready to go aboard we were chained together and tied with ropes round about our necks and were thus drawn down to the sea shore.
e 5 u 4 ililssiss of capricorn bsp 1493 1600 1601 1700 1701 1810 years geography skills i interpreting maps are i 1 location why were slave forts located where they were.
2 human environment interaction what geographic factors influenced the development of the atlantic slave trade.
social studies skills analysis critical thinking civic participation study framing historical questions define the skill j one of the most valuable ways that people gain knowledge is by asking effective questions.
an effective question is one that obtains the kind of information the person asking the question desires.
the ability to frame or construct effective questions is an important life skill as well as a key to gaining a better understanding of history.
asking effective historical questions will aid you in studying history and in conducting historical research.
learn the skill effective questions are specific straightforward and directly related to the topic.
when we do not obtain the information we want or need often it is because we have asked the wrong questions.
asking effective questions is not as easy as it seems.
it requires thought and preparation.
the following guidelines will help you in framing effective questions about history and other topics as well.
1 determine exactly what you want to know.
2 decide what questions to ask and write them down.
having written questions is very important.
they will help guide your study or research and keep you focused on your topic and goal.
you want to know.
for example if you wanted to know more about trade and the voyages of exploration that are discussed in chapter.
early exploration and settlement reviewing vocabulary terms and people 1 the first europeans to reach the east coast of north america were the.
established a navigation school and financed expeditions to the west coast of africa.
3 one of the most important european explorers was who was the first person to claim lands in the americas for spain.
4 the first voyage that sailed completely around the world was headed by.
5 sir walter raleigh founded the colony of virginia after receiving a a grant to set up a colony from the queen of england.
6 large farms or that specialize in growing one type of crop for profit were common in spanish america.
comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 38 41 7 a recall on which two islands did the vikings establish settlements before coming to north america.
b analyze what factors led europeans to begin their voyages of exploration.
c evaluate what do you think motivated sailors to sign on for voyages of exploration.
section 2 pages 42 45 8 a recall why was columbus s first voyage important.
b summarize explain the conflict that emerged between spain and portugal over their empires in the americas and how it was resolved.
c evaluate do you think the columbian exchange improved life or made life worse in the americas.
explain your answer.
new empires in the americas 65 section 3 pages 46 51 9 a identify what territories in the americas did spain control.
b analyze what factors enabled the spanish to defeat the aztec and the inca.
c elaborate why was the encomienda system important to spanish settlers.
section 4 pages 52 57 10 a describe what were the results of the defeat of the spanish armada.
b contrast how did the reasons for french settlement in the americas differ from that of the english and spanish.
what was each of their economies based on.
c predict what problems might arise among the different empires with settlements in north america.
section 5 pages 58 61 11 a explain why did the spanish turn to enslaved africans as a labor force in the americas.
b analyze in what ways did enslaved africans create their own unique culture in the americas.
c evaluate what effects do you think slavery had on the populations and cultures of west african countries.
through your online textbook choose an explorer and then research the explorer s route and discoveries.
present your research in an annotated and illustrated map or log book.
write from the explorer s point of view and include information about the areas he explored.
7 reading skills outlining and history use f ie reading social studies skill taught in this chapter to answer the following question.
16 write a historical question for each of the five sections of this chapter 2 17 writing your letter first review your notes and decide which group you want to write about.
which details from your notes will your friends and family be most interested in.
which do you find most important.
what do you want to tell your family and friends about the americas.
directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 which of the following best illustrates the process known as the columbian exchange.
a christopher columbus sailed west to reach asia and encountered the americas.
b corn and tomatoes were introduced to europe from america.
c asian goods moved long distances along the silk road to reach europe.
d advances in technology allowed sailors to better navigate on the open seas.
2 the decimation of the native population of the americas and the need for plantation labor resulted in the f encomienda system.
g establishment of religious tolerance.
h transatlantic slave trade.
j columbian exchange.
3 the desire to convert people to christianity and the demand for asian trade goods led to a increased interest in exploration.
b the renaissance.
c the conquest of the americas.
d efforts to end the slave trade.
4 spains empire in the americas included which of the following.
f new york g virginia h mexico j canada 5 which of the following established colonies in north america.
a the portuguese b the dutch c the greeks d the romans 6 the voyage of enslaved africans across the atlantic to the americas was known as the f northwest passage.
g african diaspora.
h triangular trade.
j middle passage.
7 examine the following passage from bernal diaz del castillos account of an aztec marketplace.
then answer the question below.
z the bustle and noise caused by this large crowd of people was so great that it could be heard more than four miles away.
some of our men who had traveled through italy said that they never had seen a marketplace that covered so large an area which was so well regulated and so crowded with people as this one at mexico.
bernal diaz del castillo adapted from the memoirs of the conquistador bernal diaz del castillo document based question what is the authors impression of the aztec marketplace.
how can you tell.
new empires in the americas 67 history multimedia connections click through 1 i i irvuuvi i inter activities 1 caribbean island encounters watch the video to learn about the first encounters between spanish explorers and the people of the caribbean.
claiming florida for spain watch the video to learn about ponce de leon s first landing on the coast of what is now florida.
llili a r isn cape c v ssbsws sb the spanish conquistador juan ponce de leon was the first european to set foot on land that later became part of the united states.
ponce de leon first sailed to the americas with christopher columbus on his second voyage in 1493 once in the caribbean region he helped conquer what is now puerto rico and was named ruler of the island.
in puerto rico ponce de leon heard about a nearby island that supposedly held the legendary fountain of youth.
its waters were said to make old people young again.
in 1513 ponce de leon set out to find the island but instead landed in what is now florida.
he named florida and claimed it for spain.
explore important events in the life of ponce de leon online you can find a wealth of information video clips primary sources activities and more at i 71 jin.
ponce de leon s 1513 route study the map to learn about the region of the americas that ponce de leon explored in 1513.
1620 the pilgrims sign the mayflower compact.
section 5 conflict in the colonies 98 the big idea tensions developed as the british government placed tax after tax on the colonies.
on writing llohs writing an infomercial what if television had been invented during the time that the english colonies were being founded in north america.
instead of relying on printed flyers and word of mouth to attract settlers the founders of colonies might have made infomercials.
in this chapter 3 the aftiddle colonies what you will learn if you were there you are a farmer in southern germany in 1730 religious wars have torn your country apart for many years.
now you hear stories about a place in america where people of all religions are welcome.
but the leaders of the colony and many of its people are english.
you would not know their language or customs.
still you would be free to live and worship as you like.
how would you feel about moving to a country full of strangers.
building background the middle section of the atlantic coast offered good land and a moderate climate.
several prominent english people established colonies that promised religious freedom.
to people like the settler above these colonies promised a new life.
new york and new jersey the dutch founded new netherland in 1613 as a trading post for exchanging furs with the iroquois.
the center of the fur trade in new netherland was the town of new amsterdam on manhattan island.
generous land grants to patroons or lords and religious tolerance soon brought jews french huguenots puritans and others to the colony.
director general peter stuyvesant sty vuh suhnt led the colony beginning in 1647 peter stuyvesant was forced to surrender new amsterdam to 1 the english created new york and new jersey from former dutch territory.
2 william penn established the colony of pennsylvania.
3 the economy of the middle colonies was supported by trade and staple crops.
r the big idea j people from many nations settled in the middle colonies.
key terms and people peter stuyvesant p 85 quakers p 86 william penn p 86 staple crops p 87 j l taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the founding of the middle colonies.
the english colonies 85 characteristics of the middle colonies social new york dutch influence new jersey diverse population pennsylvania founded by quakers economic successful farming of staple crops work force of slaves and indentured servants active trade with britain and west indies the impact today today new york city is the largest city in the united states with more than 8 million people.
in 1664 an english fleet captured the undefended colony of new amsterdam with out firing a single shot.
new netherland was renamed new york and new amsterdam became new york city.
soon after the english conquest in 1664 the duke of york made sir george carteret and lord john berkeley proprietors of new jersey.
this colony occupied lands between the hudson and delaware rivers.
it had a diverse population including dutch swedes finns and scots.
the fur trade was important to the economies of new york and new jersey through the end of the 1600s.
comparing how were new york and new jersey similar.
reading check.
ii lniiin 8 n penn was bom in london as the if a wealthy admiral.
penn joined the akers in 1666 and became an active eacher and writer of religious works.
he supported toleration of dissenters.
in 1681 he received a charter to establish a new colony called pennsylvania.
there penn put his beliefs into practice.
he insisted on fair dealings with local american indians welcomed immigrants and promised religious toleration.
making generalizations how did penn s ideas influence the rules of the colony.
penn s colony the society of friends or the quakers made up one of the largest religious groups in new jersey.
quakers did not follow formal religious practices and dressed plainly.
they believed in the equality of men and women before god.
they also supported nonviolence and religious tolerance for all people.
at the time many quaker beliefs and practices shocked most christians.
as a result quakers were persecuted in both england and america.
one proprietor of the new jersey colony was a quaker named william penn.
penn wished to found a larger colony under his own control that would provide a safe home for quakers.
in 1681 king charles ii agreed to grant penn a charter to begin a colony west of new jersey.
penn s colony known as pennsylvania grew rapidly.
penn limited his own power and established an elected assembly.
he also promised religious freedom to all christians.
his work made pennsylvania an important example of representative self government a government that reflects its citizens will in the colonies.
penn named the capital of his colony philadelphia which means the city of brotherly love.
in 1682 the duke of york sold penn a region to the south of pennsylvania.
this area called delaware remained part of pennsylvania until 1776 finding main ideas why did william penn establish pennsylvania and how did he influence its government.
reading check.
economy of the middle colonies the middle colonies combined characteristics of the new england and southern colonies.
with a good climate and rich land farmers there could grow large amounts of staple crops crops that are always needed.
these crops included wheat barley and oats.
farmers also raised livestock.
however their use of only one plant in each field made the fields vulnerable to erosion and insects.
slaves were somewhat more important to the middle colonies than they were to new england.
they worked in cities as skilled laborers such as blacksmiths and carpenters.
other slaves worked on farms onboard ships and in the growing shipbuilding industry.
however indentured servants largely filled the middle colonies growing labor needs.
between 1700 and 1775 about 135 000 indentured servants came to the middle colonies.
about half of them moved to pennsylvania.
by 1760 philadelphia had become the largest british colonial city.
other cities in the middle colonies such as new york city also grew quickly.
trade was important to the economy of the middle colonies.
merchants in philadelphia and new york city exported colonial goods to markets in britain and the west indies.
these products included wheat from new york pennsylvania and new jersey.
throughout the colonies women made important contributions to the economy.
they ran farms and businesses such as clothing and grocery stores bakeries and drugstores.
some women also practiced medicine and worked as nurses and midwives.
however colonial laws and customs limited women s economic opportunities.
most colonial women worked primarily in the home.
married women managed households and raised children.
sometimes they earned money for their families by selling products like butter or washing clothes.
finding the main idea on what were the economies of the middle colonies based.
reading check summary i you learn and preview in this section d about the middle colonies.
in the next section you will read about colonial government the slave trade and conflicts that arose in the english colonies.
section 3 assessment j jj ij i j f immibmii reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a describe name the middle colonies.
where were they located.
how did the region s physical geography compare to that of the northern and southern colonies.
b draw inferences what led to the diverse populations of new york and new jersey.
2 a identify who are the quakers.
b analyze how did william penn attempt to create a colonial government that would be fair to all.
3 a describe what different types of jobs did slaves in the middle colonies hold.
b evaluate in what ways were women essential to the middle colonies.
critical thinking 4 sequencing review your notes about which nation founded each middle colony.
then complete the time line below by listing the event that occurred on each of the dates on the time line.
1613 1647 1664 1681 5 comparing colonies you ve just read about early colonies in new york new jersey and pennsylvania.
think about the advantages they offered to settlers and what difficulties settlers faced.
in your notes put a star beside one of the colonies you might use in your infomercial.
the english colonies 87 america s s r the english colonies in 1760 were located between the atlantic ocean and the appalachian mountains.
the total population of the colonies was around 1 8 million.
soon however the colonies began to grow both in size and in population.
in 1763 great britain and france signed the treaty of paris giving britain control over all lands east of the mississippi river.
with the stroke of a pen the colonies increased enormously in size.
the westward expansion of the english colonies soon to be the united states had begun.
rw america s population 1760 1 8 million 1 ethnic groups 1760 white european african american native american other tseu.
a wall of mountains the 1 500 mile long appalachian mountain range formed a natural barrier to westward expansion.
the appalachians dense forests and steep terrain made passage on foot or 4.
ki by horse difficult.
1 k5 wito wismb religions 1760 protestant catholic jewish other x natural harbors the largest cities in the colonies such as philadelphia new york and boston grew where the best natural ports were.
ships were vital to the colonies for the growing fishing industry for overseas trade and to bring more settlers to the new land.
issiitiar boston population 16 000 new york population 25 000 philadelphia population 25 000 811 boston harbor provided natural protection for ships.
av jr v a v x v a 17 f ib jg new england colonies sis middle colonies 1 southern colonies a flood of people the colonial population doubled between 1750 and 1770 roughly half of the immigrants to the colonies were english.
second largest group of immigrants had no choice in the matter they were enslaved people from africa.
150 300 kilometers ihblw geography skills.
interpreting maps 1 location where were the colonies largest cities located at this time.
2 human environment interaction how did mountains and seas influence the location of the colonies.
4 section teks 1 a 3a 3b 3c 4a 10a 10b 11 a 12a 12b 12d 20a 20c 21b what you will learn n 1 colonial governments were influenced by political changes in england.
2 english trade laws limited free trade in the colonies.
3 the great awakening and the enlightenment led to ideas of political equality among many colonists.
4 the french and indian war gave england control of more land in north america.
ohhmbihmo the english colonies continued to grow despite many challenges.
key terms and people town meeting p 9 1 english bill of rights p 91 triangular trade p 93 i great awakening p 94 jonathan edwards p 94 j enlightenment p 95 i john locke p 95.
pontiac p 97 f taking notes j use the graphic organizer online to take notes on developments that affected the growing colonies.
life m the english colonies if you were there your family migrated to america in the 1700s and started a small farm in western pennsylvania.
now more and more people are moving in.
you would like to move farther west into the ohio river valley.
but a new law says you cannot move west of the mountains because it is too dangerous.
still you are restless and want more land and more freedom.
why might you decide to break the law and move west.
f building background when they moved to america the eng i lish colonists brought their ideas about government.
they expected to j i have the same rights as citizens in england.
however many officials f in england wanted tight control over the colonies.
as a result some j colonists like this family were unhappy with the policies of colonial i governments.
i colonial governments the english colonies in north america all had their own governments.
each government was given power by a charter.
the english monarch had ultimate authority over all of the colonies.
a group of royal advisers called the privy council set english colonial policies.
colonial governors and legislatures each colony had a governor who served as head of the government.
most governors were assisted by an advisory council.
in royal colonies the english king or queen selected the governor and the council members.
in proprietary colonies the proprietors chose all of these officials.
in a few colonies such as connecticut the people elected the governor.
in some colonies the people also elected representatives to help make laws and set policy.
these officials served on assemblies.
each colonial assembly passed laws that had to be approved first by the advisory council and then by the governor.
established in 1619 virginia s assembly was the first colonial legislature in north america.
at first it met as a single body but it was later split into two houses.
the first house was known as the council of state.
the governor s advisory council and the london company selected its members.
the house of burgesses was the assembly s second house.
the members were elected by colonists.
it was the first democratically elected body in the english colonies.
in new england the center of politics was the town meeting.
in town meetings people talked about and decided on issues of local interest such as paying for schools.
in the southern colonies people typically lived farther away from one another.
therefore many decisions were made at the county level.
the middle colonies used both county meetings and town meetings to make laws.
political change in england in 1685 james ii became king of england.
he was determined to take more control over the english government both in england and in the colonies.
because the colonies were so distant from the seats of government they had developed many of their own systems of governing and felt a sense of separation from the british government.
james believed that the colonies were too independent.
in 1686 he united the northern colonies under one government called the dominion of new england.
james named sir edmund andros royal governor of the dominion.
the colonists disliked andros because he used his authority to limit the powers of town meetings.
english bill of rights parliament replaced the unpopular king james and passed the english bill of rights in 1689 this act reduced the powers of the english monarch.
at the same time parliament gained power.
as time went on the colonists valued their own right to elect geography skills interpreting maps 1 location where were the new england colonies located in relation to the other colonies.
2 human environment interaction what natural feature marked the western boundary of the southern colonies.
khe englismzolonfes representatives to decide local issues.
following these changes the colonies in the dominion quickly formed new assemblies and charters.
colonial courts colonial courts made up another important part of colonial governments.
whenever possible colonists used the courts to control local affairs.
in general the courts reflected the beliefs of their local communities.
for example many laws in massachusetts enforced the puritans religious beliefs.
laws based on the bible set the standard for the community s conduct.
sometimes colonial courts also protected individual freedoms.
for example in 1733 officials arrested john peter zenger for printing a statement that damaged the reputation of the governor of new york.
andrew hamilton zenger s attorney argued that zenger could publish whatever he wished as long as it was true.
jury members believed that colonists had a right to voice their ideas openly and found him not guilty.
reading check.
analyzing information why were colonial assemblies and colonial courts created and what did they do.
english trade laws one of england s main reasons for founding and controlling its american colonies was to earn money from trade.
in the late 1600s england like most western european nations practiced mercantilism a system of creating and maintaining wealth through carefully controlled trade.
a country gained wealth if it had fewer imports goods bought from other countries than exports goods sold to other countries.
to support this system of mercantilism between 1650 and 1696 parliament passed a series of navigation acts limiting colonial trade.
for example the navigation act of 1660 forbade colonists from trading specific items such as sugar and cotton with any country other than england.
the act also required colonists to use english ships to transport goods.
parliament later passed triangular trade other acts that required all trade goods to pass through english ports where duties or import taxes were added to the items.
england claimed that the navigation acts were good for the colonies.
after all the colonies had a steady market in england for their goods.
but not all colonists agreed.
many colonists wanted more freedom to buy or sell goods wherever they could get the best price.
local demand for colonial goods was small compared to foreign demand.
despite colonial complaints the trade restrictions continued into the 1700s.
some traders turned to smuggling or illegal trading.
they often smuggled sugar molasses and rum into the colonies from non english islands in the caribbean.
parliament responded with the molasses act of 1733 which placed duties on these items.
british officials however rarely carried out this law.
by the early 1700s english merchants were trading around the world.
most american merchants traded directly with great britain or the west indies.
by importing and exporting goods such as sugar and tobacco some american merchants became wealthy.
triangular trade trade between the american colonies and great britain was not direct.
rather it generally took the form of triangular trade a system in which goods and slaves were traded among the americas britain and africa.
there were several routes of the triangular trade.
in one route colonists exchanged goods like beef and flour with plantation owners in the west indies for sugar some of which they shipped to britain.
the sugar was then exchanged for manufactured products to be sold in the colonies.
colonial merchants traveled great distances to find the best markets.
olaudah equiano 1745 1797 olaudah equiano claimed to have been born in africa in present day nigeria.
his autobiography told the story of his enslavement.
according to his autobiography equiano survived the middle passage traveling in a slave ship across the atlantic.
after arriving in the colonies a virginia planter purchased him and again sold him to a british naval officer.
while working as a sailor equiano eventually earned enough money to purchase his own freedom in 1766 equiano later settled in england and devoted himself to ending slavery.
analyzing information how did equiano gain his freedom.
i received such a salutation smell in my nostrils as i had never experienced in my life j became so sick and low that i was not able to eat the groans of the dying rendered made the whole a scene of horror almost inconceivable unbelievable.
olaudah equiano from the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano or gustavus vassa the african iii 1 the english colonies 93 the great awakening george whitefield gives a powerful sermon during the great awakening.
ministers like whitefield emphasized personal religious experiences over official church rules.
they also allowed ordinary church members whatever their race class or gender to play a role in services.
the value placed on individuals of all types during the great awakening helped shape american political ideas about who should have a say in government.
how do you think religious freedom led to middle passage one version of the triangular trade began with traders exchanging rum for slaves on the west african coast.
the traders then sold the enslaved africans in the west indies for molasses or brought them to sell in the mainland american colonies.
the slave trade brought millions of africans across the atlantic ocean in a voyage called the middle passage.
this was a terrifying and deadly journey that could last as long as three months.
enslaved africans lived in a space not even three feet high.
slave traders fit as many slaves as possible on board so they could earn greater profits.
thousands of captives died on slave ships during the middle passage.
in many cases they died from diseases such as smallpox.
as farmers began to use fewer indentured servants slaves became even more valuable.
reading check identifying cause and effect what factors caused the slave trade to grow.
how did this affect conditions on the middle passage.
great awakening and enlightenment in the early 1700s revolutions in both religious and nonreligious thought transformed the western world.
these european movements affected life in the american colonies.
great awakening religious leaders wanted to spread religious feeling throughout the growing colonial population.
in the late 1730s ministers began holding revivals emotional gatherings where people came together to hear sermons.
many american colonists experienced a great awakening in their religious lives.
this great awakening a religious movement that swept through the colonies in the 1730s and 1740s changed colonial religion.
it also affected social and political life.
jonathan edwards of massachusetts was one of the most important leaders of the great awakening.
his dramatic sermons told sinners to seek forgiveness for their sins or face punishment in hell forever.
the great awakening drew people of different regions classes and races.
women members of minority groups and poor people often took part in services.
ministers from different colonies met and shared ideas with one another.
this represented one of the few exchanges between colonies.
the great awakening promoted ideas that may also have affected colonial politics.
sermons about the spiritual equality of all people led some colonists to begin m chapter 3 demanding more political equality.
revivals became popular places to talk about political and social issues.
people from those colonies with less political freedom were thus introduced to more democratic systems used in other colonies.
enlightenment during the 1600s european scientists began to better understand the basic laws that govern nature.
their new ideas about the universe began the scientific revolution.
the revolution changed how people thought of the world.
in 1675 for example anton van leeuwenhoek became the first to observe microorganisms through a microscope.
many colonists were also influenced by the enlightenment.
this movement which took place during the 1700s spread the idea that reason and logic could improve society.
enlightenment thinkers also formed ideas about how government should work.
they based many of their ideas on the concept of using reason to best achieve virtue and social order.
some enlightenment thinkers believed that there was a social contract between government and citizens.
philosophers such as john locke thought that people had natural rights such as equality and liberty.
one judge william blackstone published a book describing the system of english law.
his ideas about natural laws and rights became influential in colonial legal education.
ideas of the scientific revolution and the enlightenment eventually influenced colonial leaders desire for self government.
summarizing how did new ideas influence colonial society.
french and indian war by the 1670s tensions had arisen between new england colonists and the wampa noag.
metacomet a wampanoag leader also known as king philip opposed the colo reading check nists efforts to take his people s lands.
in 1675 these tensions finally erupted in a conflict known as king philip s war.
the colonial militia civilians serving as soldiers fought american indian warriors.
both sides attacked each other s settlements killing men women and children.
the fighting finally ended in 1676 but only after about 600 colonists and some 3 000 indians had been killed including metacomet.
native american allies some native americans allied with the colonists to fight against metacomet and his forces.
these indians had developed trade relations with colonists.
they wanted tools weapons and other goods that europeans could provide.
in exchange the colonists wanted furs which they sold for large profits in europe.
as a result each side came to depend upon the other.
french colonists traded and allied with the algonquian and huron.
english colonists traded and allied with the iroquois league.
this powerful group united american indians from six different groups.
many american indians trusted the french more than they did the english.
the smaller french settlements were less threatening than the rapidly growing english colonies.
no matter who their allies were many indian leaders took care to protect their people s independence.
as one leader said we are born free.
we neither depend upon the governor of new france nor the governor of new york.
we may go where we please and buy and sell what we please garangula quoted in the world turned upside down edited by colin g calloway war erupts until the mid 1700s france and great britain struggled for control of territory in north america.
british colonists wanted to settle in the ohio river valley where they could the english colonies 95 north american empires before and after the treaty of paris take advantage of the fur trade.
the french believed this settlement would hurt their profits.
a standoff developed in the ohio valley where the french had built three forts.
fighting erupted in 1753 as the british military moved to take over the valley.
when a young virginian named george washington arrived with more soldiers he found the area under french control.
washington and his troops built a small simple fort that he named fort necessity.
after his troops suffered many casualties captured injured or killed soldiers washington finally surrendered.
his defeat in 1754 was the start of the french and indian war.
leaders from the colonies met to discuss defense.
the convention produced a plan for uniting the colonies called the albany plan.
meanwhile in 1756 fighting began in europe starting what became known as the seven years war.
treaty of paris the turning point of the war came in 1759 that year british general james wolfe captured quebec gaining the advantage in the war.
however the war dragged on for four more years.
finally in 1763 britain and france signed the treaty of paris officially ending the war.
the terms of the treaty gave canada to britain.
britain also gained all french lands east of the mississippi river except the city of new orleans and two small islands in the gulf of st lawrence.
from spain which had allied with france in 1762 britain received florida.
in an earlier treaty spain had received louisiana the land that france had claimed west of the mississippi river.
the treaty of paris changed the balance of power in north america.
soon british settlers began moving west to settle new lands.
western frontier most colonial settlements were located along the atlantic coast.
colonial settlers or pioneers slowly moved into the virgin ia and carolina backcountry and the ohio river valley.
indian leaders like chief pontiac opposed british settlement of this new land.
pontiac s rebellion began in may 1763 when his forces attacked british forts on the frontier.
within one month they had destroyed or captured seven forts.
pontiac then led an attack on fort detroit.
the british held out for months.
british leaders feared that more fighting would take place on the frontier if colonists kept moving onto american indian lands.
to avoid more conflict king george iii issued the proclamation of 1763 this law banned british settlement west of the appalachian mountains.
the law also ordered settlers to leave the upper ohio river valley.
these limitations angered many colonists and some began to question british policies.
summarizing why did george iii issue the proclamation of 1763.
reading check section 4 assessment pontiac 1720 1769 pontiac an ottawa chief who had fought for france tried to resist british settlement west of the appalachians.
calling them dogs dressed in red who have come to rob us he attacked the british in the ohio country in 1763 pontiac s rebellion was put down and he surrendered in 1766 analyzing information how did pontiac try to stop the british.
summary and preview in this section i you read about colonial governments the slave trade and the conflicts with foreign countries and with native americans that the colonies faced as they grew.
in the next section you ll learn about the increasing tension between the colonies and great britain that led to independence.
reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a describe how were colonial governments organized.
b analyze how did political change in england affect colonial governments.
c explain why did self government increase in the colonies.
2 a explain what is mercantilism.
b analyze how did the navigation acts support the system of mercantilism.
c evaluate did the colonies benefit from mercantilism.
why or why not.
3 a identify what was the great awakening and how did it reflect religious freedom.
how did the ideas of virtue and the social contract affect colonial government.
b compare how was the enlightenment similar to the great awakening.
c identify how did john locke and william black i stone contribute to the idea of self government in the i colonies.
4 a explain what caused the french and indian war.
j b evaluate where was the colonial western frontier.
defend the british decision to ban colonists from set tling on the western frontier.
critical thinking 5 summarizing review your notes on the developments in the colonies during the late 1600s to mid 1700s.
then add a box to the bottom of your chart in which you briefly summarize how the colonies grew and changed during the period as well as the challenges they faced.
development effects establishment of local government political change in england trade laws great awakening enlightenment french and indian war t j how the colonies grew and changed and challenges faced 6 reviewing the information this section focused on what life was like in all the english colonies discussed so far.
does this information give you any new ideas about the colony you ll use in your infomercial.
the english colonies 97 history and geography as you have read life differed from colony to colony.
the colonies were created with very different goals in mind.
many of the northern colonies were established with the goal of providing religious freedom to the people who lived there.
many of the middle and southern colonies were founded by companies and individual colonists who hoped to make a profit on the resources found there.
eventually however the northern colonies also became centers of business activity.
new england colonies middle colonies southern colonies 100 200 miles 100 200 kilometers 7a chapter 4 identify the main ideas of the paragraphs you are reading.
the american revolution 111 what you will learn the revolution begins if you were there 1 the first continental congress demanded certain rights from great britain.
2 armed conflict between british soldiers and colonists broke out with the shot heard round the world.
3 the second continental congress created the continental army to fight the british.
4 in two early battles the army lost control of boston but then regained it.
u you are a member of the british parliament in the 1770s.
some members say that the americans are defying the king.
others point out that the colonists are british citizens who have certain rights.
now the king must decide to punish the rebellious colonists or listen to their complaints.
what advice would you give the king.
sthebigldea b the tensions between the colonies and great britain led to armed conflict in 1775.
j key terms and people first continental congress p 112 patriots p 113 minutemen p 114 redcoats p 114 second continental congress p 114 continental army p 114 george washington p 114 battle of bunker hill p 115 use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the events that occurred in the early days of the american revolution.
i building background taxes and harsh new laws led some colonists to protest againstthe british.
in some places the protests i turned violent.
the british government refused to listen ignoring the i colonists demands for more rights.
that setthe stage for war.
first continental congress to many colonists the closing of boston harbor was the final insult in a long list of abuses.
in response to the mounting crisis all the colonies except georgia sent representatives to a meeting in october 1774 this meeting known as the first continental congress was a gathering of colonial leaders who were deeply troubled about the relationship between great britain and its colonies in america.
at carpenters hall in philadelphia the leaders remained locked in weeks of intense debate.
patrick henry and others believed that violence was unavoidable.
on the other hand delegates from pennsylvania and new york had strict orders to seek peace.
wisely the delegates compromised.
they encouraged colonists to continue boycotting british goods but told colonial militias to prepare for war.
meanwhile they drafted the declaration of rights a list of 10 resolutions to be presented to king george iii.
included was the colonists right to life liberty and property.
the first continental congress did not seek a separation from britain.
its goal was to state the colonists concerns and ask the king to correct the problems.
but before they left philadelphia the delegates agreed to meet in 1775 if the king refused their petition.
patrick henry returned from the congress and reported to his fellow virginians.
to encourage them to support the patriot cause chapter 4 african and native americans the declaration did not recognize the rights of enslaved africans either.
the authors had compared life under british rule to living as an enslaved people.
the obvious question arose why did any form of slavery exist in a land that valued personal freedom.
even thomas jefferson the main author of the declaration was a slaveholder.
in july 1776 slavery was legal in all the colonies.
by the 1780s the new england colonies were taking steps to end slavery.
even so the conflict over slavery continued long after the revolutionary war.
the declaration of independence also did not address the rights of native americans to life liberty or property.
despite the proclamation of 1763 american colonists had been quietly settling on lands that belonged to native americans.
this tendency to disregard the rights of native americans would develop into a pattern after the colonists won their independence from great britain.
reading check finding main ideas what groups were unrepresented in the declaration of independence.
i summary and preview in 1776 the i colonists declared their independence.
to achieve their goal however they would have to win a war against the british army.
in the next section you will learn about some of the battles of the revolutionary war.
for a time it seemed as if the british would defeat the colonists.
section 2 assessmen online quiz is reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify who was thomas paine.
b make inferences why do you thinkthomas paine originally published common sense anonymously.
c elaborate do you think that most colonists would have supported independence from britain without thomas paine s publication of common sensei explain.
2 a identify what two sides emerged in response to the declaration of independence.
what did each side favor.
b explain what arguments did the authors of the declaration of independence give for declaring the colonies free from british control.
c predict define and give some examples of unalienable rights.
how might some groups use the declaration of independence in the future to gain rights.
3 a identify who urged her husband to remember the ladies.
b making inferences why did the authors of the declaration of independence fail to address the rights of women native americans and african americans in the document.
critical thinking 4 analyzing review your notes on the declaration of independence.
then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to identify three results of the declaration of independence.
declaration of 1.
2 independence 3.
writesmart gathering ideas about the declaration of independence you are living at the time of the american revolution.
what is new and surprising about the colonists actions.
in one or two minutes what is the most important thing you can say about the colonies declaring independence.
the american revolution 121 1 thomas jefferson wrote the first draft of the declaration in a little more than two weeks.
how is the declaration s idea about why governments are formed still important to our country today.
exploring thedocument vocabulary impel force endowed provided usurpations wrongful seizures of power evinces clearly displays f despotism unlimited power tyranny oppressive power exerted by a government 1 or ruler i candid fair i here the declaration lists the charges that the colonists had against king george iii.
how does the language in the list appeal to people s emotions.
exploring thedocument the declaration of independence in congress july 4 1776 the unanimous declaration of the thirteen united states of america when in the course of human events it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another and to assume among the powers of the earth the separate and equal station to which the laws of nature and of nature s god entitle them a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it and to institute new government laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness.
prudence indeed will dictate that governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes and accordingly all experience hath shown that mankind are more disposed to suffer while evils are sufferable than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed.
but when a long train of abuses and usurpations pursuing invariably the same object evinces a design to reduce them under absolute despotism it is their right it is their duty to throw off such government and to provide new guards for their future security such has been the patient sufferance of these colonies and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former systems of government.
the history of the present king of great britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over these states.
to prove this let facts be submitted to a candid world.
he has refused his assent to laws the most wholesome and necessary for the public good.
he has forbidden his governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing importance unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be obtained and when so suspended he has utterly neglected to attend to them.
he has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of people unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in the legislature a right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only.
he has called together legislative bodies at places unusual uncomfortable and distant from the depository of their public records for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.
he has dissolved representative houses repeatedly for opposing with manly firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.
he has refused for a long time after such dissolutions to cause others to be elected whereby the legislative powers incapable of annihilation have returned to the people at large for their exercise the state remaining in the mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without and convulsions within.
he has endeavored to prevent the population of these states for that purpose obstructing the laws of naturalization of foreigners refusing to pass others to encourage their migration hither and raising the conditions of new appropriations of lands.
he has obstructed the administration of justice by refusing his assent to laws for establishing judiciary powers.
he has made judges dependent on his will alone for the tenure of their offices and the amount and payment of their salaries.
he has erected a multitude of new offices and sent hither swarms of officers to harass our people and eat out their substance.
he has kept among us in times of peace standing armies without the consent of our legislature.
he has affected to render the military independent of and superior to the civil power.
he has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution and unacknowledged by our laws giving his assent to their acts of pretended legislation for quartering large bodies of armed troops among us for protecting them by a mock trial from punishment for any murders which they should commit on the inhabitants of these states j vocabulary relinquish release yield inestimable priceless formidable causing dread annihilation destruction convulsions violent disturbances naturalization of foreigners the process by which foreign born persons become citizens i appropriations of lands i setting aside land for i settlement i tenure term a multitude of many quartering lodging housing mum bett a massachusetts slave believed that the words all men are created equal should apply to her and other enslaved africans.
she successfully sued for her freedom in 1781 for cutting off our trade with all parts of the world for imposing taxes on us without our consent for depriving us in many cases of the benefits of trial by jury vocabulary arbitrary not based on law render make abdicated given up foreign mercenaries soldiers hired to fight for a country not their own perfidy violation of trust insurrections rebellions petitioned for redress asked formally for a correction of wrongs unwarrantable jurisdiction unjustified authority magnanimity generous spirit conjured urgently called upon consanguinity common ancestry acquiesce consent to here the declaration calls the king a tyrant.
what do you think tyrant means in this passage.
exploring the document for transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offences for abolishing the free system of english laws in a neighboring province establishing therein an arbitrary government and enlarging its boundaries so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule into these colonies for taking away our charters abolishing our most valuable laws and altering fundamentally the forms of our governments for suspending our own legislature and declaring themselves invested with power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.
he has abdicated government here by declaring us out of his protection and waging war against us.
he has plundered our seas ravaged our coasts burnt our towns and destroyed the lives of our people.
he is at this time transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to complete the works of death desolation and tyranny already begun with circumstances of cruelty perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.
he has constrained our fellow citizens taken captive on the high seas to bear arms against their country to become the executioners of their friends and brethren or to fall themselves by their hands.
he has excited domestic insurrections amongst us and has endeavored to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless indian savages whose known rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages sexes and conditions.
in every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in the most humble terms our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated injury.
a prince whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a tyrant is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.
nor have we been wanting in attention to our british brethren.
we have warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us.
we have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here.
we have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to disavow these usurpations which would inevitably interrupt our connections and correspondence.
they too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity.
we must therefore acquiesce in the necessity which denounces our separation and hold them as we hold the rest of mankind enemies in war in peace friends.
we therefore the representatives of the united states of america in general congress assembled appealing to the supreme judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions do in the name and by authority of the good people of these colonies solemnly publish and declare that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states that they are absolved from all allegiance to the british crown and that all political connection between them and the state of great britain is and ought to be totally dissolved and that as free and independent states they have full power to levy war conclude peace contract alliances establish commerce and to do all other acts and things which independent states may of right do.
and for the support of this declaration with a firm reliance on the protection of divine providence we mutually pledge to each other our lives our fortunes and our sacred honor.
vocabulary rectitude rightness here is where the document declares the independence of the colonies.
whose authority does the congress use to declare independence.
exploring thedocument john hancock button gwinnett lyman hall george walton william hooper joseph hewes john penn edward rutledge thomas heyward jr thomas lynch jr arthur middleton samuel chase william paca thomas stone charles carroll of carrollton george wythe richard henry lee thomas jefferson benjamin harrison thomas nelson jr francis lightfoot lee carter braxton robert morris benjamin rush benjamin franklin john morton george clymer james smith george taylor james wilson george ross caesar rodney george read thomas mckean william floyd philip livingston francis lewis lewis morris richard stockton john witherspoon francis hopkinson john hart abraham clark josiah bartlett william whipple samuel adams john adams robert treat paine elbridge gerry stephen hopkins william ellery roger sherman samuel huntington william williams oliver wolcott matthew thornton exploring the document the congress adopted the final draft of the declaration of independence on july 4 1776 a formal copy written on parchment paper was signed on august 2 1776 from whom did the declaration s signers receive their authority to declare independence.
the following is part of a passage that the congress removed from jefferson s original draft he has waged cruel war against human nature itself violating its most sacred rights of life and liberty in the persons of a distant people who never offended him captivating and carrying them into slavery in another hemisphere or to incur miserable death in their transportation thither.
why do you think the congress deleted this passage.
section 3 teks 2a 4b 4c ioc 22b 25b what you will learn many americans supported the war effort.
the patriots both won and lost battles during the years 1775 1777 france and spain helped the patriots fight the british.
the winter at valley forge tested the strength of patriot troops.
the war continued at sea and in the west.
t the big idea patriot forces faced many obstacles in the war against britain.
key terms and people mercenaries p 128 battle of trenton p 129 battle of saratoga p 130 marquis de lafayette p 131 baron friedrich von steuben p 131 bernardo de galvez p 131 john paul jones p 133 george rogers clark p 133 i use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the early years of the american revolution.
the struggle for if you were there you are a serving maid at an inn in new york city.
british soldiers often stop at the inn for a meal.
you sometimes overhear their conversations though they don t notice you.
now a patriot leader has asked you to bring him any information you hear.
you want to help the patriot cause but wonder what will happen if you are caught spying.
would you agree to spy for the patriots.
building background many colonists struggled for the patriot cause.
men women and children all made important contributions.
they fought kept farms and shops running and provided food and supplies.
in spite of their efforts winning the war was a great challenge.
supporting the war effort george washington s chief task as the continental army s commander in chief was to raise troops.
during the war more than 230 000 soldiers served in the continental army and another 145 000 enlisted in local militias.
the typical soldier was young often under the legal age of 16 and had little money or property.
the army offered low pay harsh conditions and a big chance of becoming a casualty.
yet the patriots knew they were fighting for their homes and their freedom.
finding and keeping dedicated soldiers would be a constant challenge throughout the war.
in time the continental congress required states to supply soldiers.
men who could afford it often paid others such as slaves or apprentices to fight in their places.
one question facing general washington was whether to recruit african americans.
many white southerners opposed the idea and at first washington banned african americans from serving.
when the british promised freedom to any slave who fought on their side however thousands of african americans joined the redcoats.
26 chapter texas test practice directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 what action would a loyalist have been likely to take during the revolution.
a attend the continental congress b support the olive branch petition c support the declaration of independence d join the continental army 2 which of the following events took place last.
f the declaration of independence was issued.
g the second continental congress met.
h the battles at lexington and concord occurred.
j the battle of bunker hill took place.
3 why was the victory at the battle of saratoga so important to the patriot cause.
a it allowed the declaration of independence to be issued.
b it forced the british army to retreat from boston.
c it convinced france to aid the colonies in their fight.
d it caused the british government to give up the war.
4 the most brutal and destructive fighting of the war probably occurred f in the southern colonies.
g at valley forge.
h in new england.
j at lexington and concord.
5 the declaration of independences claim that people have a right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness shows the influence of what enlightenment thinker from europe.
a jonathan edwards b john locke c king george iii d thomas paine 6 in what way was clarks battle strategy the same as john paul joness strategy.
f they both were badly outnumbered by the british.
g they both knew the colonial midwest region well.
h they both aimed to weaken the british by attacking their supply lines.
j they both survived the winter at valley forge.
7 read the following passage from thomas paines the crisis and use it to answer the question below.
these are the times that try mens souls.
the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the service of his country but he that stands it now deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.
tyranny is not easily conquered yet we have this consolation with us that the harder the conflict the more glorious the triumph.
thomas paine the crisis 1776 document based question what point is paine trying to make in this passage.
the american revolution 143 h multimedia connections history i s revolution the american revolution 143 mc2 assignment write a biographical narrative about a person who lived in the early americas before or during the colonial period.
a biographical narrative you have been listening to and telling narratives all your life.
a biographical narrative a form of historical writing i is a true story about an event or brief period in a person s life.
1 asking questions try using i the 5i 1 how questions who.
to help you think of descriptive details.
ask questions such as who was this person.
what was he or she doing.
exactly where and when did the event occur.
how did the person or other people react to the event.
1 prewrite getting started think of all the people you read about in this unit.
which ones interested you most.
what particular events and situations in these people s lives seem most exciting or significant.
pick one of these events or situations as the subject of your narrative.
creating an interesting narrative make your narrative lively and interesting by including physical descriptions of people places and things using details that appeal to the five senses sight hearing touch smell taste specific actions that relate directly to the story you are telling dialogue between the people involved or direct quotations background information about the place customs and setting all relevant details and information needed to relate the events of the story and how they affected the person and perhaps history organize the events in your narrative in chronological order the order in which they occurred.
2 write you can use this framework to help you draft your narrative.
a writer s framework introduction grab your reader s attention with a striking detail or bit of dialogue.
introduce the historical person and setting using specific details.
set the scene by telling how the event or situation began.
body present actions and details in the order in which they occurred.
connect actions with transition words like first then next and finally.
provide specific details to make the person and the situation come alive.
conclusion wrap up the action of the narrative.
tell how the person was affected by what happened.
explain how the event or situation was important in the persons life and how it affected history.
14 unit1 3 evaluate and revise evaluating read through your completed draft to make sure your narrative is complete coherent and clear.
then look for ways to improve it.
evaluation questions for a biographical narrative does your introduction grab the reader s attention.
do you introduce the historical person and tell how i the event or situation began.
s do you include details to make the person place and event seem real.
i are the actions in the story in the order in which they occurred.
have you included all of the actions and details a reader would need to understand what happened.
does the conclusion tell how the event or situation affected the person and history.
showing sequence a clear sense of the sequence of events is important in any narrative.
here is a list of words that show those after next before now finally soon first still second etc.
then last when later while revising when you revise your narrative you may need to add transition words.
transition words help you link ideas between sentences and paragraphs.
notice the words in bold in the following sentences.
after cabeza de vaca and the other adventurers left the beach and started inland they separated into different groups.
later cabeza de vaca heard that many of the others had died.
still he never lost faith that he would reach his fellow spaniards in mexico.
4 proofread and publish proofreading throughout your narrative you used transition words to link events.
make sure that you have spelled the words correctly and have not confused them with other words.
for example be sure to use two l s in finally and not to mistake the transition word then for the comparative word than.
publishing one good way to share your biographical narrative is to exchange it with one or more classmates who have written about the same person you have.
after reading each other s narratives you can compare and contrast them.
how are your stories similar.
how do they differ.
writesmart use mywritesmartto create share and revise your paper.
5 practice and apply use the steps and strategies outlined in this workshop to write your biographical narrative.
our colonial heritage 145 the big idea americans carried on a vigorous debate before ratifying the constitution.
vwritesmart a newspaper editorial it is 1788 and you re writing an editorial for a local newspaper.
you want to convince your readers that the new constitution will be much better than the old articles of confederation.
in this chapter 5 or no real value because states did not have gold or silver reserves to back it up.
inflation occurs when there are increased prices for goods and services combined with the reduced value of money.
congress had no power to stop states from issuing more paper money and thus stop inflation.
weak economy in rhode island the state legislature printed large amounts of paper money worth very little.
this made debtors people who owe money quite happy.
they could pay back their debts with paper money worth less than the coins they had borrowed.
however creditors people who lend money were upset.
hundreds of creditors fled rhode island to avoid being paid back with worthless money.
the loss of trade with britain combined with inflation created a depression.
a depression is a period of low economic activity combined with a rise in unemployment.
reading check summarizing what economic problems did the new nation face.
shays s rebellion each state handled its economic problems differently.
massachusetts refused to print worthless paper money.
it tried to pay its war debts by collecting taxes on land.
heavy debts for farmers massachusetts s tax policy hit farmers hard.
as landowners they had to pay the new taxes.
however farmers had trouble paying their debts.
the courts began forcing them to sell their property.
some farmers had to serve terms in debtors prison others had to sell their labor.
many government leaders in the state did not care about the problems of poor farmers however.
in some cases farmers actually owed these leaders money.
farmers rebel in august 1786 farmers in three western counties began a revolt.
bands of angry citizens closed down courts in western massachusetts.
their reasoning was simple with the courts shut down no one s property could be taken.
in september a poor farmer and revolutionary war veteran daniel shays led hundreds of men in a forced shutdown of the supreme court in springfield massachusetts.
the state government ordered the farmers to stop the revolt under threat of capture and death.
these threats only made sh i nd his followers more determined.
the of farmers to protest high taxes anc debt became known as shays s rebellion.
shays s defeat shays s forces were defeated by state troops in january 1787 by february many of the rebels were in prison.
during their trials 14 leaders were sentenced to death.
however the state soon freed most of the rebels including shays.
state officials knew that many citizens of the state agreed with the rebels and their cause.
reading check shays s rebellion 71 finding main ideas what led to shays s rebellion.
forming a government 161 calls for change weaknesses of the articles of confederation most power held by states one branch of government delegates were late and missed the meeting.
connecticut georgia maryland and south carolina did not respond to the request at all and sent no delegates.
because of the poor attendance the participants including james madison and alexander hamilton called on all 13 states to send delegates to a constitutional convention in philadelphia in may 1787 they planned to revise the articles of confederation to better meet the needs of the nation.
the failure of the articles of confederation led to the creation of the constitution and began the period of the early republic.
this period would last until 1800 when the political system we know today became more established.
finding main ideas why did some people believe the national government needed to change.
in the end shays s rebellion showed the weakness of the confederation government.
it led some americans to admit that the articles of confederation had failed to protect the ideals of liberty set forth in the declaration of independence.
when massachusetts had asked the national government to help put down shays s rebellion congress could offer little help.
more americans began calling for a stronger central government.
they wanted leaders who legislative branch has few powers no executive branch no judicial system no system of checks and balances would be able to protect the nation in times of crisis.
earlier in 1786 the virginia legislature had called for a national conference.
it wanted to talk about economic problems and ways to change the articles of confederation.
the meeting took place in annapolis maryland in september 1786 nine states decided to send delegates to the annapolis convention but some of their reading check.
i summary and preview many ameri i cans believed that shays s rebellion was final proof that the national government needed to be changed.
in the next section you will read about the constitutional convention.
section 2 assessment online quiz reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a summarize what problems did the united i states experience with spain and great britain.
i b predict what are some possible results of the t growing problems between the united states and great britain.
why was access to the mississippi i so important for americans.
f 2 a describe what difficulties were involved with interstate commerce.
i b analyze what was the cause of inflation in the new nation and how could it have been prevented.
3 a explain how did massachusetts s tax policy affect farmers.
b evaluate defend the actions of daniel shays and the other rebels.
4 a recall why did madison and hamilton call for a constitutional convention.
t b analyze how did shays s rebellion lead to a call for change in the united states.
i i 2 chapter you will learn about the structure of the constitution.
in 1789 madison suggested an amendment limiting congress s power over its own salary.
although congress proposed the amendment in 1789 it was not ratified until 1992 section 4 assessment i hmhsocialstudies com reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify who were the federalists and the antifederalists.
b draw conclusions what arguments did the federalists make for ratification of the constitution.
what was the main argument of the antifederalists against the constitution.
2 a recall when did the constitution go into effect.
b draw conclusions why was it important that all 13 states ratify the constitution.
c elaborate do you think that the federalist papers played an essential role in the ratification of the constitution.
explain your answer.
3 a recall why did congress add the bill of rights.
b explain from where did legislators ideas for the bill of rights come.
c elaborate do you think the process for amending the constitution is too difficult.
explain your position.
critical thinking 4 analyzing review your notes on federalist and antifederalist views.
then identify the outcome of the debate in a graphic organizer like the one below.
be sure to mention the bill of rights.
5 organizing your evidence in this section you learned how the bill of rights was an important addition to the constitution.
you now have all your evidence about the difference between the articles of confederation and the constitution.
choose two or three of the most important points and prepare to defend the constitution just like alexander hamilton and james madison did in the federalist papers.
forming a government 173 social studies skills analysis 1 critical thinking civic participation study determining different points of view define the skill a point of view is a person s outlook or attitude.
it is the way that he or she looks at a topic or thing.
each person s point of view is shaped by his or her background.
because people s backgrounds are different their points of view are too.
since a person s point of view shapes his or her opinions knowing that point of view helps you understand and evaluate those opinions.
being able to detect differences in point of view is important to understanding differences in people s opinions and actions in history.
learn the skill when you encounter someone s beliefs opinions or actions in your study of history use the following guidelines to determine his or her point of view.
1 look for information about the person s background.
2 ask yourself what factors in the person s background might have influenced his or her opinion or action concerning the topic or event.
3 be aware that sometimes the person s opinions or actions themselves will provide clues to his or her point of view.
benjamin lincoln led the troops that put down shays s rebellion in massachusetts.
he was also a state politician and a general during the revolution.
lincoln offered this explanation of shays s uprising.
among the main causes i rank the ease with which credit was obtained in the time of the revolution the moment the day arrived when all discovered that things were fast returning to normal and that the indolent lazy persons and improvident unwise persons would soon experience the evils of their idleness and sloth many startled panicked and complained ofthe weight of public taxes and at the cruelty of creditors those to whom money is owed to call for their just dues rightful payment the disaffected unhappy people attempted to stop the courts of law and to suspend the operations of government.
this they hoped to do until an end should thereby be put to public and private debts lincoln s background as a general state official and leader against the rebels likely gave him a negative point of view on the revolt.
his reference to the rebels as lazy and unwise also provides clues to his attitude.
you should weigh such factors when evaluating the accuracy of his statement.
practice the skill the following statement about shays s rebellion came from a massachusetts farmer.
read it and apply the guidelines to answer the questions.
1 have labored hard all my days.
i have been obliged to do more than my part in the revolution been loaded with rates taxes have been abused by sheriffs and debt collectors i have lost a great deal t he great men are going to get all we have and i think it is time for us to put a stop to it.
1 from what point of view is this person commenting on the revolt.
what is his opinion of it.
2 how does his view of himself differ from lincoln s view of people like him.
3 is this view of the revolt likely to be more accurate than lincoln s view.
why or why not.
i chapter 6 the ideas spelled out in the first amendment form the most basic rights of all u s citizens.
these rights include freedom of religion freedom of the press freedom of speech freedom of assembly and the right to petition.
in the spirit of thomas jefferson s virginia statute for religious freedom the first amendment begins congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.
in other words the government cannot support or interfere with the practice of a religion.
this amendment keeps the government from favoring one religion over any other or establishing an official religion.
the first amendment also guarantees freedom of speech and of the press.
this means that americans have the right to express their own ideas and views.
they also have the right to hear the ideas and views of others.
former senator margaret chase smith discussed why these freedoms are important.
the key to security she once said is public information.
freedom of speech does not mean that people can say anything they want to how 1 amendment i congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
the constitution does not protect slander false statements meant to damage someone s reputation.
libel or intentionally writing a lie that harms another person is not protected either.
the supreme court has also ruled that speech that endangers public safety is not protected.
for example justice oliver wendell holmes declared in 1919 that falsely shouting fire in a crowded theater is not protected as free speech.
americans also have freedom of assembly.
any group may gather peacefully.
as long as they do not engage in illegal activities the government cannot interfere.
the right to petition or make a request of the government is another right of the american people.
any american can present a petition to a government official.
this right lets americans show dissatisfaction with a law.
they can also suggest new laws.
one of the reasons the declaration of independence gave for breaking with britain was king george ill s refusal to respond to petitions sent by colonists.
reading check the impact.
today free speech protection has also been applied to symbolic speech or nonverbal communication that expresses an idea such as wearing a protest button.
summarizing what rights does the first amendment guarantee to americans.
workers use the right of assembly to protest a proposed budget in new york city.
amendment ii a well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.
amendment iii no soldier shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without the consent of the owner nor in time of war but in a manner to be prescribed by law.
amendment iv the right of the people to be secure in their persons houses papers and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated and no warrants shall issue but upon probable cause supported by oath or affirmation and particularly describing the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized.
to having their property searched for illegal goods.
anger over such actions led to the fourth amendment rule against unreasonable searches and seizures.
before a citizen s property can be searched authorities must now get a search warrant.
this order gives authorities permission to search someone s property.
a judge issues this order only when it seems likely that a search might uncover evidence relating to a crime.
in emergencies however police can make an emergency search.
this may preserve evidence needed to prove possible illegal activity.
reading check finding main ideas why were the third and fourth amendments matters of great importance to americans when the bill of rights was written.
protecting citizens the second third and fourth amendments relate to colonial disputes with britain and reflect many of the ideals outlined in the declaration of independence.
the second amendment deals with state militias and the right to bear arms.
colonial militias played a big role in the revolutionary war.
the framers of the constitution thought that the states needed their militias for emergencies.
today the national guard has largely replaced organized state militias.
supporters of gun control laws have generally argued that the second amendment was intended to protect the collective right of states to maintain well regulated militia units.
opponents hold that the amendment was meant to protect an individual s right of self defense.
the meaning of the amendment continues to be debated.
the third amendment prevents the military from forcing citizens to house soldiers.
before the revolution the british pressured colonists to shelter and feed british soldiers a practice colonists protested in the declaration of independence.
british leaders also forced colonists to submit rights of the accused the fifth sixth seventh and eighth amendments provide guidelines for protecting the rights of the accused.
according to the fifth amendment the government cannot punish anyone without due process of law.
this means that the law must be fairly applied.
a grand jury decides if there is enough evidence to indict en dyt or formally accuse a person.
without an indictment the court cannot try anyone for a serious crime.
the fifth amendment also protects people from having to testify at their own criminal trial.
to keep from testifying a person need only take the fifth.
in addition anyone found not guilty in a criminal trial cannot face double jeopardy.
in other words he or she cannot be tried again for the same crime.
the final clause of the fifth amendment states that no one can have property taken without due process of law.
there is one exception the government s power of eminent domain.
this is the power to take personal property to benefit the public.
one example would be taking private land to build a public road.
however the government must pay the owners a fair price for the property.
chapter texas test practice directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 which of the following rights is a right protected in the first amendment.
a the right to bear arms b the right to public education c the right to jury trials d the right to free speech 2 the right of every american to be a member of a political party is an example of f the principle of dual sovereignty.
g the first amendment right to freedom of assembly.
h the principle of majority rule.
j the fifth amendment right to due process of law.
3 obeying laws paying taxes and willingness to serve on a jury are all a methods of gaining u s citizenship.
b duties of u s citizens.
c ways in which citizens can influence their government.
d protected by the second amendment.
4 the first amendment would protect f a reporter that knowingly spreads lies about someone.
g an individual who peacefully protests a government policy.
h an individual who falsely shouts fire in a crowded theater.
j a hunter who keeps a rifle at home.
5 which of the following is an example of a check that the executive branch has on the legislative branch.
a the president may declare laws unconstitutional.
b the vice president serves as president of the senate.
c the president may veto bills passed by congress.
d the president may appoint members of congress.
6 which of the following protects the rights of the accused.
f the guarantee of a speedy trial g the right to vote cannot be denied because of sex h the right to sign a petition j the right to keep and bear arms 7 read the following quote from president lyndon johnson and use it to answer the question below.
z what a president says and thinks is not worth five cents unless he has the people and congress behind him.
without congress im just a six feet four texan.
with congress im president of the united states in the fullest sense.
president lyndon johnson quoted in the macmillan dictionary of political quotations document based question what point about government was president johnson making in this remark.
citizenship and the constitution 229 tne reaerai government writesmart a nobel nomination every year a few people are nominated for a nobel prize for their work to improve the world.
in this chapter ask your teacher or classmates to help you understand them.
1789 george washington becomes the first president.
1789 the french revolution begins.
world chapter 7 you try it.
read the following passage and answer the questions that follow.
economic differences hamilton wanted new forms of economic growth.
he wanted to promote manufacturing and business.
he even suggested that the government award a prize to companies that made excellent products.
in addition hamilton wanted to pass higher tariffs.
known as protective tariffs these taxes would raise the prices of foreign products.
hamilton hoped this would cause americans to buy u s goods.
as a result american manufacturing would be protected from foreign competition.
jefferson worried about depending too much on business and manufacturing.
he believed that farmers were the most independent voters jefferson wanted to help farmers by keeping the costs of the goods they bought low.
lower tariffs would help keep prices low.
after you read the passage answer the following questions.
1 which two questions can be answered directly from the text above and which one requires that you make an inference.
from chapter 7 p 240 241 chapter chapter 8 lowered military spending and reduced the size of the army.
the navy was cut to seven active ships.
jefferson and gallatin hoped that saving this money would allow the government to repay the national debt.
jefferson also asked gallatin to find ways to get rid of domestic taxes like the tax on whiskey.
the democratic republican led congress passed the laws needed to carry out these policies.
the entire national government in 1801 consisted only of several hundred people.
jefferson preferred to keep it that way.
he believed that the primary functions of the federal government were to protect the nation from foreign threats deliver the mail and collect customs duties.
jefferson did recognize that some of the federalist policies such as the creation of the bank of the united states should be kept.
although jefferson had battled hamilton over the bank as president he agreed to leave it in place.
reading check summarizing what policy changes did democratic republicans introduce and which federalist policies did jefferson keep.
marbury v madison although republicans controlled the presi dency and congress federalists dominated the federal judiciary.
in an effort to continue their control over the judiciary federalist legislators passed the judiciary act of 1801 shortly before their terms of office ended.
this act created 16 new federal judgeships that president adams filled with federalists before leaving office.
the republican press called these people midnight judges arguing that adams had packed the judiciary with academic federalists the night before he left office.
functions some of these appointments were made uses or purposes so late that the documents that authorized them had not been delivered by the time adams left office.
this led to controversy once jefferson took office.
william marbury named as a justice of the peace by president adams did not receive his documents before adams left office.
when jefferson took office marburydemandedthedocuments.
on jefferson s advice however the new secretary of state james madison refused to deliver them.
jefferson argued that the appointment of the midnight judges was not valid.
marbury v madison 1803 background of the case shortly before thomas jefferson took office john adams had appointed william marbury to be a justice of the peace.
adams had signed marbury s commission but it was never delivered.
marbury sued to force madison to give him the commission.
the court s ruling the court ruled that the law marbury based his claim on was unconstitutional.
the court s reasoning the judiciary act of 1789 gave the supreme court the authority to hear a wide variety of cases including those like marbury s.
but the supreme court ruled that congress did not have the power to make such a law.
because the constitution limits the types of cases the supreme court can hear.
thus the law was in conflict with the constitution and had to be struck down.
why it matters marburyv.
madison was important for several reasons.
it confirmed the supreme court s power to declare acts of congress unconstitutional.
by doing so it established the court as the final authority on the constitution.
this helped make the judicial branch of government equal to the other two branches.
chief justice john marshall and later federal judges would use this power of judicial review as a check on the legislative and executive branches.
a na lys i s skill analyzing information i 1 what do you think it means to be the final authority on the constitution.
2 how did marburyv.
madison affect the constitution s system of checks and balances.
the jefferson era 269 marbury brought suit asking the supreme court to order madison to deliver the papers.
marbury claimed that the judiciary act of 1789 gave the court the power to do so.
john marshall a federalist appointed by john adams was the chief justice of the court.
marshall and president jefferson disagreed about many political issues.
when marshall agreed to hear marbury s case jefferson protested saying that the federalists have retired into the judiciary as a stronghold.
marshall wrote the court s opinion in marbury v madison a case that helped establish the supreme court s power to check the power of the other branches of government.
the constitution marshall noted gave the court authority to hear only certain types of cases.
a request like marbury s was not one of them.
the law that marbury s case depended upon was therefore unconstitutional.
in denying marbury s request in this way the court avoided a direct confrontation with jefferson s administration.
but more impor john marshall tant it established the court s power of judicial review the power to declare an act of congress unconstitutional.
marshall and later federal judges would use this power to make the judiciary a much stronger part of the national government.
under marshall s leadership the court gained additional power by beginning to issue only one decision in a case.
in british courts each justice provided a separate decision.
the system of one decision gave the courts more authority.
in response to marbury jefferson urged congress to impeach justice samuel chase.
the congress held the impeachment trial but chase was acquitted.
analyzing information why was marburyv.
madison an important ruling.
summary and preview a peaceful i transfer of power took place after the election of 1800 in the next section you will read about the louisiana purchase.
reading check section 1 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what were the political parties in the election of 1800 and who were their candidates.
b analyze why was the election of 1800 significant.
what years made up the era of the early republic.
what caused the early republic to form and what were some of its effects.
2 a describe what ideas for government did thomas jefferson stress in his inaugural address.
b compare and contrast what similarities and differences did jefferson s republican government have with the previous federalist one.
c elaborate defend jefferson s preference for keeping the national government small.
3 a identify how did john marshall help lead the new nation.
b draw conclusions why is the power of judicial review important.
c predict how might the marbury v madison ruling affect future actions by congress.
how might it affect the lives of americans.
critical thinking 4 categorizing review your notes on jefferson s beliefs and policies.
then copy the graphic organizer below and show how jefferson brought change through his policies.
jefferson as president federalist policies republican policies 5 gathering ideas about a person s accomplishments look back through what you have just read to see what you have learned about jefferson s decisions in office.
make a list of the traits you think each decision shows in jefferson.
the jefferson era 283 4 the cmf 1812 section gsg teks 5a 5c 5d 5e 13a 14b 20c 22b what you will learn.
american forces held their own against the british in the early battles of the war.
u s forces stopped british offensives in the east and south.
the effects of the war included prosperity and national pride.
if you were there it s 1812 and the united states and great britain are at war.
you are a sailor on an american merchant ship that has been licensed as a privateer.
your ship s mission will be to chase and capture ships of the mighty british navy.
even with the help of merchant ships like yours the american navy is badly outnumbered.
you know you face danger and may not survive.
do you think your mission will succeed.
great britain and the united states went to battle in the war of 1812 key terms and people oliver hazard perry p 285 battle of lake erie p 285 andrew jackson p 286 treaty of fort jackson p 286 battle of new orleans p 286 hartford convention p 287 treaty of ghent p 287 i taking notes i use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the sequence of events in the war of 1812 from beginning to end.
i building background anger against great britain s actions i finally provoked the united states into the war of 1812 britains great navy gave it a clear advantage at sea but the war was also fought on i several other fronts.
victories in major battles along the frontier gave j americans a new sense of unity.
early battles in the summer of 1812 the united states found itself in a war with one of the world s most powerful nations.
despite the claims by the war hawks the war of 1812 would not be a quick and easy fight.
war at sea when the war began the british navy had hundreds of ships.
in contrast the u s navy had fewer than 20 ships.
none of them was as powerful as the greatest british warships.
most of the british navy s ships however were scattered around the globe.
although small the u s navy had well trained sailors and powerful new warships such as the uss constitution.
american vessels defeated british ships several times in one on one duels.
such victories embarrassed the british and raised american morale.
eventually the british ships blockaded america s seaports.
battles along the canadian border american leaders hoped to follow up victories at sea with an overland invasion of canada.
three attacks were planned from detroit from niagara falls and from up the hudson river valley toward montreal.
chapter and make a generalization about it.
social studies skills wcehtuity historical context use the social studies skills taught in this chapter 9 look for exam j pies of text arranged as comparisons and contrasts.
chapter 9 the doctrine was issued by the president on december 2 1823 during his annual message to congress.
the monroe doctrine had four basic points.
1 the united states would not interfere in the affairs of european nations.
2 the united states would recognize and not interfere with european colonies that already existed in north and south america.
3 the western hemisphere was to be off limits to future colonization by any foreign power.
4 the united states would consider any european power s attempt to colonize or interfere with nations in the western hemisphere to be a hostile act.
some europeans strongly criticized the monroe doctrine but few european countries challenged it.
one impact of the doctrine was to bring latin america under the economic political and military influ ence of the united states.
it also kept most european powers from interfering in latin american affairs.
the doctrine has remained important to u s foreign policy.
the united states has continued to consider latin america within its sphere of influence the area a nation claims some control over.
at times it has intervened in latin american affairs when its own interests such as national security were at risk.
analyzing what effect did the revolutions in latin america have on u s foreign policy.
reading check summary you leam and preview in this section d that u s foreign policy was characterized by both compromise and strong leadership following the war of 1812 in the next section you will learn about the sense of national pride that developed as the united states grew and expanded.
section 1 assessment i j reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what issues were settled between the united states and great britain in 1817 and 1818.
which areas did these decisions affect.
b make inferences why would the united states and britain agree to occupy the pacific northwest together.
c elaborate why were the rush bagot agreement and the convention of 1818 compromises.
2 a recall what problems existed between spain and the united states.
b analyze why was the adams onls treaty important.
what area did it affect.
c evaluate do you think that andrew jackson was right to act without orders.
explain your answer.
3 a explain what did the monroe doctrine state.
explain its impact.
b contrast how did the monroe doctrine differ from adams s fourth of july address.
c elaborate what do you think the newly independent latin american countries thought of the monroe doctrine.
critical thinking 4 identifying cause and effect review your notes regarding u s foreign policy issues.
create a new chart and for each issue identify the nations involved the agreement or doctrine and the effects or impact.
nations agreement doctrine issue effects impact 5 determining relationships one ofthe main ways you can learn about someone s character is by how he or she treats others.
start a list of words and phrases that describe how the united states acted in relationships with other nations.
for example lists might include words and phrases like willing to compromise and firm.
a new national identity 301 2 section teks 1a 5a 5b 5c 6a 7a 7d 10b 11a 11b 12a 12d 13a 14b 18a 18b 18c 21a 22b 27b what you will learn 1 growing nationalism led to improvements in the nations transportation systems.
2 the missouri compromise settled an important regional conflict.
3 the outcome of the election of 1824 led to controversy.
a rising sense of national unity allowed some regional differences to be set aside and national interests to be served.
key terms and people nationalism p 302 american system p 302 henry clay p 302 cumberland road p 304 erie canal p 304 era of good feelings p 305 sectionalism p 305 missouri compromise p 305a john quincy adams p 305b wtakinq notes i use the graphic organizer online to take notes on factors that contributed to national unity.
if you were there you live near the western end of the newly completed erie canal in 1831 in fact your older brothers helped build the canal.
everyday you watch as mules pull the canal boats along the still water of the canal.
sometimes the boats carry passengers traveling from city to city.
you have never been far from your home and you are curious about their journey.
what would you ask the travelers.
bding background peace prosperity and a growing country americans a sense of national unity.
in practical terms building and canals also helped unify the nation.
they made travel easier linking people from different regions of the country.
nevertheless some i regional conflicts continued.
growing nationalism pleased by successful negotiations with foreign powers americans enjoyed a rising sense of nationalism.
nationalism is feelings of pride in and loyalty to a nation.
americans believed in the nation s potential to build a society that was equal to european powers.
the american system the democratic republicans wanted to build a strong national economy to promote the sense of a unified country and reduce sectional conflicts.
they pushed forward a plan eventually known as the american system a series of measures intended to make the united states economically self sufficient.
the most vocal supporter of the plan was u s representative henry clay from kentucky.
to build the economy clay pushed for a national bank that would provide a single currency making interstate trade easier.
and the lessons learned in the war of 1812 led many to think that a national bank would stabilize the economy.
clay wanted the money from a protective tariff to be used to improve and build roads and canals.
02 chapter 9 economics and sectionalism industry and favored policies that made imported goods more expensive than american made goods.
these internal improvements would unite the country.
they would provide a way for both goods and people to travel more easily across the long distances of the nation.
agricultural products of the west and the south and manufactured goods made in the north would be easier to transport to distant markets.
not everyone agreed with the plan however.
most of the resistance was centered in the west and the south.
these regions were more dependent on trade to acquire manufactured goods than the north was.
the plan for a high tariff on imported manufactured goods resulted in higher prices for these goods.
this increase in prices would be felt more in the west and the south while benefiting the manufacturers in the north.
clay responded with the argument that the north would be dependent on those regions for food and cotton.
the south however still opposed the possibility of higher prices.
respected congressman daniel webster spoke against the tariff because he believed it would help one industry over others.
webster and his supporters argued that using a federal law that benefited one region of the nation more than others violated the ideals results american made goods were cheaper leading to higher sales and great profits for u s businesses.
iron and cotton would be used by u s businesses instead of foreign businesses.
american businesses would receive help in order to expand.
trade within the nation would increase.
the west produced many food crops and favored policies that encouraged trade and lower prices on goods.
the south exported enormous amounts of cotton and favored policies that allowed them to trade with european textile manufacturers.
a new national identity 303 of the constitution.
they also believed that it put too much control of the nation in the hands of the central government and acted against the principles of a free market economy.
some members of congress believed that the constitution did not permit the federal government to spend money on internal improvements.
clay argued that the possible gains for the country justified federal action.
roads and canals in the early 1800s most roads in the united states were made of dirt making travel difficult.
british actress frances kemble described one new york road she had struggled along during a visit in the 1830s.
the wickedest road i do think the cruellest hard heartedest road that ever a wheel rumbled upon frances anne kemble butler journal to improve the nation s roads congress agreed with clay and invested in road building.
the cumberland road was the first road built by the federal government.
it ran from cumberland maryland to wheeling a town on the ohio river in present day west virginia.
construction began in 1815 workers had to cut a 66 foot wide band sometimes through forest to make way for the road.
then they had to use shovels and pickaxes to dig a 12 to 18 inch roadbed which they filled with crushed stone.
all of the work had to be done without the benefit of today s bulldozers and steamrollers.
by 1818 the road reached wheeling.
by 1833 the national road as the expansion was called stretched to columbus ohio.
by 1850 it reached all the way to illinois.
meanwhile americans tried to make water transportation easier by building canals.
one of the largest projects was the erie canal which ran from albany to buffalo new york.
construction of the canal began in 1817 and was completed in 1825 using shovels british german and irish immigrants dug the entire canal by hand.
the canal cost millions of dollars but it proved to be worth the expense.
the erie canal allowed goods and people to move between towns on lake erie and new york city and the east coast.
its success served as an incentive for a canal building boom across the country.
the construction of canals and roads had direct and indirect effects on the environment.
the landscape was changed by the clearing of forests and rivers and streams were redirected or dammed.
once the canals and roads were built new farms and towns developed and further changed the environment.
even in rural areas the natural environment was changed to accommodate the needs of humans.
era of good feelings from 1815 to 1825 the united states enjoyed the era of good feelings a time of peace pride and progress.
the phrase was coined by a boston editor in 1817 during james monroe s visit to new england early in his presidency.
the emphasis on national unity was strengthened by two supreme court case decisions that reinforced the power of the federal government.
in the 1819 case mcculloch v maryland the court asserted the implied powers of congress in allowing for the creation of a national bank.
in the 1824 case gibbons v ogden the court said that the states could not interfere with the power of congress to regulate interstate commerce.
both of these court cases along with others showed the increasing control of the national government over the decisions of state governments.
congress began to make more laws based on the loose interpretation of the necessary and proper clause.
the system of federalism that was framed by the constitution was still debated however and many people disagreed with the growing power of the central government.
reading check drawing inferences how did new roads and canals affect the economy.
the issue of sectionalism even as many americans felt a growing national pride tensions between the three geographic regions of the nation began to grow.
the three regions the west the north and the south had different economies political goals and social customs.
disagreements between the different regions or sectionalism were a common part of the political debates of the era of the early to mid 1800s.
when the nation was founded the main political divisions between states followed the regional lines between those in the north and those in the south.
from the beginning the two regions had different economic and political concerns.
the north worked for laws supporting trade and commerce while the south favored policies that benefited agricultural production.
northern states insisted on equal representation for states with lower populations to make sure they were not overpowered by the more populous southern states.
but the biggest difference between the regions was the southern system of slavery.
from the beginning of the nation leaders in the two regions debated how to handle the difference.
under the articles of confederation the land ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance of 1787 had established a new kind of political region in the country.
territories were not states but they were under the direct administration of the federal government.
the ordinances established the policies and political structures for new land acquired in the future.
as americans settled the regions new states were created.
their economies and political goals however were different than those of the northern and southern states along the atlantic coast.
slavery and expansion the most heated debates about sectionalism were often linked with slavery.
leaders in the southern states knew that many in the north wanted the practice to be abolished.
they knew that if enough votes from free states academic vocabulary incentive something that leads people to follow a certain course of action a new national identity 305 the missouri compromise 1820 ma unorganized territory florida geography skills interpreting maps j the missouri compromise banned slavery in the j region north of 3630 n.
i free state 1 1 free territory i slave state 1 1 slave territory known as the silver tongued kentuckian henry clay was a gifted speaker.
he became involved in local politics early in his life and by age 29 he was appointed to the u s senate.
throughout his career in the senate he was dedicated to preserving the union.
the missouri compromise and a later agreement the compromise of 1850 helped to ease sectional tensions at least temporarily.
analyzing why did henry clay work for compromises between regions.
could be gained in congress slavery would be ended.
leaders in free states however knew that if the south gained more votes in the senate policies that favored the slave states would be passed.
for this reason congress worked to maintain an equal number of free and slave states in the union.
missouri compromise as new states were added leaders argued over whether or not slavery should spread into new states.
one such disagreement arose in 1819 when congress considered missouri s application to enter the union as a slave state.
at the time the union had 11 free states and 11 slave states.
adding a new slave state would have tipped the balance in the senate in favor of the south.
1 region in which part of the country was slavery permitted.
2 human environment interaction why did leaders choose 36 30 as the compromise line.
to protect the power of the free states the house passed a special amendment.
it declared that the united states would accept missouri as a slave state but importing enslaved africans into missouri would be illegal.
it also set free the children of missouri slaves.
southern politicians angrily opposed this plan.
north carolina senator nathaniel macon wanted to continue adding slave states.
why depart from the good old way which has kept us in quiet peace and harmony.
eventually the senate rejected the amendment.
missouri was still not a state.
henry clay convinced congress to agree to the missouri compromise which settled the conflict that had arisen from missouri s application for statehood.
this compromise had three main conditions 1 missouri would enter the union as a slave state.
2 maine would join the union as a free state keeping the number of slave and free states equal.
3 slavery would be prohibited in any new territories or states north of 3630 latitude missouri s southern border.
105a chapter you learned about the dispute that arose over missouri s admission to the union.
yet that was not what this controversy was really about.
recognizing the central issue in this dispute helps you understand why each side fought so hard over just one state.
use the following steps to identify central issues when you read about historical events.
1 identify the main subject of the information.
2 determine the nature and purpose of what you are reading.
is it a primary source or a secondary one.
why has the information been provided.
3 find the strongest or most forceful phrases or statements in the material.
these are often clues to the issues or ideas the speaker or writer thinks most central or important.
4 determine how the information might be connected to the major events or controversies that were concerning the nation at the time.
practice the skill soon after the missouri compromise passed secretary of state john quincy adams wrote the impression produced upon my mind by the progress of this discussion the dispute over missouri is that the bargain between freedom and slavery contained in the constitution is morally and politically vicious cruel and oppressive i have favored this missouri compromise believing it to be all that can be effected accomplished under the present constitution and from an extreme unwillingness to put the union at hazard risk.
but perhaps it would have been a bolder course to have persisted in the restriction upon missouri till it should have terminated ended in a convention of the states to amend the constitution.
this would have produced a new union of thirteen or fourteen states unpolluted with slavery if the union must be dissolved slavery is precisely the question upon which it ought to break.
for the present however this contest issue is laid to sleep apply the steps to identifying central issues to analyze adams s statement and answer the following questions 1 about what subject was adams writing.
what was his reason for making these remarks.
2 what did adams believe was the most important issue in the dispute.
what strong language does he use to indicate this.
3 what evidence suggests adams did not think the breakup of the union the central issue.
14 chapter 10 you try it.
the following passage is from the chapter you will learn the following academic words criteria p 328 contemporary p 333 the age of jackson 321 teks 1a 5c 5f what you will learn 1 democracy expanded in the 1820s as more americans held the right to vote.
2 jackson s victory in the election of 1828 marked a change in american politics.
t the expansion of voting rights and the election of andrew jackson signaled the growing power of the american people.
key terms and people nominating conventions p 323 jacksonian democracy p 323 democratic party p 323 john c calhoun p 323 spoils system p 324 martin van buren p 324 kitchen cabinet p 324 jr i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how an expansion of voting rights led to andrew jackson s election to the presidency.
22 chapter to answer the questions about the map below.
19 place the expansions in the order in which they were acquired by the united states according to the map.
20 create your own map of the westward expansion of the united states beginning with the 13 colonies.
21 write three questions about the movement of the u s population that might be answered by one of the two maps.
writesmart 22 writing an outline for a documentary film look back through all your notes and choose one topic from this chapter in this textbook an encyclopedia or another source recommended by your teacher.
look for two or three reasons causes why the war of 1812 the event or situation occurred.
at the same time consider the war as a cause.
look for two or three effects of the war.
then choose whether to write about the causes or the effects.
2 write you can use this framework to help you write your first draft.
introduction body conclusion begin with a quote or interesting fact present the causes or effects in summarize your ideas about the about the event.
chronological time order or order causes or the effects of the event identify the event you will discuss.
of importance.
the war of 1812 explain each cause or effect in its identify whether you will be own paragraph providing support discussing the causes or the effects.
with facts and examples.
376 unit 3 3 evaluate and revise evaluating drawing clear logical connections is the key to writing about causes and effects.
use these questions to evaluate and revise your paper.
evaluation questions for an explanation of causes or effects does the introduction begin with an interesting quotation or fact.
does the introduction identify the event the war and the causes or events to be discussed.
is each cause or effect explained in its own paragraph.
do facts and examples help to explain each cause or effect and connect it to the event the war.
are you using correct grammar spelling sentence structure punctuation and appropriate citation of your sources.
are the causes or effects organized clearly by chronological order or order of importance.
does the conclusion summarize the causes or effects and their importance.
recognizing false cause and effect in planning your essay be careful to avoid false cause and effect relationships.
the fact that one thing happened before or after another doesn t mean one caused the other.
for example the fact that james madison was elected in 1808 just four years before the war of 1812 does not mean his election caused the war of 1812 revising make sure the connections between the war and its causes or effects are clear by sharing your paper with a classmate.
if your classmate is confused add background information.
if he or she disagrees with your conclusions add evidence or rethink your reasoning.
using transitions here are some transitional words and phrases that show cause or effect relationships because as a result therefore for since so consequently for this reason.
4 proofread and publish proofreading some transitional words and phrases need to be set off from the sentence with commas.
here are two examples the louisiana territory was a huge region of land.
as a result the size of the united states almost doubled when the land was purchased.
jefferson wanted to know more about the land he had purchased.
therefore he asked congress to fund an expedition.
check your paper to see if you need to add commas after or around any transitional words or phrases.
publishing get together with a classmate and share causes and or effects.
compare your lists to see whether you have identified different causes or effects.
share your findings with your class.
m writesmart use mywritesmartto create share and revise your paper.
9 5 practice and apply use the steps and strategies outlined in this workshop to write your explanation of the causes or effects of the war of 1812 the new republic 3 wswiiwinaso the united states continued to grow in size and wealth experiencing revolutions in technology and business as did other parts of the world.
during the earliest phases of expansion regions of the united states developed differently from each other.
citizens differed in their ideas of progress government and religion.
for the success of the nation they tried to compromise on their disagreements.
in the next four chapter 12 the telegraph sent pulses or surges of electric current through a wire.
the telegraph operator tapped a bar that controlled the length of each pulse.
at the other end of the wire these pulses were changed into clicking sounds.
a short click was called a dot.
a long click was called a dash.
morse s partner alfred lewis vail developed a system known as morse code different combinations of dots and dashes that represent each letter of the alphabet.
for example dot dot dot dash dash dash dot dot dot is the distress signal called sos.
several years passed before morse was able to connect two locations with telegraph wires.
people doubted his machine.
some did not think that he was reading messages sent from miles away.
morse s break came during the 1844 democratic national convention.
a telegraph wired news of the presidential candidate s nomination to politicians in washington.
the waiting politicians responded three cheers for the telegraph.
telegraphs were soon sending and receiving information for businesses the government newspapers and private citizens.
the telegraph grew with the railroad.
telegraph companies strung their wires on poles along railroads across the country.
they established telegraph offices in many train stations.
thousands of miles of telegraph line were added every year in the 1850s.
the first transcontinental line was finished samuel f b morse 1791 1872 like steamboat creator robert fulton samuel f b morse began his career as a painter rather than as an inventor.
in 1832 morse was a widower struggling to raise his three children alone.
he became interested in the idea of sending messages electrically.
morse hoped he could invent a device that would earn enough to support his family.
eventually the telegraph made morse extremely wealthy.
drawing conclusions what motivated morse to invent the telegraph.
in 1861 by the time he died in 1872 morse was famous across the united states.
with the spread of telegraph lines people could relay information and news more quickly.
the economy of the nation became even more unified as businesses used the telegraph to conduct financial transactions with distant partners.
cities especially in the west grew rapidly because of the increased economic opportunities available to distant businesses.
the territories of the united states began filling with people farther and farther west.
reading check.
identifying cause and effect what effect did the telegraph have on cross country communications.
steam powered factories during the industrial revolution factories began to rely on steam power instead of waterpower.
this shift brought major changes to the nation s industries.
water powered factories had to be built near streams or waterfalls.
in contrast steam power allowed business owners to build factories almost anywhere.
yet the northeast was still home to most of the nation s industry.
by 1860 new england alone had as many factories as the entire south did.
some companies decided to build their factories closer to cities and transportation centers.
this provided easier access to workers allowing businesses to lower wages.
being closer to cities also reduced shipping costs.
cities soon became the center of industrial growth.
people from rural areas and foreign countries flocked to the cities for jobs.
factory workers improved the designs of many kinds of machines.
mechanics invented tools that could cut and shape metal stone and wood with great precision.
by the 1840s this new machinery was able to produce interchangeable parts.
within a short period of time the growing machine tool industry was even making customized equipment.
new businesses were also aided by government policies that favored free trade.
there was little regulation of businesses and taxes were designed to benefit business owners.
many americans supported these governmental policies because they want reading check.
ed to benefit from the growing economy themselves.
thousands of new businesses were established many to market the new inventions that were being introduced every day.
although these businesses often failed they spurred technological innovation and entrepreneurship.
finding main ideas what changes resulted from the shift to steam power.
improved farm equipment during the 1830s technology began transforming the farm as well as the factory.
in 1837 blacksmith john deere saw that friends in illinois had difficulty plowing thick soil with iron plows.
he thought a steel blade might work better.
his design for a steel plow was a success.
by 1846 deere was selling 1 000 plows per year.
in 1831 cyrus mccormick developed a new harvesting machine the mechanical reaper which quickly and efficiently cut down wheat.
he began mass producing his reapers in a chicago factory.
mccormick used new methods to encourage sales.
his company advertised gave demonstrations and provided a repair and spare parts department.
he also let customers buy on credit.
the combination of deere s plow and mccormick s reaper allowed midwestern farmers to plant and harvest huge crop fields.
by 1860 u s farmers were producing more than 170 million bushels of wheat and more than 800 million bushels of corn per year.
american inventions continued 1849 walter hunt invents the safety pin.
i c 1851 isaac singer improves the sewing machine.
the production and repair of clothing becomes much easier.
paferizecz fytr o 84 i t g i wabtsr whb.
w hew vokk.
mcbabda0 dbssw reading check summarizing what marketing methods did mccormick use to help sell his farm equipment.
changing life at home many inventions of the industrial revolu j selling for only 1 50 by the 1850s.
additional useful items created during this period include matches introduced in the 1830s and the safety pin invented in 1849 all of these inventions helped make life at home more convenient for americans.
the impact today tion simply made life easier.
when alexis de tocqueville of france visited the united states in the early 1830s he identified what he called a very american quality.
americans want to be always making life more comfortable and convenient to avoid trouble and to satisfy the smallest wants desires without effort and almost without cost alexis de tocqueville from democracy in america reading check analyzing how did labor saving inventions affect daily life.
i summary and preview new machines i and inventions changed the way americans lived and did business in the early 1800s.
in the next chapter you will learn how agri cultural changes affected the south.
new inventions such as cell phones laptop computers and wireless internet continue to make life easier and more convenient for people today.
the sewing machine first invented by elias howe a factory apprentice in lowell massachusetts was one of these conveniences.
isaac singer then made improvements to howe s design.
like mccormick singer allowed customers to buy his machines on credit and provided service.
by 1860 singer s company was the world s largest maker of sewing machines.
other advances improved on everyday items.
in the 1830s iceboxes cooled by large blocks of ice became available.
iceboxes stored fresh food safely for longer periods.
iron cookstoves began replacing cooking fires and stone hearths.
companies also began to mass produce earlier inventions.
this allowed many families to buy household items such as clocks that they could not afford in the past.
for example a clock that cost 50 in 1800 was section 4 assessment online quiz reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a describe how did the telegraph work.
b predict what impact might the telegraph have on the future of the united states.
c analyze how did the telegraph increase urbanization.
2 a describe how did water powered factories differ from steam powered factories.
b explain how did the shift to steam power lead to the growth of cities.
c explain what governmental policies helped industries grow in a free trade system.
what were the benefits of this system.
3 a identify what contributions did cyrus mccormick and john deere make to farming.
b analyze what effect did new inventions have on agriculture in the united states.
4 a identify what inventions improved life at home.
b evaluate which invention do you think had the greatest effect on the daily lives of americans.
1859 manufactured goods become more valuable than agricultural goods in the country s economy for the first time.
the united states is becoming a modern industrial nation.
critical thinking 5 supporting a point of view review your notes on technological advances and their effects.
then create a most important why graphic organizer like the one below that shows the top three advances you think are most important and why.
writesmart analysis skilli reading time lines which two inventions improved american agriculture.
6 describing technological advances add notes about the inventions mentioned in this section to your chart.
think about which invention you will use for your advertisement.
the aveiuseuieiu.
j gn north 409u ffl bias define the skill everyone has firmly held beliefs.
however when we let our beliefs automatically slant or shape our point of view on topics we may be showing bias.
bias is a fixed idea or opinion about someone or something.
some bias is based on a set of ideas about a group to which the person or thing belongs.
this type of bias is called a stereotype.
if the group is defined by race religion age gender or similar characteristics the bias is known as prejudice.
learn the skill not all beliefs are biases even if those beliefs are strongly held.
biases are beliefs that have little or no evidence to support them.
the more unreasonable a person s view is in light of facts and evidence the more likely it is that the belief is a bias.
another characteristic of bias is the person s reluctance to question his or her belief if it is challenged by evidence.
sometimes people stubbornly cling to views that overwhelming evidence proves wrong.
this is why bias is defined as a fixed idea or opinion.
one of the most damaging effects of bias and a good reason for trying to avoid it is that it can prevent us from learning new things.
bias sometimes appears in written oral and visual material.
authors may include bias accidentally or in order to sway people s opinions on a topic.
to recognize bias in a source you can follow the steps below.
1 identify the author or creator of the source.
consider the author s background and determine if he or she is an authority on the topic.
2 identify the author s purpose point of view and frame of reference.
information about the author and the source may help you determine the source s reliability and validity.
3 examine the language used in the source.
look for stereotypes and opinions in the source.
sources that lack objectivity and specific facts may be biased.
4 determine if the source is valid and reliable.
compare the source with other information on the topic to determine whether the source contains more facts or more opinions.
practice the skill in 1834 tennessee congressman davy crockett visited the textile mills at lowell massachusetts.
read his account of the lowell girls who worked in the factory and answer the questions below.
here are thousands of young women useful to others with the prospect before them of future comfort and respectability there are more than five thousand females employed in lowell and when you come to see the amount of labour performed by them in superintending operating the different machinery you will be astonished 1 what facts can be confirmed from this source.
2 what opinions are found in this source.
3 do you think this source is biased.
explain your answer.
406 chapter 12 visual nummary use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter 13 textile mills in great britain were the largest foreign buyers of southern cotton.
joseph r anderson followed helper s advice.
in 1848 anderson became the owner of the tredegar iron works in richmond virginia one of the most productive iron works in the nation.
it was the only factory to produce bridge materials cannons steam engines and other products.
industry however remained a small part of the southern economy.
southern industry faced stiff competition from the north and from england both of which could produce many goods more cheaply.
and as long as agricultural profits remained high southern investors preferred to invest in land.
reading check focus on reaping what kind of web site would you look for to learn more about the tredegar iron works.
making inferences why were there fewer industries in the south.
analysis skill.
drawing conclusions why do you think cotton was so important to the south s economy.
i summary and preview you have read i about how southern farmers worked to improve farming methods.
in the next section you will read about the structure of southern society.
section 1 assessment.
onune quiz reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a describe how did the cotton gin make processing cotton easier.
b draw conclusions why had slavery been on the decline before the invention of the cotton gin.
how did slavery change as a result of the cotton gin.
c predict how might the invention of the cotton gin and the rise of cotton production and slavery affect southern society.
2 a identify what areas of the united states made up the cotton belt.
what physical characteristics helped define the area.
b evaluate do you think the south should have i paid more attention to its industrial growth.
i 3 a describe what other crops and industries were encouraged in the south.
b make inferences why were some southern leaders worried about the south s reliance on cotton.
critical thinking 4 identifying cause and effect review your notes on the causes of the cotton boom.
then add to your graphic organizer by identifying the effects of the cotton boom on the south.
writesmart 5 noting life on the cotton farm in your notebook note how whitney s gin changed life on the farm.
also note other details about cotton farming you could include in your sketch.
the south 4 teks 7b 7c 10b sleuth m society what you will learn.
1 southern society and culture consisted of four main groups.
2 free african americans in the south faced a great deal of discrimination.
t if you were there your family owns a small farm in georgia in the 1840s.
sometimes you work in the fields but more often you tend the vegetable garden and peach orchard.
since you have no close neighbors you look forward to sundays.
going to church gives you a chance to socialize with other young people.
sometimes you wonder what it would be like to live in a city like savannah.
how would life be different if you left the farm for the city.
the big idea southern society centered around agriculture.
key term yeomen p 422 w taking notes building background although the south had some industry agriculture was the heart of the southern economy.
cotton was king.
as a result wealthy plantation families were the most prominent social class in southern society.
small farmers however made up the largest part of the population.
use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the different segments of southern society.
southern society and culture popular fiction often made it seem that all white southerners had many slaves and lived on large plantations.
many fiction writers wrote about wealthy southern families who had frequent grand parties.
the ideal image of the antebellum before the war south included hospitality and well treated slaves on beautiful plantations that almost ran themselves.
this romantic view was far from the reality.
during the first half of the 1800s only about one third of white southern families had slaves.
fewer families had plantations.
despite their small numbers these planters had a powerful influence over the south.
the economy of the south was dependent on agriculture and most of the agricultural production relied on slave plantations.
many plantation owners served as political leaders.
they led a society made up of many different kinds of people including yeomen farmers poor whites slaves and free african americans.
each of these segments of society contributed to the economic success of the south.
420 chapter 13 chapter 14 ifayteims and lp e pj you try it.
read the following paragraph and then answer the questions below.
the most famous and daring conductor on the underground railroad was harriet tubman.
when tubman escaped slavery in chapter 14 carry a streak of fire to boston.
if you attempt it as the lord liveth i ll meet you.
and fight every inch of the way.
despite the opposition of beecher and other traditional ministers finney s appeal remained powerful.
also the first amendment guarantee of freedom of religion prevented the government from passing laws banning the new religious practices.
ministers were therefore free to spread their message of faith and salvation to whoever wished to listen.
due to the efforts of finney and his followers church membership across the country grew a great deal during the second great awakening.
many new church members were women and african americans.
the african methodist episcopal church spread across the middle atlantic states.
although the movement had begun in the northeast and on the frontier the second great awakening renewed some people s religious faith throughout america.
drawing conclusions what impact did the second great awakening have on religion in america.
reading check.
social reformers speak out renewed religious faith often led to movements to fix the problems of urban growth.
one solution was political action.
for example in 1844 new york city created the first city police force.
members of the growing middle class especially women often led the efforts.
many of the women did not work outside the home and hired servants to care for their households.
this gave them time to work in reform groups.
the 1830s to the 1850s were an era of many reform movements.
temperance movement many social reformers worked to prevent alcohol abuse.
they believed that americans drank too much.
in the 1830s on average an american consumed seven gallons of alcohol per year.
countless americans thought that alcohol abuse caused social problems such as family violence poverty and criminal behavior.
americans worries about the effects of alcohol led to the growth of a temperance movement.
this reform effort urged people to use self discipline to stop drinking hard liquor.
reform movements reform movements in america included religious meetings called revivals where preachers urged huge crowds of people to seek salvation.
the temperance movement an effort to convince people to avoid drinking alcohol promoted posters like the one shown here.
how might the scenes in this poster encourage people to stop drinking.
reformers asked people to limit themselves to beer and wine in small amounts.
groups like the american temperance society and the american temperance union helped to spread the message.
minister lyman beecher spoke widely about the evils of alcohol.
he claimed that people who drank alcohol were neglecting the education of their families and corrupting their morals.
the impact today mcguffey s readers were among the first graded textbooks.
organizing classes by grades was a new idea that is standard practice today.
prison reform another target of reform was the prison system.
dorothea dix was a middle class reformer who visited prisons throughout massachusetts beginning in 1841 dix reported that mentally ill people frequently were jailed with criminals.
they were sometimes left in dark cells without clothes or heat and were chained to the walls and beaten.
dix spoke of what she saw to the state legislature.
in response the massachusetts government built facilities for the mentally ill dix s work had a nationwide effect.
eventually more than 100 state hospitals were built to give mentally ill people professional care.
prisons also held runaway children and orphans.
some had survived only by begging or stealing and they got the same punishment as adult criminals.
boston mayor josiah quincy asked that young offenders receive different punishments than adults.
in the 1820s several state and local governments founded reform schools for children who had been housed in prisons.
there children lived under strict rules and learned useful skills.
some reformers also tried to end the overcrowding and cruel conditions in prisons.
their efforts led to the creation of houses of correction.
these institutions did not use punishment alone to change behavior.
they also offered prisoners education.
reading check summarizing how did reformers change the punishment of criminals.
improvements in education another challenge facing america in the early 1800s was poor public education.
during this era childhood was beginning to be viewed as a separate stage of life in which education was of the utmost importance in creating responsible citizens.
however many children worked in factories or on farms to help support their families.
if children could read the bible write and do simple math that was often considered to be enough.
education in the early 1800s the availability of education varied widely.
new england had the most schools while the south and west had the fewest.
few teachers were trained.
schoolhouses were small and students of all ages and levels worked in one room.
mcguffey s readers were the most popular textbooks.
william holmes mcguffey an educator and minister put selections from british and american literature in them as well as instruction in moral and social values.
social background and wealth affected the quality of education.
rich families sent children to private schools or hired tutors.
however poor children had only public schools.
girls could go to school but parents usually thought that girls needed little education and kept them home.
therefore few girls learned to read.
common school movement people in the common school movement wanted all children taught in a common place regardless of background.
horace mann was a leader of this movement.
in 1837 mann became massachusetts s first secretary of education.
he convinced the state to double its school budget and raise teachers salaries.
he lengthened the school year and began the first school for teacher training.
mann s success set a standard for education reform throughout the country.
450 chapter 14 entialin calls for greater integration.
enslaved people from getting any education even at the primary school level.
while some slaves learned to read on their own they almost always did so in secret.
slaveholders were fearful that education and knowledge in general might encourage a spirit of revolt among enslaved african americans.
reading check drawing conclusions why was it difficult for african americans to get an education in the south in the early 1800s.
1 summary and preview the efforts of i reformers led to improvements in many aspects of american life in the early to mid 1800s.
in the next section you will learn about reform minded people who opposed the practice of slavery.
section 3 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what was the second great awakening and who was one of its leaders.
b summarize what effects did the second great awakening have on religion in the united states.
i c explain how did the second great awakening j relate to the basic right of freedom of religion.
i 2 a describe what role did dorothea dix play in social reforms of the early 1800s.
1 b identify what views did temperance societies have on the social issues of the time.
what changes j did they bring about.
f c summarize what different reforms helped improve the u s prison system.
d elaborate how might the second great f awakening have led to the growth of social reform i movements.
3 a identify what was the common school movement and who was one of its leaders.
i i b analyze why did reformers set out to improve education in the united states.
c evaluate do you think horace mann s ideas for educational reform were good ones.
4 a recall in what cities were the first public schools for african americans located.
b draw conclusions how did free african americans benefit from educational reforms.
critical thinking 5 categorizing review the reform movement events on the time line in your notes.
then use a chart like the one below to identify the leaders and accomplishments of each reform movement.
movement leaders accomplishments prison and mental health reform temperance education writesmart 6 choosing important events this section covers the reform of social issues such as religion prisons and education.
write the reforms described in your chart then write a note about each reform and about the important people involved in it think about how each one influenced life in the united states.
new movements in america 4 section teks 1a 7b 7d 19a 20c t k 22 f23c 23l 24kr24ft tnhwb aaovcmriont to end slavery what you will learn 1 americans from a variety of backgrounds actively opposed slavery.
2 abolitionists organized the underground railroad to help enslaved africans escape.
3 despite efforts of abolitionists many americans remained opposed to ending slavery.
if you were there you live in southern ohio in the 1850s.
a friend who lives across the river in kentucky has asked you to join a network that helps escaping slaves.
she reminds you that your house has a secret cellar where you could easily hide fugitives for a few days.
you are opposed to slavery.
but you know this might get you in trouble with your neighbors and with the law.
would you become an agent for the underground railroad.
in the mid 1800s debate over slavery increased as abolitionists organized to challenge slavery in the united states.
key terms and people abolition p 454 william lloyd garrison p 455 american anti slavery society p 455 angelina and sarah grimke p 455 frederick douglass p 456 sojourner truth p 456 underground railroad p 456 harriet tubman p 458 rs igi lffib j use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the different abolitionist movements that existed the leaders of each movement and the methods each used.
i building background the early 1800s brought many i movements for social reform in the united states.
perhaps the most.
important and far reaching was the movement for the abolition of slavery.
while reformers worked to end slavery many also took risks to help slaves to escape.
j americans oppose slavery some americans had opposed slavery since before the country was founded.
benjamin franklin was the president of the first antislavery society in america the pennsylvania society for promoting the abolition of slavery.
in the 1830s americans took more organized action supporting abolition or a complete end to slavery.
differences among abolitionists abolitionists came from many different backgrounds and opposed slavery for various reasons.
the quakers were among the first groups to challenge slavery on religious grounds.
other religious leaders gave speeches and published pamphlets that moved many americans to support abolition.
in one of these abolitionist theodore weld wrote that everyman knows that slavery is a curse.
other abolitionists referred to the declaration of independence.
they reminded people that the american revolution had been fought in the name of liberty and other unalienable rights.
454 chapter chapter review visual summary reviewing vocabulary terms and people 1 which of the following authors wrote about puritan life in the scarlet letter.
a emily dickinson c thomas gallaudet b herman melville d nathaniel hawthorne 2 which document expressed the complaints of supporters of women s rights.
a declaration of the c letters on rights of women women s rights b declaration of d seneca falls sentiments convention 3 as leader of the common school movement who worked to improve free public education.
a walt whitman c lyman beecher b horace mann d sojourner truth comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 438 442 4 a describe how did irish and german immigrants interact with the environments they found when they reached the united states.
b identify what political party was founded by nativists and what policies did it support.
c explain what conflicts arose in the cities.
how were the conflicts between immigrants and nativists resolved.
d analyze what factors caused u s cities to grow so fast.
e evaluate do you think that the benefits of city life outweighed its drawbacks.
section 2 pages 443 445 5 a describe who were some important transcen dentalists and what ideas did they promote.
b compare and contrast in what ways were transcendentalists and romantics similar and different.
new movements in america 4 c elaborate which movement appeals to you more american transcendentalism or romanticism.
section 3 pages 448 453 6 a identify what important reform movements became popular in the early 1800s.
b analyze why did education become an important topic for reformers in the 1800s.
what changes were made.
c predict how would the changes made to the care of the disabled change society.
d evaluate which reform movement do you think had the greatest effect on the united states.
section 4 pages 454 459 7 a recall what are the different reasons why people supported abolition.
b describe what contributions did frederick douglass make in the abolition movement.
c make inferences how did northerners and southerners differ in their opposition to abolition.
d evaluate which of the methods used by abolitionists to oppose slavery do you think was most successful.
section 5 pages 461 466 8 a recall what led many women to question their place in american society.
b make inferences why did female ractory workers like charlotte woodward support the women s rights movement.
c evaluate by 1860 do you think the women s movement had been successful.
explain your answer.
using the internet 9 activity creating visuals the liberator and north star were two newspapers that encouraged the end of slavery.
through your online book research the influence of abolitionist newspapers such as those written by william lloyd garrison and frederick douglass.
then create a visual display that illustrates how each newspaper represented the abolitionist point of view.
reading skills recognizing implied main ideas use the reading skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
10 choose three paragraphs from the chapter 15 section 1 popular sovereignty p 476 wilmot proviso p 476 sectionalism p 477 free soi party p 477 secede p 478 compromise of 1850 p 479 fugitive slave act p 479 anthony burns p 480 uncle tom s cabin p 481 harriet beecher stowe p 481 section 2 franklin pierce p 483 stephen douglas p 484 kansas nebraska act p 485 pottawatomie massacre ip.
487 charles sumner p 487 preston brooks p 487 section 3 republican party p 488 james buchanan p 488 john c fremont ip.
489 dred scott p 489 roger b taney p 490 abraham lincoln p 490 lincoln douglas debates p 491 freeport doctrine ip.
492 section 4 john brown s raid p 493 john c breckinridge p 495 constitutional union party ip.
495 john bell p 495 john j crittenden p 496 confederate states of america ip.
497 jefferson davis ip.
497 academic vocabulary in this chapter 15 the nlsiion di vides if you were there you work for the weekly newspaper in harpers ferry virginia.
you strongly oppose slavery but you think the question ought to be resolved by laws not bloodshed.
now your paper has sent you to interview the famous abolitionist john brown in prison.
his raids in bleeding kansas killed several people.
now he is in jail for attacking a federal arsenal and taking weapons.
what questions would you ask john brown.
teks 5c 7c 7d 8a 8b 10a 17b 21a 22a 24a section what you will learn.
1 john brown s raid on harpers ferry intensified the disagreement between free states and slave states.
2 the outcome ofthe election of 1860 divided the united states.
3 the dispute over slavery led the south to secede.
building background unpopular compromises and court decisions deepened the divisions between pro slavery and antislavery i advocates.
the lincoln douglas debates attracted more attention to j the issue.
as the disagreements grew violence increased though many j americans hoped to avoid it.
but it was too late to keep the nation unified j the united states broke apart due to the growing conflict over slavery.
raid on harpers ferry in 1858 john brown tried to start an uprising.
he wanted to attack the federal arsenal in virginia and seize weapons there.
he planned to arm local slaves.
brown expected to kill or take hostage white southerners who stood in his way.
he urged abolitionists to give him money so that he could support a small army.
but after nearly two years brown s army had only about 20 men.
on the night of october 16 1859 john brown s raid began when he and his men took over the arsenal in harpers ferry virginia in hopes of starting a slave rebellion.
he sent several of his men into the countryside to get slaves to join him.
however enslaved african americans did not come to harpers ferry fearing punishment if they took part.
instead local white southerners attacked brown.
eight of his men and three local men were killed.
brown and some followers retreated to a firehouse.
federal troops arrived in harpers ferry the following night.
the next morning colonel robert e lee ordered a squad of marines to storm the firehouse.
in a matter of seconds the marines killed two more of brown s men and captured the rest including brown.
brown was quickly convicted of treason murder and conspiracy.
some of his men received death sentences.
john a copeland a key terms and people john brown s raid p 493 john c breckinridge p 495 constitutional union party p 495 john bell p 495 john j crittenden p 496 confederate states of america p 497 jefferson davis p 497 hmhsocjalstu jjes com taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the significance of each ofthe people listed and their relationship to the events of the section.
a divided nation 491 primary source song the battle hymn of the republic the popular song john brown s body was not originally written about the abolitionist but it was quickly adapted to describe his life and execution.
in one verse the raid on harpers ferry is described.
he captured harpers ferry with his nineteen men so few and he frightened old virginny till she trembled through and through they hung him for a traitor themselves a traitor crew but his soul is marching on.
chorus glory glory hallelujah.
glory glory hallelujah.
glory glory hallelujah.
his soul goes marching on analysis skill analyzing primary sources how do the lyrics of the battle hymn of the republic demonstrate the cause that the union soldiers were fighting for.
the song was sung by union soldiers and supporters as a patriotic symbol.
in 1859 abolitionist julia ward howe wrote new lyrics for the song that became even more popular.
the song no longer mentioned brown but described the religious importance many unionists found for supporting the war.
named the battle hymn of the republic the song became a marching song for the union military.
it is still sung today at many official government events.
mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the lord he is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored he hath loosed the fateful lightning of his terrible swift sword his truth is marching on.
chorus glory glory hallelujah.
glory glory hallelujah.
glory glory hallelujah.
his truth is marching on w julia ward howe fugitive slave defended his actions.
if i am dying for freedom i could not die for a better cause.
convinced that he also would be sentenced to death brown delivered a memorable speech.
now if it is deemed thought necessary that i should forfeit give up my life for the furtherance of the ends of justice and mingle mix my blood with the blood of millions in this slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked cruel and unjust enactments i say let it be done john brown quoted in john brown 1800 1859 by oswald garrison villard as expected the judge ordered brown to be hanged.
the sentence was carried out one month later on december 2 1859 many northerners mourned john brown s death but some abolitionists criticized his extreme actions.
abraham lincoln said brown agreed with us in thinking slavery wrong.
however lincoln continued that cannot excuse violence bloodshed and treason.
most southern whites both slaveholders and non slaveholders felt threatened by the actions of john brown.
they worried that a john brown the second might attack.
one south carolina newspaper voiced these fears we are convinced the safety of the south lies only outside the present union.
another newspaper stated that the sooner we get out of the union the better.
drawing conclusions why did john brown s raid lead some southerners to talk about leaving the union.
election of 1860 in this climate of distrust americans prepared for another presidential election in 1860 the northern and southern democrats could not agree on a candidate.
northern reading check.
494 chapters in a book publishing share your paper with one or more classmates.
after reading each other s papers you can compare and contrast them.
writesmart use mywritesmart to create share and revise your paper.
5 practice and apply use the steps and strategies outlined in this workshop to write your paper comparing and contrasting two people or events.
the nation expands 5 unit 1 1 hl clv v m a jali dlu 1 diui vvh ti tkti jf c x k 67.
181 504 1 what you will learn when compromise after compromise failed the united states was divided by war.
the american civil war tested the strength of the bond between the states.
during the civil war americans fought each other on battlefields and in government.
ideas about slavery and sovereignty led many soldiers to fight.
eventually the nation was reunited but deep scars remained.
in the next two chapter tells of one of the most important events in our history.
summarizing focus on reading after reading a large amount of information you can summarize it into a shorter amount that is easier for you to understand.
understanding summarizing using the ideas and information presented in a book can be easier if you summarize what the author is sayinr.
when you summarize you can use some of the key ideas and words to write your own sentences that explain the information.
when you write a summary some details can be left out.
read the following passage and its summary.
notice which details the author chose to include and which to leave out.
civil war armies fought in the ancient battlefield formation that produced massive casualties.
endless rows of troops fired directly at one another with cannonballs landing amid them.
when the order was given soldiers would attach bayonets to their guns and rush toward their enemy.
men died to gain every inch of ground nnmmmm summary battles in the civil war were brutal.
the weapons that the troops used cannons and guns with bayonets led to many deaths.
from chapter 16 primary source letter june 23 1863 joseph williams an african american soldier and recruiter from pennsylvania wrote this letter describ ing why african americans fought for the union.
we ute rvow deter mmued to kobd every step wkbed hot been offered to ws us ebtbzerus oftke united states for our edevotbon benefit wkbek represent jwstbee tke purity tke truth mud respiration hope of keccven.
we m u st berern deeply to recebbree tke duty tke neorat arcd pobitbeat reecessbty for tke bereefit of our rar e every eon sbdercetbon of wrvor of interest mod of duty to qod med nucun requires that we skoutd be trwe to our tru st quoted in a grand army of black men edited by edwin s redkey skill.
analyzing primary sources why did williams think being soldiers was so important for african americans.
african americans participate in the war as the war casualties climbed the union needed even more troops.
african americans were ready to volunteer.
not all white northerners were ready to accept them but eventually they had to.
frederick douglass believed that military service would help african americans gain rights.
once let the black man get upon his person the brass letters u s and a musket on his shoulder and bullets in his pocket and there is no power on earth which can deny that he has earned the right to citizenship frederick douglass quoted in the life and writings of frederick douglass vol.
3 congress began allowing african americans to volunteer as laborers in july 1862 the war department also gave contrabands or escaped slaves the right to join the union army in south carolina.
free african americans in louisiana and kansas also formed their own units.
by the spring of 1863 african american army units were proving themselves in combat.
they took part in a union attack on port hudson louisiana in may.
one unit stood out above the others.
the 54th massachusetts infantry consisted mostly of free african americans.
in july 1863 this regiment led a heroic charge on south carolina s fort wagner.
the 54th took heavy fire and suffered huge casualties in the failed operation.
about half the regiment was killed wounded or captured.
edward l pierce a correspondent for the new york tribune wrote the fifty fourth did well and nobly they moved up as gallantly as any troops could.
william camey a sergeant in the regiment became the first african american to receive the congressional medal of honor after he was shot several times while keeping the u s flag aloft during the battle.
the bravery of the 54th regiment made it the most celebrated african american unit of the war.
about 180 000 african americans served with the union army.
they received 10 a month while white soldiers got 13.
they were usually led by white officers some from abolitionist families.
african americans faced special horrors on the battlefield.
confederates often killed their black captives or sold them into slavery.
in the 1864 election lincoln suggested rewarding african american soldiers by giving them the right to vote.
fnwfhnrow analyzing information how did african americans support the union.
thecivilwar 53 growing opposition the deepening shadows in lincoln s face reflected the huge responsibilities he carried.
besides running the war he had to deal with growing tensions in the north.
copperheads as the months rolled on and the number of dead continued to increase a group of northern democrats began speaking out against the war.
led by u s representative clement l vallandigham of ohio they called themselves peace democrats.
their enemies called them copperheads comparing them to a poisonous snake.
the name stuck.
many copperheads were midwest erners that sympathized with the south and opposed abolition.
they believed the war was not necessary and called for its end.
vallandigham asked what the war had gained and then said let the dead at fredericksburg and vicksburg answer.
lincoln saw the copperheads as a threat to support of the war effort.
to silence them he suspended the right of habeas corpus.
habeas corpus is a constitutional protection against unlawful imprisonment.
ignoring this protection union officials jailed their enemies including some copperheads without evidence or trial.
lincoln s action greatly angered democrats and some republicans.
northern draft in march 1863 war critics erupted again when congress approved a draft or forced military service.
for 300 men were allowed to buy their way out of military service.
for an unskilled laborer however that was nearly a year s wages.
critics of the draft called the civil war a rich man s war and a poor man s fight.
in july 1863 riots broke out when african americans were brought into new york city to replace striking irish dock workers.
the city happened to be holding a war draft at the same time.
the two events enraged rioters who attacked african americans and draft offices.
more than 100 people died.
in this tense situation the northern democrats nominated former general george mcclellan for president in 1864 they called infantry family while wealthy civilians could avoid military service poorer men were drafted to serve in the union army.
this member of the 31st pennsylvania infantry brought his family along with him.
his wife probably helped the soldier with many daily chores such as cooking and laundry.
why would soldiers bring their families to live with them in camp.

