 Sail, sail thy best, ship of Democracy, Of value is thy freight, ’tis not the Present only, The Past is also stored in thee, Thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone, not of the Western continent alone, Earth’s résumé entire floats on thy keel, O ship, is steadied by thy spars, With thee Time voyages in trust, the antecedent nations sink or swim with thee, With all their ancient struggles, martyrs, heroes, epics, wars, thou bear’st the other continents, Theirs, theirs as much as thine, the destination-port triumphant. . . . Walt Whitman Thou Mother with Thy Equal Brood, 1872

T HE
American Pageant 

 PART

 ONE

Founding the
New Nation





 ca. 33,000 B.C.E. –1783 C.E.

T


 he European explorers who followed Christopher Columbus to North America in the sixteenth century had no notion of founding a new nation. Neither did the ﬁrst European settlers who peopled the thirteen English colonies on the eastern shores of the continent in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. These original colonists may have ﬂed poverty or religious persecution in the Old World, but they continued to view themselves as Europeans, and as subjects of the Eng lish king. They regarded America as but the western rim of a transatlantic European world. Yet life in the New World made the colonists different from their European cousins, and eventually, during the American Revolution, the Americans came to embrace a vision of their country as an independent

 nation. How did this epochal transformation come about? How did the colonists overcome the conﬂ icts that divided them, unite against Britain, and declare themselves at great cost to be an “American” people? They had much in common to begin with. Most were Eng lishspeaking. Most came determined to create an agricultural society modeled on Eng lish customs. Conditions in the New World deepened their common bonds. Most colonists strove to live lives unfettered by the tyrannies of royal authority, ofﬁcial religion, and social hierarchies that they had left behind. They grew to cherish ideals that became synonymous with American life—reverence for individual liberty, self-government, religious tolerance, and economic opportunity. They also commonly

Algonquin Indians Fishing, by John White
 The English watercolorist accompanied the ﬁrst English expedition to Roanoke Island (later part of Virginia) in 1585. His paintings faithfully recorded the Indian way of life that was now imperiled by the arrival of the Europeans.

Founding the New Nation


 displayed a willingness to subjugate outsiders—ﬁrst Indians, who were nearly annihilated through war and disease, and then Africans, who were brought in chains to serve as slave labor, especially on the tobacco, rice, and indigo plantations of the southern colonies. But if the settlement experience gave people a common stock of values, both good and bad, it also divided them. The thirteen colonies were quite different from one another. Puritans carved tight, pious, and relatively democratic communities of small family farms out of rocky-soiled New Eng land. Theirs was a homogeneous world in comparison to most of the southern colonies, where large landholders, mostly Anglicans, built plantations along the coast from which they lorded over a labor force of black slaves and looked down upon the poor white farmers who settled the backcountry. Different still were the middle colonies stretching from New York to Delaware. There diversity reigned. Well-to-do merchants put their stamp on New York City, as Quakers did on Philadelphia, while out in the countryside sprawling estates were interspersed with modest homesteads. Within individual colonies, conﬂ icts festered over economic interests, ethnic rivalries, and religious practices. All those clashes made it difﬁcult for colonists to imagine that they were a single people with a common destiny, much less that they ought to break free from Britain. The American colonists in fact had little reason to complain about Britain. Each of the thirteen colonies enjoyed a good deal of self-rule. Many colonists proﬁted from trade within the British Empire. But by the 1760s,



 this stable arrangement began to crumble, a victim of the imperial rivalry between France and Britain. Their struggle for supremacy in North America began in the late seventeenth century and ﬁ nally dragged in the colonists during the French and Indian War from 1756 to 1763. That war in one sense strengthened ties with Britain, since colonial militias fought triumphantly alongside the British army against their mutual French and Indian enemies. But once the French were driven from the North American continent, the colonists no longer needed Britain for protection. More important still, after 1763 a ﬁ nancially overstretched British government made the fateful choice of imposing taxes on colonies that had been accustomed to answering mainly to their own colonial assemblies. By the 1770s issues of taxation, self-rule, and trade restrictions brought the crisis of imperial authority to a head. Although as late as 1775 most people in the colonies clung to the hope of some kind of accommodation short of outright independence, royal intransigence soon thrust the colonists into a war of independence that neither antagonist could have anticipated just a few years before. Eight years of revolutionary war did more than anything in the colonial past to bring Americans together as a nation. Comradeship in arms and the struggle to shape a national government forced Americans to subdue their differences as best they could. But the spirit of national unity was hardly universal. One in ﬁve colonists sided with the British as “Loyalists,” and a generation would pass before the wounds of this ﬁrst American “civil war” fully healed. Yet in the end, Americans won the Revolution, with no small measure of help from the French, because in every colony people shared a ﬁ rm belief that they were ﬁghting for the “unalienable rights” of “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness,” in the words of Thomas Jefferson’s magniﬁcent Declaration of Independence. Almost two hundred years of living a new life had prepared Americans to found a new nation.

Philadelphia, Corner of Second and High
Streets Delegates to the Constitutional
 Convention in 1787 gathered in Philadelphia, the largest city in North America, a vivid symbol of the rise of American society from its precarious beginnings at Jamestown and Plymouth nearly two centuries earlier.

New World Beginnings





33,000 B.C.E. –1769 C.E.
 I have come to believe that this is a mighty continent which was hitherto unknown. . . . Your Highnesses have an Other World here.

S


 everal billion years ago, that whirling speck of dust known as the earth, ﬁ fth in size among the planets, came into being. About six thousand years ago—only a minute in geological time—recorded history of the Western world began. Certain peoples of the Middle East, developing a written culture, gradually emerged from the haze of the past. Five hundred years ago—only a few seconds ﬁguratively speaking—European explorers stumbled on the Americas. This dramatic accident forever altered the future of both the Old World and the New, and of Africa and Asia as well.

The Shaping of North America
 Planet earth took on its present form slowly. Some 225 million years ago, a single supercontinent contained all the world’s dry land. Then enormous chunks of terrain began to drift away from this colossal landmass, opening the Atlantic and Indian Oceans, narrowing the Paciﬁc Ocean, and forming the great continents of Eurasia, Af-

 rica, Australia, Antarctica, and the Americas. The existence of a single original continent has been proved in part by the discovery of nearly identical species of ﬁsh that swim today in long-separated freshwater lakes throughout the world. Continued shifting and folding of the earth’s crust thrust up mountain ranges. The Appalachians were probably formed even before continental separation, perhaps 350 million years ago. The majestic ranges of western North America—the Rockies, the Sierra Nevada, the Cascades, and the Coast Ranges—arose much more recently, geologically speaking, some 135 million to 25 million years ago. They are truly “American” mountains, born after the continent took on its own separate geological identity. By about 10 million years ago, nature had sculpted the basic geological shape of North America. The continent was anchored in its northeastern corner by the massive Canadian Shield—a zone undergirded by ancient rock, probably the ﬁrst part of what became the North American landmass to have emerged above sea level. A narrow eastern coastal plain, or “tidewater” region, creased by many river valleys, sloped gently up-

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Effects of the Great Ice Age




4–8 B.C.


RECORDED HISTORY BEGINS

JESUS BORN



VIRGINIA FOUNDED





VIRGINIA BICENFOUNDED TENNIAL





 169 years

 169 years

 115 years

COLUMBUS'S DISCOVERY

4000 B.C.


INDEPENDENCE DECLARED

 ward to the timeworn ridges of the Appalachians. Those ancient mountains slanted away on their western side into the huge midcontinental basin that rolled downward to the Mississippi Valley bottom and then rose relentlessly to the towering peaks of the Rockies. From the Rocky Mountain crest—the “roof of America”—the land fell off jaggedly into the intermountain Great Basin, bounded by the Rockies on the east and the Sierra and Cascade ranges on the west. The valleys of the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers and the Willamette– Puget Sound trough seamed the interiors of present-day Cal i fornia, Oregon, and Washington. The land at last met the foaming Paciﬁc, where the Coast Ranges rose steeply from the sea. Nature laid a chill hand over much of this terrain in the Great Ice Age, beginning about 2 million years ago. Two-mile-thick ice sheets crept from the polar regions to blanket parts of Europe, Asia, and the Americas. In North America the great glaciers carpeted most of present-day Canada and the United States as far southward as a line stretching from Pennsylvania through the Ohio Country and the Dakotas to the Paciﬁc Northwest. When the glaciers ﬁ nally retreated about 10,000 years ago, they left the North American landscape transformed, and much as we know it today. The weight of the gargantuan ice mantle had depressed the level of the Canadian Shield. The grinding and ﬂushing action of the moving and melting ice had scoured away the shield’s topsoil, pitting its rocky surface with thousands of shallow depressions into which the melting glaciers ﬂowed to form lakes. The same glacial action scooped out and ﬁ lled the Great Lakes. They originally drained southward through the Mississippi River system to the Gulf of Mexico. When the melting ice unblocked the Gulf of St. Lawrence, the lake water sought the St. Lawrence River outlet to the Atlantic Ocean, lowering the Great Lakes’ level and leaving the Missouri-



1991 2000


 46 years

WORLD WAR II ENDS

 9 years

COLD WAR ENDS

NEW MILLENNIUM BEGINS

 Mississippi-Ohio system to drain the enormous midcontinental basin between the Appalachians and the Rockies. Similarly, in the West, water from the melting glaciers ﬁ lled sprawling Lake Bonneville, covering much of present-day Utah, Nevada, and Idaho. It drained to the Paciﬁc Ocean through the Snake and Columbia River systems until diminishing rainfall from the ebbing ice cap lowered the water level, cutting off access to the Snake River outlet. Deprived of both inﬂow and drainage, the giant lake became a gradually shrinking inland sea. It grew increasingly saline, slowly evaporated, and left an arid, mineral-rich desert. Only the Great Salt Lake remained as a relic of Bonneville’s former vastness. Today Lake Bonneville’s ancient beaches are visible on mountainsides up to 1,000 feet above the dry ﬂoor of the Great Basin.

Peopling the Americas
 The Great Ice Age shaped more than the geological history of North America. It also contributed to the origins of the continent’s human history. Though recent (and still highly controversial) evidence suggests that some early peoples may have reached the Americas in crude boats, most probably came by land. Some 35,000 years ago, the Ice Age congealed much of the world oceans into massive ice-pack glaciers, lowering the level of the sea. As the sea level dropped, it exposed a land bridge connecting Eurasia with North America in the area of the present-day Bering Sea between Siberia and Alaska. Across that bridge, probably following migratory herds of game, ventured small bands of nomadic Asian hunters—the “immigrant” ancestors of the Native Americans. They continued to trek across the Bering isthmus for some 250 centuries, slowly peopling the American continents (see Map 1.1).

°N


ARCTIC OCEAN



BERING LAND BRIDGE

40°E


Ci
 r cl e

160°E


 c cti Ar

180°
°N




20°E


160°W


0°


N


40°
140°W


AT L A N T I C O C EA N
r 
 f Cance

Tropic o


20°N
120°W


100°W


PAC I F IC OC EA N
Equator 0° 
20°W


N
20°S
Tropic of Capricorn




40°S


500 1000 Km.


1000 Mi.


 Extent of land, ca. 33,000 –10,500 B.C.E. Glaciers, ca. 15,000 B.C.E. Probable ancient shoreline Probable migratory route

80°W


60°W


 Map 1.1 The First Discoverers of America The origins of the ﬁrst Americans remain something of a mystery. According to the most plausible theory of how the Americas were populated, for some 25,000 years people crossed the Bering land bridge from Eurasia to North America. Gradually they dispersed southward down ice-free valleys, populating both the American continents.

40°W


 Selected Paleo-Indian site

Interactive Map


Making Sense of the New World
 his map from 1546 by Sebastian Münster represents one of the earliest efforts to make geographic sense out of the New World (Nouus Orbis and Die Nůw Welt on the map). The very phrase New World suggests just how staggering a blow to the European imagination was the discovery of the Americas. Europeans reached instinctively for the most expansive of all possible terms—world, not simply places, or even continents—to comprehend Columbus’s startling report that lands and peoples previously unimagined lay beyond the horizon of Europe’s western sea. Gradually the immense implications of the New World’s existence began to impress themselves on Europe, with consequences for literature, art, politics, the economy, and, of course, cartography. Maps

T


 can only be representations of reality and are therefore necessarily distortions. This map bears a recognizable resemblance to modern mapmakers’ renderings of the American continents, but it also contains gross geographic inaccuracies (note the location of Japan—Zipangri—relative to the North American west coast) as well as telling commentaries on what sixteenth-century Europeans found remarkable (note the Land of Giants—Regio Gigantum—and the indication of cannibals— Canibali—in present-day Argentina and Brazil, respectively). What further clues to the European mentality of the time does the map offer? In what ways might misconceptions about the geography of the Americas have inﬂuenced further exploration and settlement patterns?





 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

 As the Ice Age ended and the glaciers melted, the sea level rose again, inundating the land bridge about 10,000 years ago. Nature thus barred the door to further immigration for many thousands of years, leaving this part of the human family marooned for millennia on the now-isolated American continents. Time did not stand still for these original Americans. The same climatic warming that melted the ice and drowned the bridge to Eurasia gradually opened ice-free valleys through which vanguard bands groped their way southward and eastward across the Americas. Roaming slowly through this awesome wilderness, they eventually reached the far tip of South America, some 15,000 miles from Siberia. By the time Europeans arrived in America in 1492, perhaps 54 million people inhabited the two American continents.* Over the centuries they split into countless tribes, evolved more than 2,000 separate languages, and developed many diverse religions, cultures, and ways of life. Incas in Peru, Mayans in Central America, and Aztecs in Mexico shaped stunningly sophisticated civilizations. Their advanced agricultural practices, based primarily on the cultivation of maize, which is Indian corn, fed large populations, perhaps as many as 20 million in Mexico alone. Although without large draft animals such as horses and oxen, and lacking even the simple technology of the wheel, these peoples built elaborate cities and carried on far-ﬂung commerce. Talented mathematicians, they made strikingly accurate astronomical observations. The Aztecs also routinely sought the favor of their gods by offering human sacriﬁces, cutting the hearts out of the chests of living victims, who were often captives conquered in battle. By some accounts more than 5,000 people were ritually slaughtered to celebrate the crowning of one Aztec chieftain.

The Earliest Americans
 Agriculture, especially corn growing, accounted for the size and sophistication of the Native American civilizations in Mexico and South America. About 5000 b.c.e. hunter-gatherers in highland Mexico developed a wild

 *Much controversy surrounds estimates of the pre-Columbian Native American population. The ﬁgures here are from William M. Denevan, ed., The Native Population of the Americas in 1492, rev. ed. (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1992).

Corn Culture
 This statue of a corn goddess from the Moche culture of present-day coastal Peru, made between 200 and 600 B.C.E. vividly illustrates the centrality of corn to native American peoples, a thousand years before the rise of the great Incan and Aztec empires that the Europeans later encountered.

 grass into the staple crop of corn, which became their staff of life and the foundation of the complex, largescale, centralized Aztec and Incan civilizations that eventually emerged. Cultivation of corn spread across the Americas from the Mexican heartland. Everywhere it was planted, corn began to transform nomadic hunting bands into settled agricultural villagers, but this process went forward slowly and unevenly. Corn planting reached the present-day American Southwest as early as 2000 b.c.e. and powerfully molded Pueblo culture. The Pueblo peoples in the Rio Grande valley constructed intricate irrigation systems to water their cornﬁelds. They were dwelling in villages of multistoried, terraced buildings when Spanish explorers made contact with them in the sixteenth century. (Pueblo means “village” in Spanish.) Corn cultivation reached other parts of North America considerably later. The timing of its arrival in dif ferent localities explains much about the relative rates of development of different Native American peoples (see Map 1.2). Throughout the continent to the north and east of the land of the Pueblos, social life was less elaborately developed—indeed “societies” in the modern sense of the word scarcely existed. No dense concentrations of population or complex nation-states comparable to the Aztec empire existed in North America outside of Mexico at the time of the Europeans’ arrival—one of the reasons for the relative ease with which the European colonizers subdued the native North Americans. The Mound Builders of the Ohio River valley, the Mississippian culture of the lower Midwest, and the desert-dwelling Anasazi peoples of the Southwest did

ESKIMO ESKIMO

 tic Arc rcle Ci

YUPIK 160°W ALEUT

40°W


 DOGRIB

ARCTIC YELLOWKNIFE

°N




 INUIT

 TLINGIT

Hudson
Bay


CHIPEWYA 140°W

 SUBARCTIC

 HAIDA

NORTHWEST COAST

 CREE

 CREE

 CREE

 MONTAGNAIS

 CREE

OJIBWA CREE

 BLACKFEET

 MICMAC

P L ATEAU

 MAKAH

 OJIBWA

ASSINIBOINE
Great ALGONQUIN C ABENAKI CHINOOK olum SPOKANE issouri R. Lakes COEUR FLATHEAD M bia R. OJIBWA TILLAMOOK D’ALENE MANDAN CROW CAYUSE NEZ HURON MENOMINEE MASSACHUSETT PERCE IROQUOIS ARIKARA POTAWATOMI WINNEBAGO NARRAGANSETT SIOUX M SHOSHONE SAUK MODOC i ERIE CHEYENNE YUROK NORTHEAST FOX SIOUX KICKAPOO DELAWARE PAIUTE HUPA SHOSHONE MIAMI G R EAT P LA I NS SUSQUEHANNA YUKI MAIDU GREAT BASIN SHAWNEE IOWA LENAPE ILLINOIS POMO WASHO ARAPAHO PAWNEE R. POWHATAN SHOSHONE . MISSOURI o hi oR MIWOK CHICKAHOMINY KANSA Arka ad UTE r MONO n sas R. PAIUTE olo TUSCARORA C OSAGE KIOWA CALIFORNIA NAVAJO APACHE CHEROKEE CATAWBA HOPI PUEBLO CHUMASH MOHAVE CREEK QUAPAW ZUNI CHICKASAW APACHE CADDO COMANCHE ALABAMA SOUTHEAST WICHITA APACHE CHOCTAW 120°W PIMA NATCHEZ KILIWA TIMUCUA 
60°W


°N




 is ss

O


 sippi R.

PAC I F I C O C E A N

 BEOTHUK

 CREE

KWAKIUTL NOOTKA

 INUIT

AT L A N T I C O C E A N

 o Ri

 a Gr

 de

 n

 PIMA

 KARANKAWA

S OUTHWEST



N


Gulf of
Mexico


 ic Trop

 TAINO 600 Mi.

 Tribal location SIOUX at time of contact Modern boundaries, for reference

 r

 ance

 of C

20°N


 CIBONEY

600 Km.


 CALUSA

CARIBBEAN AZTEC

Caribbean Sea


MESOAMERICA 100°W

80°W


 Map 1.2 North American Indian Peoples at the Time of First Contact with Europeans Because this map depicts the location of various Indian peoples at the time of their ﬁrst contact with Europeans, and because initial contacts ranged from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries, it is necessarily subject to considerable chronological skewing and is only a crude approximation of the “original” territory of any given group. The map also cannot capture the ﬂuidity and dynamism of Native American life even before Columbus’s “discovery.” For example, the Navajo and Apache peoples had migrated from present-day northern Canada only shortly before the Spanish ﬁ rst encountered them in the present-day American Southwest in the 1500s. The map also places the Sioux on the Great Plains, where Europeans met up with them in the early nineteenth century—but the Sioux had spilled onto the plains not long before then from the forests surrounding the Great Lakes. The indigenous populations of the southeastern and mid-Atlantic regions are especially difﬁcult to represent accurately in a map like this because pre-Columbian intertribal conﬂicts had so scrambled the native inhabitants that it is virtually impossible to determine which groups were originally where. Interactive Map





 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

 Cahokia This artist’s rendering of Cahokia, based on archaeological excavations, shows the huge central square and the imposing Monk’s Mound, which rivaled in size the pyramids of Egypt.

 sustain some large settlements after the incorporation of corn planting into their ways of life during the ﬁrst millennium c.e. The Mississippian settlement at Cahokia, near present-day East St. Louis, was at one time home to as many as twenty-ﬁve thousand people. The Anasazis built an elaborate pueblo of more than six hundred interconnected rooms at Chaco Canyon in modern-day New Mexico. But mysteriously, perhaps due to prolonged drought, all those ancient cultures fell into decline by about 1300 c.e. The cultivation of maize, as well as of high-yielding strains of beans and squash, reached the southeastern Atlantic seaboard region of North America about 1000 c.e. These plants made possible three-sister farming, with beans growing on the trellis of the cornstalks and squash covering the planting mounds to retain moisture in the soil. The rich diet provided by this environmentally clever farming technique produced some of the highest population densities on the continent, among them the Creek, Choctaw, and Cherokee peoples. The Iroquois in the northeastern woodlands, inspired by a legendary leader named Hiawatha, created in the sixteenth century perhaps the closest North American approximation to the great empires of Mexico and Peru. The Iroquois Confederacy developed the political and orga ni zational skills to sustain a robust military alliance that menaced its neighbors, Native

 American and European alike, for well over a century (see “Makers of America: The Iroquois,” pp. 42–43). But for the most part, the native peoples of North America were living in small, scattered, and impermanent settlements on the eve of the Europeans’ arrival. In more settled agricultural groups, women tended the crops while men hunted, ﬁshed, gathered fuel, and cleared ﬁelds for planting. This pattern of life frequently conferred substantial authority on women, and many North American native peoples, including the Iroquois, developed matrilineal cultures, in which power and possessions passed down the female side of the family line. Unlike the Europeans, who would soon arrive with the presumption that humans had dominion over the earth and with the technologies to alter the very face of the land, the Native Americans had neither the desire nor the means to manipulate nature aggressively. They revered the physical world and endowed nature with spiritual properties. Yet they did sometimes ignite massive forest ﬁ res, deliberately torching thousands of acres of trees to create better hunting habitats, especially for deer. This practice accounted for the open, parklike appearance of the eastern woodlands that so amazed early European explorers. But in a broad sense, the land did not feel the hand of the Native Americans heavy upon it, partly because they were so few in number. They were so thinly spread

Early Explorers


 across the continent that vast areas were virtually untouched by a human presence. In the fateful year 1492, probably no more than 4 million Native Americans padded through the whispering, primeval forests and paddled across the sparkling, virgin waters of the continent north of Mexico. They were blissfully unaware that the historic isolation of the Americas was about to end forever, as the land and the native peoples alike felt the full shock of the European “discovery.”

Indirect Discoverers
 of the New World Europeans, for their part, were equally unaware of the existence of the Americas. Blond-bearded Norse seafarers from Scandinavia had chanced upon the northeastern shoulder of North America about 1000 c.e. They landed at a place near L’Anse aux Meadows in presentday Newfoundland that abounded in wild grapes, which led them to name the spot Vinland. But no strong nation-state, yearning to expand, supported these venturesome voyagers. Their ﬂ imsy settlements consequently were soon abandoned, and their discovery was forgotten, except in Scandinavian saga and song. For several centuries thereafter, other restless Europeans, with the growing power of ambitious governments behind them, sought contact with a wider world, whether for conquest or trade. They thus set in motion the chain of events that led to a drive toward Asia, the penetration of Africa, and the completely accidental discovery of the New World. Christian crusaders must rank high among America’s indirect discoverers. Clad in shining armor, tens of thousands of these European warriors tried from the eleventh to the fourteenth century to wrest the Holy Land from Muslim control. Foiled in their military assaults, the crusaders nevertheless acquired a taste for the exotic delights of Asia. Goods that had been virtually unknown in Europe now were craved—silk for cloth ing, drugs for aching ﬂesh, perfumes for unbathed bodies, colorful draperies for gloomy castles, and spices— especially sugar, a rare luxury in Europe before the crusades—for preserving and ﬂavoring food. Europe’s developing sweet tooth would have momentous implications for world history. The luxuries of the East were prohibitively expensive in Europe. They had to be transported enormous distances from the Spice Islands (Indonesia), China, and India, in creaking ships and on swaying camel-



 back. The journey led across the Indian Ocean, the Persian Gulf, and the Red Sea or along the tortuous caravan routes of Asia or the Arabian Peninsula, ending at the ports of the eastern Mediterranean (see Map 1.3). Muslim middlemen exacted a heavy toll en route. By the time the strange-smelling goods reached Italian merchants at Venice and Genoa, they were so costly that purchasers and proﬁts alike were narrowly limited. European consumers and distributors were naturally eager to ﬁ nd a less expensive route to the riches of Asia or to develop alternate sources of supply.

Europeans Enter Africa
 European appetites were further whetted when footloose Marco Polo, an Italian adventurer, returned to Europe in 1295 and began telling tales of his nearly twenty-year sojourn in China. Though he may in fact never have seen China (legend to the contrary, the hard evidence is sketchy), he must be regarded as an indirect discoverer of the New World, for his book, with its descriptions of rose-tinted pearls and golden pagodas, stimulated European desires for a cheaper route to the trea sures of the East. These accumulating pressures eventually brought a breakthrough for European expansion. Before the middle of the ﬁ fteenth century, European sailors refused to sail southward along the coast of West Africa because they could not beat their way home against the prevailing northerly winds and south-ﬂowing currents. About 1450, Portuguese mariners overcame those obstacles. Not only had they developed the caravel, a ship that could sail more closely into the wind, but they had discovered that they could return to Europe by sailing northwesterly from the African coast toward the Azores, where the prevailing westward breezes would carry them home. The new world of sub-Saharan Africa now came within the grasp of questing Europeans. The northern shore of Africa, as part of the Mediterranean world, had been known to Europe since antiquity. But because sea travel down the African coast had been virtually impossible, Africa south of the forbidding Sahara Desert barrier had remained remote and mysterious. African gold, perhaps two-thirds of Europe’s supply, crossed the Sahara on camelback, and shadowy tales may have reached Europe about the ﬂourishing West African kingdom of Mali in the Niger River valley, with its impressive Islamic university at Timbuktu. But Europeans



 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

150°W


120°W


90°W


30°W


60°W


0°


60°E


30°E


90°E


150°E


120°E


GREENLAND
Arctic Circle 
Iceland


60°N


 ENGLAND

Genoa


 PORTUGAL

NORTH AMERICA

Venice
Constantinople


 SPAIN

Azores


 ASIA

E UR O P E


 FRANCE

JAPAN PERSI A

Canary Is.


30°N


Beijing
Hangzhou
Delhi


Alexandria
Tropic of Cancer
Cape


A T L A N T I C
Verde Is.
 OCEAN

SA H A R A M ALI

A RABI A

C H IN A
 INDIA

Timbuktu


 AFRICA 0° Equator

PACIFIC OCEAN

PACIFIC OCEAN

Guangzhou
(Canton)


Malacca


Spice
Islands


 Príncipe São Tomé

SOUTH AMERICA
Madagascar 
INDIAN OCEAN

Tropic of Capricorn


AUS TRALIA

30°S


N




 The world known to Europe, 1492 60°S Antarctic Circle

3000 Km.


3000 Mi.


 Portuguese exploration

The Silk Road


 Díaz, 1488

 Other land trade routes

 da Gama, 1498

 Ocean trade routes

 Prevailing wind

 Map 1.3 The World Known to Europe and Major Trade Routes with Asia, 1492 Goods on the early routes passed through so many hands along the way that their ultimate source remained mysterious to Europeans.

 had no direct access to sub-Saharan Africa until the Portuguese navigators began to creep down the West African coast in the middle of the ﬁ fteenth century. The Portuguese promptly set up trading posts along the African shore for the purchase of gold—and slaves. Arab ﬂesh merchants and Africans themselves had traded slaves for centuries before the Europeans arrived. The slavers routinely charged higher prices for captives from distant sources, because they could not easily ﬂee to their native villages or be easily rescued by their kin. Slave brokers also deliberately separated persons from the same tribes and mixed unlike people together to frustrate orga nized resistance. Thus from its



Interactive Map


 earliest days, slavery by its very nature inhibited the expression of regional African cultures and tribal identities. The Portuguese adopted these Arab and African practices. They built up their own systematic trafﬁc in slaves to work the sugar plantations that Portugal, and later Spain, established on the African coastal islands of Madeira, the Canaries, São Tomé, and Principe. The Portuguese appetite for slaves was enormous and dwarfed the modest scale of the pre-European trafﬁc. Slave trading became a big business. Some forty thousand Africans were carried away to the Atlantic sugar islands in the last half of the ﬁ fteenth century. Millions

European Trade and Exploration




 Marco Polo Passing Through the Strait of Hormuz This illustration, from the ﬁrst printed edition of The Travels of Marco Polo in 1477, shows the traveler crossing the Persian Gulf between the Arabian Peninsula and Persia (presentday Iran).

 more were to be wrenched from their home continent after the discovery of the Americas. In these ﬁ fteenthcentury Portuguese adventures in Africa were to be found the origins of the modern plantation system, based on large-scale commercial agriculture and the wholesale exploitation of slave labor. This kind of plantation economy would shape the destiny of much of the New World. The seafaring Portuguese pushed still farther southward in search of the water route to Asia. Edging cautiously down the African coast, Bartholomeu Dias rounded the southernmost tip of the “Dark Continent” in 1488. Ten years later Vasco da Gama ﬁ nally reached India (hence the name “Indies,” given by Europeans to all the mysterious lands of the Orient) and returned

 home with a small but tantalizing cargo of jewels and spices. Meanwhile, the kingdom of Spain became united— an event pregnant with destiny—in the late ﬁ fteenth century. This new unity resulted primarily from the marriage of two sovereigns, Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile, and from the brutal expulsion of the “inﬁdel” Muslim Moors from Spain after centuries of Christian-Islamic warfare. Glorying in their sudden strength, the Spaniards were eager to outstrip their Portuguese rivals in the race to tap the wealth of the Indies. To the south and east, Portugal controlled the African coast and thus controlled the gateway to the round-Africa water route to India. Of necessity, therefore, Spain looked westward.



 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

 Columbus Comes upon a New World

 Gorée Island Slave Fortress From this holding station off the coast of Senegal, thousands of African captives passed through the “Door of No Return” into a lifetime of slavery in the New World.

 The stage was now set for a cataclysmic shift in the course of history—the history not only of Europe but of all the world. Europeans clamored for more and cheaper products from the lands beyond the Mediterranean. Africa had been established as a source of cheap slave labor for plantation agriculture. The Portuguese voyages had demonstrated the feasibility of long-range ocean navigation. In Spain a modern national state was taking shape, with the unity, wealth, and power to shoulder the formidable tasks of discovery, conquest, and colonization. The dawn of the Renaissance in the fourteenth century nurtured an ambitious spirit of optimism and adventure. Printing presses, introduced about 1450, facilitated the spread of scientiﬁc knowledge. The mariner’s compass, possibly borrowed from the Arabs, eliminated some of the uncertainties of sea travel. Meanwhile, across the ocean, the unsuspecting New World innocently awaited its European “discoverers.” Onto this stage stepped Christopher Columbus. This skilled Italian seafarer persuaded the Spanish monarchs to outﬁt him with three tiny but seaworthy ships, manned by a motley crew. Daringly, he unfurled the sails of his cockleshell craft and headed westward. His superstitious sailors, fearful of venturing into the oceanic unknown, grew increasingly mutinous. After six weeks at sea, failure loomed until, on October 12, 1492, the crew sighted an island in the Bahamas. A new world thus swam within the vision of Europeans.

The Impact of Discovery




 nished the labor; and the New World offered its raw materials, especially its precious metals and its soil for the cultivation of sugar cane. For Europeans as well as for Africans and Native Americans, the world after 1492 would never be the same, for better or worse.

When Worlds Collide


Christopher Columbus (1451–1506), by Ridolfo di
 Domenico Ghirlandaio No portrait from life exists of Columbus, so all likenesses of him, including this one, are somewhat fanciful.

 Columbus’s sensational achievement obscures the fact that he was one of the most successful failures in history. Seeking a new water route to the fabled Indies, he in fact had bumped into an enormous land barrier blocking the ocean pathway. For decades thereafter explorers strove to get through it or around it. The truth gradually dawned that sprawling new continents had been discovered. Yet Columbus was at ﬁ rst so certain that he had skirted the rim of the “Indies” that he called the native peoples Indians, a gross geographical misnomer that somehow stuck. Columbus’s discovery would eventually convulse four continents—Europe, Africa, and the two Americas. Thanks to his epochal voyage, an interdependent global economic system emerged on a scale undreamedof before he set sail. Its workings touched every shore washed by the Atlantic Ocean. Europe provided the markets, the capital, and the technology; Africa fur-

 Two ecosystems—the fragile, naturally evolved networks of relations among organisms in a stable environment— commingled and clashed when Columbus waded ashore. The reverberations from that historic encounter—often called the Columbian exchange (see Figure 1.1)—echoed for centuries after 1492. The ﬂora and fauna of the Old and New Worlds had been separated for thousands of years. European explorers marveled at the strange sights that greeted them, including exotic beasts such as iguanas and “snakes with castanets” (rattlesnakes). Native New World plants such as tobacco, maize, beans, tomatoes, and especially the lowly potato eventually revolutionized the international economy as well as the European diet, feeding the rapid population growth of the Old World. These foodstuffs were among the most important Indian gifts to the Europeans and to the rest of the world. Perhaps three-ﬁfths of the crops cultivated around the globe today originated in the Americas. Ironically, the introduction into Africa of New World foodstuffs like maize, manioc, and sweet potatoes may have fed an African population boom that numerically, though not morally, more than offset the losses inﬂicted by the slave trade. In exchange the Europeans introduced Old World crops and animals to the Americas. Columbus returned to the Caribbean island of Hispaniola (present-day Haiti and the Dominican Republic) in 1493 with seventeen ships that unloaded twelve hundred men and a virtual Noah’s Ark of cattle, swine, and horses. The horses soon reached the North American mainland through Mex ico and in less than two centuries had spread as far as Canada. North American Indian tribes like the Apaches, Sioux, and Blackfeet swiftly adopted the horse, transforming their cultures into highly mobile, wide-ranging hunter societies that roamed the grassy Great Plains in pursuit of the shaggy buffalo. Columbus also brought seedlings of sugar cane, which thrived in the warm Car ibbean climate. A “sugar revolution” consequently took place in the European diet, fueled by the forced migration of millions of Africans to work the caneﬁelds and sugar mills of the New World.



 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

 Gold, silver

 Corn, potatoes, pineapples, tomatoes, tobacco, beans, vanilla, chocolate

Syphilis
OLD WORLD NEW WORLD

 Wheat, sugar, rice, coffee

 Horses, cows, pigs

 Smallpox, measles, bubonic plague, influenza, typhus, diphtheria, scarlet fever

 Slave labor

 AFRICA

 Figure 1.1 The Columbian Exchange Columbus’s discovery initiated the kind of explosion in international commerce that a later age would call “globalization.” (Source: Adapted from Out of Many: A History of the American People, Third Edition, Combined Edition by Faragher, Buhle, Czitrom, and Armitage. Copyright © 1999. By permission of Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.)

 Unwittingly, the Europeans also brought other organisms in the dirt on their boots and the dust on their clothes, such as the seeds of Kentucky bluegrass, dandelions, and daisies. Most ominous of all, in their bodies they carried the germs that caused smallpox, yellow fever, and malaria. Indeed Old World diseases would quickly devastate the Native Americans. During the Indians’ millennia of isolation in the Americas, most of the Old World’s killer maladies had disappeared from among them. But generations of freedom from those illnesses had also wiped out protective antibodies. Devoid of natural resistance to Old World sicknesses, Indians died in droves. Within ﬁ fty years of the Spanish arrival, the population of the Taino natives in Hispaniola dwindled from some 1 million people to about 200. Enslavement and armed aggression took their toll, but the deadliest killers were microbes, not muskets. The lethal germs spread among the New World peoples with the speed and force of a hurricane, swiftly sweeping far ahead of the human invaders; most of those afﬂ icted

 never laid eyes on a European. In the centuries after Columbus’s landfall, as many as 90 percent of the Native Americans perished, a demographic catastrophe without parallel in human history. This depopulation was surely not intended by the Spanish, but it was nevertheless so severe that entire cultures and ancient ways of life were extinguished forever. Bafﬂed, enraged, and vengeful, Indian slaves sometimes kneaded tainted blood into their masters’ bread, to little effect. Perhaps it was poetic justice that the Indians unintentionally did take a kind of revenge by infecting the early explorers with syphilis, injecting that lethal sexually transmitted disease for the ﬁ rst time into Europe.

The Spanish Conquistadores
 Gradually, Europeans realized that the American continents held rich prizes, especially the gold and silver of the advanced Indian civilizations in Mexico and Peru.

Spanish Explorers and Conquistadores


 The Scourge of Smallpox This Peruvian infant, depicted about 1700, was ravaged by the dread European disease and placed in a crude quarantine.

 Spain secured its claim to Columbus’s discovery in the Treaty of Tordesillas (1494), dividing with Portugal the “heathen lands” of the New World (see Map 1.4). The lion’s share went to Spain, but Portugal received compensating territory in Africa and Asia, as well as title to lands that one day would be Brazil. Spain became the dominant exploring and colonizing power in the 1500s. In the ser vice of God, as well as in search of gold and glory, Spanish conquistadores (conquerors) fanned out across the Caribbean and eventually onto the mainland of the American continents (see “Makers of America: The Spanish Conquistadores,” pp. 20–21). On Spain’s long roster of notable deeds, two spectacular exploits must be headlined. Vasco Nuñez Balboa, hailed as the discoverer of the Pa-



 ciﬁc Ocean, waded into the foaming waves off Panama in 1513 and boldly claimed for his king all the lands washed by that sea (see Map 1.5). Ferdinand Magellan started from Spain in 1519 with ﬁve tiny ships. After beating through the storm-lashed strait off the tip of South America that still bears his name, he was slain by the inhabitants of the Philippines. His one remaining vessel creaked home in 1522, completing the ﬁ rst circumnavigation of the globe. Other ambitious Spaniards ventured into North America. In 1513 and 1521, Juan Ponce de León explored Florida, which he at ﬁ rst thought was an island. Seeking gold—and probably not the mythical “fountain of youth”—he instead met with death by an Indian arrow. In 1540–1542 Francisco Coronado, in quest of fabled golden cities that turned out to be adobe pueblos, wandered with a clanking cavalcade through Arizona and New Mexico, penetrating as far east as Kansas. En route his expedition discovered two awesome natural wonders: the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River and enormous herds of buffalo (bison). Hernando de Soto, with six hundred armor-plated men, undertook a fantastic gold-seeking expedition during 1539–1542. Floundering through marshes and pine barrens from Florida westward, he discovered and crossed the majestic Mississippi River just north of its junction with the Arkansas River. After brutally mistreating the Indians with iron collars and ﬁerce dogs, he at length died of fever and wounds. His troops secretly disposed of his remains at night in the Mississippi, lest the Indians exhume and abuse their abuser’s corpse. Meanwhile in South America, the ironﬁsted conqueror Francisco Pizarro crushed the Incas of Peru in 1532 and added a huge hoard of booty to Spanish coffers. By 1600 Spain was swimming in New World silver, mostly from the fabulously rich mines at Potosí in present-day Bolivia, as well as from Mexico. This ﬂood of precious metal touched off a price revolution in Europe that increased consumer costs by as much as 500 percent in the hundred years after the midsixteenth century. Some scholars see in this ballooning European money supply the fuel that fed the growth of the economic system known as capitalism. Certainly, New World bullion helped transform the world economy. It swelled the vaults of bankers from Spain to Italy, laying the foundations of the modern commercial banking system. It clinked in the purses of merchants in France and Holland, stimulating the spread of commerce and manu facturing. And it paid for much of the burgeoning international trade with Asia, whose sellers had little use for any European good except silver.

Arctic Circle


Missis


 sippi R.

NORTH AMERICA

Coronado
1540–1542


C a b o t 1 4 97


 EUROPE

 PORTUGAL

CENTRAL AMERICA

West
Indies


 ibbe



30°N
Tropic of Cancer


AT L A N T I C

 ARABIA

O C E A N


 an Sea

Balboa


Med
 it Sea erranean



Verrazano
 Ponce de León bus Colum

Car


 ASIA

 SPAIN

De Soto
1539–1542


 Cortés

 Tenochtitlán (Mexico City)

60°N


 ENGLAND

Newfoundland


 FRANCE

Gulf of
Mexico


Cabeza
 de Vaca 1528–1536

Cartier
1535–1536


 c Vespuc

 i





 AFRICA

Arabian
Sea
0°


AT L A N T I C
ed 
 itio

OC EA N
n1 
9–






 Portuguese claims Ocean currents



150°W




2000 Km.


2000 Mi.


120°W


90°W


60°W


 ion 14 marcat Line of De ation emarc Line of D

 Spanish claims





Tropic of
Capricorn


 an’s 30°S Va agell n of M n 1522 ) r tu e R itio no Exped an del Ca sti (Seba

N


30°W


0°


 Map 1.4 Principal Voyages of Discovery Spain, Portugal, France, and England reaped the greatest advantages from the New World, but much of the earliest exploration was done by Italians, notably Christopher Columbus of Genoa. John Cabot, another native of Genoa (his original name was Giovanni Caboto), sailed for England’s King Henry VII. Giovanni da Verrazano was a Florentine employed by France.

 The islands of the Caribbean Sea—the West Indies as they came to be called, in yet another perpetuation of Columbus’s geographic confusion—served as offshore bases for the staging of the Spanish invasion of the mainland Americas. Here supplies could be stored, and men and horses could be rested and acclimated, before proceeding to the conquest of the continents. The loosely orga nized and vulnerable native communities of the West Indies also provided laboratories for testing the techniques that would eventually subdue the advanced Indian civilizations of Mexico and Peru. The most important such technique was the institution known as the encomienda. It allowed the government

 OCEAN

 ma

Exp


Ga


 n’s

 da

 lla

 INDIAN

 o

 ge

SOUTH AMERICA

Pizarro
1531–1533


 sc

Ma


O C EAN


1 4 97


PAC I F IC

–149 8


Equator


30°E


60°E


Interactive Map


 to “commend,” or give, Indians to certain colonists in return for the promise to try to Christianize them. In all but name, it was slavery. Spanish missionary Bartolomé de Las Casas, appalled by the encomienda system in Hispaniola, called it “a moral pestilence invented by Satan.”

The Conquest of Mexico
 In 1519 Hernán Cortés set sail from Cuba with sixteen fresh horses and several hundred men aboard eleven ships, bound for Mexico and for destiny. On the island of



M
 is

.
 oR

NORTH AMERICA

Santa Fé


San
Diego


 ad

 e nd Gra

 r on o,

Pon


–1


110°W




PACIFIC OCEAN

 ce

 de

Gulf of
Mexico




Map 1.5 Principal Early
Spanish Explorations and
 Conquests Note that Coronado traversed northern Texas and Oklahoma. In present-day eastern Kansas, he found, instead of the great golden city he sought, a drab encampment, probably of Wichita Indians.

N


30°


St. Augustine, 1565


Rio


Co


120°W


ATLANTIC OCEAN
De S oto 9–15 
 l Co

 a or

 sippi R. sis

 d

 Cortés Conquers Mexico

NEW SPAIN

Le


 ón

,1






N


20°


CUBA
Co rté 
Veracruz


Mexico City


 s, 1519

Caribbean Sea
80°W


N


250 500 Km.


Balboa,


500 Mi.


Pizarro,
1531–1533
100°W


90°W


70°W
10°N


SOUTH AMERICA

To Peru


Interactive Map


 Bartolomé de Las Casas (1474–1566), a reformminded Dominican friar, wrote The Destruction of the Indies in 1542 to chronicle the awful fate of the Native Americans and to protest Spanish policies in the New World. He was especially horriﬁed at the catastrophic effects of disease on the native peoples:

“


 Who of those in future centuries will believe this? I myself who am writing this and saw it and know the most about it can hardly believe that such was possible.

”


 Cozumel off the Yucatán Peninsula, he rescued a Spanish castaway who had been enslaved for several years by the Mayan-speaking Indians. A short distance farther on, he picked up the female Indian slave Malinche, who knew both Mayan and Nahuatl, the language of the powerful Aztec rulers of the great empire in the highlands of central Mexico. In addition to his superior ﬁrepower, Cortés now had the advantage, through these two interpreters, of understanding the speech of the native peoples whom he was about to encounter, including the Aztecs. Malinche eventually learned Spanish and was baptized with the Spanish name of Doña Marina. Near present-day Veracruz, Cortés made his ﬁ nal land fall. Through his interpreters he learned of unrest

 within the Aztec empire among the peoples from whom the Aztecs demanded tribute. He also heard alluring tales of the gold and other wealth stored up in the legendary Aztec capital of Tenochtitlán. He lusted to tear open the coffers of the Aztec kingdom. To quell his mutinous troops, he boldly burned his ships, cutting off any hope of retreat. Gathering a force of some twenty thousand Indian allies, he marched on Tenochtitlán and toward one of history’s most dramatic and fateful encounters. As Cortés proceeded, the Aztec chieftain Moctezuma sent ambassadors bearing fabulous gifts to welcome the approaching Spaniards. These only whetted the conquistador’s appetite. “We Spanish suffer from a strange disease of the heart,” Cortés allegedly informed the emissaries, “for which the only known remedy is gold.” The ambassadors reported this comment to Moctezuma, along with the astonishing fact that the newcomers rode on the backs of “deer” (horses). The superstitious Moctezuma also believed that Cortés was the god Quetzalcoatl, whose return from the eastern sea was predicted in Aztec legends. Expectant yet apprehensive, Moctezuma allowed the conquistadores to approach his capital unopposed. As the Spaniards entered the Valley of Mexico, the sight of the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlán amazed them. With 300,000 inhabitants spread over ten square miles, it rivaled in size and pomp any city in contemporary

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
The Spanish The Great AfricanConquistadores American Migration 
I


 n 1492, the same year that Columbus sighted America, the great Moorish city of Granada, in Spain, fell after a ten-year siege. For ﬁve centuries the Christian kingdoms of Spain had been trying to drive the North African Muslim Moors (“the Dark Ones,” in Spanish) off the Iberian Peninsula, and with the fall of Granada they succeeded. But the lengthy Reconquista had left its mark on Spanish society. Centuries of military and religious confrontation nurtured an obsession with status and honor, bred religious zealotry and intolerance, and created a large class of men who regarded manual labor and commerce contemptuously. With the Reconquista ended, some of these men turned their restless gaze to Spain’s New World frontier. At ﬁ rst Spanish hopes for America focused on the Caribbean and on ﬁ nding a sea route to Asia. Gradually, however, word ﬁ ltered back of rich kingdoms on the mainland. Between 1519 and 1540, Spanish conquistadores swept across the Americas in two wide arcs of conquest—one driv ing from Cuba through Mexico

Conquistadores, ca. 1534
 This illustration for a book called the Köhler Codex of Nuremberg may be the earliest depiction of the conquistadores in the Americas. It portrays men and horses alike as steadfast and self-assured in their work of conquest.



 into what is now the southwestern United States, the other starting from Panama and pushing south into Peru. Within half a century of Columbus’s arrival in the Americas, the conquistadores had extinguished the great Aztec and Incan empires and claimed for church and crown a territory that extended from Colorado to Argentina, including much of what is now the continental United States. The military conquest of this vast region was achieved by just ten thousand men, orga nized in a series of private expeditions. Hernán Cortés, Francisco Pizarro, and other aspiring conquerors signed contracts with the Spanish monarch, raised money from investors, and then went about recruiting an army. Only a small minority of the conquistadores—leaders or followers—were nobles. About half were professional soldiers and sailors; the rest comprised peasants, artisans, and members of the middling classes. Most were in their twenties and early thirties, and all knew how to wield a sword.

 Diverse motives spurred these motley adventurers. Some hoped to win royal titles and favors by bringing new peoples under the Spanish ﬂag. Others sought to ensure God’s favor by spreading Christianity to the pagans. Some men hoped to escape dubious pasts, and others sought the kind of historical adventure experienced by heroes of classical antiquity. Nearly all shared a lust for gold. As one of Cortés’s foot soldiers put it, “We came here to serve God and the king, and also to get rich.” One historian adds that the conquistadores ﬁ rst fell on their knees and then fell upon the aborigines. Armed with horses and gunpowder and preceded by disease, the conquistadores quickly overpowered the Indians. But most never achieved their dreams of glory. Few received titles of nobility, and many of the rank and ﬁ le remained permanently indebted to the absentee investors who paid for their equipment. Even when an expedition captured exceptionally rich booty, the spoils were unevenly divided: men from the command-

 er’s home region often received more, and men on horseback generally got two shares to the infantryman’s one. The conquistadores lost still more power as the crown gradually tightened its control in the New World. By the 1530s in Mexico and the 1550s in Peru, colorless colonial administrators had replaced the freebooting conquistadores. Nevertheless, the conquistadores achieved a kind of immortality. Because of a scarcity of Spanish women in the early days of the conquest, many of the conquistadores married Indian women. The soldiers who conquered Paraguay received three native women each, and Cortés’s soldiers in Mexico—who were forbidden to consort with pagan women—quickly had their lovers baptized into the Catholic faith. Their offspring, the “new race” of mestizos, formed a cultural and a biological bridge between Latin America’s European and Indian races.

 An Aztec View of the Conquest, 1531 Produced just a dozen years after Cortés’s arrival in 1519, this drawing by an Aztec artist pictures the Indians rendering tribute to their conquerors. The inclusion of the banner showing the Madonna and child also illustrates the early incorporation of Christian beliefs by the Indians.



 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

 Europe. The Aztec metropolis rose from an island in the center of a lake, surrounded by ﬂoating gardens of extraordinary beauty. It was connected to the mainland by a series of causeways and supplied with fresh water by an artfully designed aqueduct. Moctezuma treated Cortés hospitably at ﬁ rst, but soon the Spaniards’ hunger for gold and power exhausted their welcome. “They thirsted mightily for gold; they stuffed themselves with it; they starved for it; they lusted for it like pigs,” said one Aztec. On the noche triste (sad night) of June 30, 1520, the Aztecs attacked, driv ing the Spanish down the causeways from Tenochtitlán in a frantic, bloody retreat. Cortés then laid siege to the city, and it capitulated on August 13, 1521. That same year a smallpox epidemic burned through the Valley of Mexico. The combination of conquest and disease took a grisly toll. The Aztec empire gave way to three centuries of Spanish rule. The temples of Tenochtitlán were destroyed to make way for the Christian cathedrals of Mexico City, built on the site of the ruined Indian capital. And the native population of Mexico, winnowed mercilessly by the invader’s dis-

 eases, shrank from some 20 million to 2 million people in less than a century. Yet the invader brought more than conquest and death. He brought his crops and his animals, his language and his laws, his customs and his religion, all of which proved adaptable to the peoples of Mexico. He intermarried with the surviving Indians, creating a distinctive culture of mestizos, people of mixed Indian and European heritage. To this day Mexican civilization remains a unique blend of the Old World and the New, producing both ambivalence and pride among people of Mexican heritage. Cortés’s translator, Malinche, for example, has given her name to the Mexican language in the word malinchista, or “traitor.” But Mexicans also celebrate Columbus Day as the Dia de la Raza—the birthday of a wholly new race of people.

The Spread of Spanish America
 Spain’s colonial empire grew swiftly and impressively. Within about half a century of Columbus’s landfall,

 Artists’ Rendering of Tenochtitlán Amid tribal strife in the fourteenth century, the Aztecs built a capital on a small island in a lake in the central Valley of Mexico. From here they oversaw the most powerful empire yet to arise in Mesoamerica. Two main temples stood at the city’s sacred center, one dedicated to Tlaloc, the ancient rain god, and the other to Huitzilopochtli, the tribal god, who was believed to require human hearts for sustenance.

 Spain's New World Empire

 Cortés and Malinche, ca. 1540 (detail) Though done by an Indian artist, this drawing identiﬁes Malinche by her Christian name, Marina. She eventually married one of Cortés’s soldiers, with whom she traveled to Spain and was received at the Spanish court.

 hundreds of Spanish cities and towns ﬂourished in the Americas, especially in the great silver-producing centers of Peru and Mexico. Some 160,000 Spaniards, mostly men, had subjugated millions of Indians. Majestic cathedrals dotted the land, printing presses turned out books, and scholars studied at distinguished universities, including those at Mexico City and Lima, Peru, both founded in 1551, eighty-ﬁve years before Harvard, the ﬁ rst college established in the Eng lish colonies. But how secure were these imperial possessions? Other powers were already snifﬁ ng around the edges of the Spanish domain, eager to bite off their share of the promised wealth of the new lands. The upstart Eng lish sent Giovanni Caboto (known in Eng lish as John Cabot) to explore the northeastern coast of North America in 1497 and 1498. The French king dispatched another Italian mariner, Giovanni da Verrazano, to probe the eastern seaboard in 1524. Ten years later the Frenchman Jacques Cartier journeyed hundreds of miles up the St. Lawrence River. To secure the northern periphery of their New World domain against such encroachments and to convert more Indian souls to Christianity, the Spanish began to fortify and settle their North American borderlands. In a move to block French ambitions and to protect the sea-lanes to the Caribbean, the Spanish



 erected a fortress at St. Augustine, Florida, in 1565, thus founding the oldest continually inhabited European settlement in the future United States. In Mexico the tales of Coronado’s expedition of the 1540s to the upper Rio Grande and Colorado River regions continued to beckon the conquistadores northward. A dust-begrimed expeditionary column, with eighty-three rumbling wagons and hundreds of grumbling men, traversed the bare Sonora Desert from Mexico into the Rio Grande valley in 1598. Led by Don Juan de Oñate, the Spaniards cruelly abused the Pueblo peoples they encountered. In the Battle of Acoma in 1599, the Spanish severed one foot of each survivor. They proclaimed the area to be the province of New Mexico in 1609 and founded its capital at Santa Fé the following year (see Map 1.6). The Spanish settlers in New Mexico found a few furs and precious little gold, but they did discover a wealth of souls to be harvested for the Christian religion. The Roman Catholic mission became the central institution in colonial New Mexico until the missionaries’ efforts to suppress native religious customs provoked an Indian uprising called Popé’s Rebellion in 1680. The Pueblo rebels destroyed every Catholic church in the province and killed a score of priests and hundreds of Spanish settlers. In a reversal of Cortés’s treatment of the Aztec temples more than a century earlier, the Indians rebuilt a kiva, or ceremonial religious chamber, on the ruins of the Spanish plaza at Santa Fé. It took nearly half a century for the Spanish fully to reclaim New Mexico from the insurrectionary Indians. Meanwhile, as a further hedge against the everthreatening French, who had sent an expedition under Robert de La Salle down the Mississippi River in the 1680s, the Spanish began around 1716 to establish settlements in Texas. Some refugees from the Pueblo uprising trickled into Texas, and a few missions were established there, including the one at San Antonio later known as the Alamo. But for at least another century, the Spanish presence remained weak in this distant northeastern outpost of Spain’s Mexican empire. To the west, in Cal i fornia, no serious foreign threat loomed, and Spain directed its attention there only belatedly. Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo had explored the Cal ifornia coast in 1542, but he failed to ﬁ nd San Francisco Bay or anything else of much interest. For some two centuries thereafter, Cal i fornia slumbered undisturbed by European intruders. Then in 1769 Spanish missionaries led by Father Junipero Serra founded at San Diego the ﬁ rst of a chain of twenty-one missions that wound



 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

120°W


 do

R.


Co


 l

 California missions, 1769–1823

 a or

100°W


105°W


Y
CK RO TS. M

35°N


110°W


115°W


Arkansas R
.


Quivira


Taos
Santa Fé


Ca


Acoma


Red R.


Gila R.


SONORA DESERT

Cab


PACIFIC OCEAN

 nad ian R.

 rillo

Br


 az

 os R.

, 154


Tucson


R.


 AD

Mission
San Antonio


 a

 NT

 ni

E
DR MA L TA RA ER RIEN O

, 1598


 or

 DE

 lif

 CI

Ca


 OC

 SI

 RE

 of

 AL



 e

 ñate de O

M


 lf



100 200 Km.


 os

 and

 RA

Gu


25°N


Pec


 o

Gr


 ER

N


Ri


El Paso


 SI

30°N


Durango


200 Mi.


M E X IC O


 Present-day New Mexico

 Map 1.6 Spain’s North American Frontier, 1542–1823 Interactive Map

 up the coast as far as Sonoma, north of San Francisco Bay. Father Serra’s brown-robed Franciscan friars toiled with zealous devotion to Christianize the three hundred thousand native Cal i fornians. They gathered the seminomadic Indians into fortiﬁed missions and taught them horticulture and basic crafts. These “mission Indians” did adopt Christianity, but they also lost contact with their native cultures and often lost their lives as well, as the white man’s diseases doomed these biologically vulnerable peoples. The misdeeds of the Spanish in the New World obscured their substantial achievements and helped give birth to the Black Legend. This false concept held that the conquerors merely tortured and butchered the Indians (“kill ing for Christ”), stole their gold, infected them with smallpox, and left little but misery behind. The Spanish invaders did indeed kill, enslave, and infect countless natives, but they also erected a colossal

 empire, sprawling from Cal i fornia and Florida to Tierra del Fuego. They grafted their culture, laws, religion, and language onto a wide array of native societies, laying the foundations for a score of Spanish-speaking nations. Clearly, the Spaniards, who had more than a century’s head start over the Eng lish, were genuine empire builders and cultural innovators in the New World. As compared with their Anglo-Saxon rivals, their colonial establishment was larger and richer, and it was destined to endure more than a quarter of a century longer. And in the last analysis, the Spanish paid the Native Americans the high compliment of fusing with them through marriage and incorporating indigenous culture into their own, rather than shunning and eventually isolating the Indians as their Eng lish adversaries would do.

Chronology


 CHRONOLOGY ca. 33,000– 8000 B.C.E.

 First humans cross into Americas from Asia

1519–


 Cortés conquers Mexico for Spain

 ca. 5000 B.C.E.

 Corn is developed as a staple crop in highland Mexico



 Magellan’s vessel completes circumnavigation of the world

 ca. 4000 B.C.E.

 First civilized societies develop in the Middle East



 Verrazano explores eastern seaboard of North America for France

 ca. 1200 B.C.E.

 Corn planting reaches present-day American Southwest



 Pizarro crushes Incas

 ca. 1000 C.E.



 Cartier journeys up the St. Lawrence River

 Norse voyagers discover and brieﬂy settle in northeastern North America Corn cultivation reaches Midwest and southeastern Atlantic seaboard

1539–


 De Soto explores the Southeast and discovers the Mississippi River

1540–


 Coronado explores present-day Southwest

 ca. 1100 C.E.

 Height of Mississippian settlement at Cahokia

 ca. 1100– 1300 C.E.



 Cabrillo explores Cal i fornia coast for Spain

 Christian crusades arouse European interest in the East



 Spanish build fortress at St. Augustine



 Marco Polo returns to Europe

 late 1500s

 late 1400s

 Iroquois Confederacy founded, according to Iroquois legend

 Spain becomes united



 Dias rounds southern tip of Africa

 ca. 1598–

 Spanish under Oñate conquer Pueblo peoples of Rio Grande valley



 Columbus lands in the Bahamas



 Spanish found New Mexico



 Treaty of Tordesillas between Spain and Portugal



 Popé’s Rebellion in New Mexico



 1680s Da Gama reaches India Cabot explores northeastern coast of North America for Eng land

 French expedition down Mississippi River under La Salle



 Serra founds ﬁ rst Cal i fornia mission, at San Diego



 Balboa claims all lands touched by the Paciﬁc Ocean for Spain

1513,


 Ponce de León explores Florida





 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

KEY TERMS
Canadian Shield (4) Incas (8) Aztecs (8) nation-states (8) Cahokia (10) three-sister farming (10) middlemen (11) caravel (11) plantation (13) Columbian Exchange (15) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Tordesillas, Treaty of (17) conquistadores (17) capitalism (17) encomienda (18) noche triste (22) mestizos (22) Acoma, Battle of (23) Popé’s Rebellion (23) Black Legend (24) 
Ferdinand of Aragon
Isabella of Castile
Christopher Columbus
Francisco Coronado
Francisco Pizarro
Bartolomé de Las Casas
 Hernán Cortés

 Malinche (Doña Marina) Moctezuma Giovanni Caboto (John Cabot) Robert de La Salle Father Junipero Serra

To Learn More
Mark A. Burkholder and Lyman L. Johnson, Colonial Latin
America (2000)
Alfred W. Crosby, Jr., The Columbian Exchange: Biological
 and Cultural Consequences of 1492 (1972) Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies (1998) Tom Dillehay, The Settlement of the Americas: A New Prehistory (2000) J. H. Elliott, Empires of the Atlantic World (2006) Olaudah Equiano, Equiano’s Travels (1789) Steven W. Hackel, Children of Coyote, Missionaries of Saint Francis: Indian-Spanish Relations in Colonial California, 1769–1850 (2005) Hugh Honour, The New Golden Land (1975) Alice Beck Keyhoe, America Before the European Invasions (2002)

 Lyle N. McAlister, Spain and Portugal in the New World, 1492–1700 (1984) Anthony Pagden, Peoples and Empires: A Short History of European Migration, Exploration, and Conquest, from Greece to the Present (2003) John Thornton, Africa and Africans in the Making of the Atlantic World, 1400–1800 (1992) David J. Weber, Bárbaros: Spaniards and Their Savages in the Age of Enlightenment (2005)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Planting
 of English America




1500–1733
 . . . For I shall yet live to see it [Virginia] an Inglishe nation.

A


 s the seventeenth century dawned, scarcely a hundred years after Columbus’s momentous landfall, the face of much of the New World had already been profoundly transformed. European crops and livestock had begun to alter the very landscape, touching off an ecological revolution that would reverberate for centuries to come. From Tierra del Fuego in the south to Hudson Bay in the north, disease and armed conquest had cruelly winnowed and disrupted the native peoples. Several hundred thousand enslaved Africans toiled on Caribbean and Brazilian sugar plantations. From Florida and New Mexico southward, most of the New World lay ﬁ rmly within the grip of imperial Spain. But north of Mexico, America in 1600 remained largely unexplored and effectively unclaimed by Europeans. Then, as if to herald the coming century of colonization and conﬂ ict in the northern continent, three European powers planted three primitive outposts in

 three distant corners of the continent within three years of one another: the Spanish at Santa Fé in 1610, the French at Québec in 1608, and, most consequentially for the future United States, the Eng lish at Jamestown, Virginia, in 1607.

 England’s Imperial Stirrings Feeble indeed were Eng land’s efforts in the 1500s to compete with the sprawling Spanish Empire. As Spain’s ally in the ﬁ rst half of the century, Eng land took little interest in establishing its own overseas colonies. Religious conﬂ ict also disrupted Eng land in midcentury, after King Henry VIII broke with the Roman Catholic Church in the 1530s, launching the Eng lish Protestant Reformation. Catholics battled Protestants for decades, and the religious balance of power seesawed. But after

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 “planted” them with new Protestant landlords from Scotland and Eng land. This policy also planted the seeds of the centuries-old religious conﬂ icts that persist in Ireland to the present day. Many Eng lish soldiers developed in Ireland a sneering contempt for the “savage” natives, an attitude that they brought with them to the New World.

Elizabeth Energizes England


Elizabeth I (1533–1603), by Marcus Gheeraets the
 Younger, ca. 1592 Although accused of being vain, ﬁckle, prejudiced, and miserly, she proved to be an unusually successful ruler. She never married (hence, the “Virgin Queen”), although various royal matches were projected.

 the Protestant Elizabeth ascended to the Eng lish throne in 1558, Protestantism became dominant in Eng land, and rivalry with Catholic Spain intensiﬁed. Ireland, which nominally had been under Eng lish rule since the twelfth century, became an early scene of that rivalry. The Catholic Irish sought help from Catholic Spain to throw off the yoke of the new Protestant Eng lish queen. But Spanish aid never amounted to much; in the 1570s and 1580s, Elizabeth’s troops crushed the Irish uprising with terrible ferocity, inﬂ icting unspeakable atrocities upon the native Irish people. The Eng lish crown conﬁscated Catholic Irish lands and

 Encouraged by the ambitious Elizabeth I (see Table 2.1), hardy Eng lish buccaneers now swarmed out upon the shipping lanes. They sought to promote the twin goals of Protestantism and plunder by seizing Spanish trea sure ships and raiding Spanish settlements, even though Eng land and Spain were technically at peace. The most famous of these semipiratical “sea dogs” was the courtly Sir Francis Drake. He swashbuckled and looted his way around the planet, returning in 1580 with his ship heavily ballasted with Spanish booty. The venture netted proﬁts of about 4,600 percent to his ﬁ nancial backers, among whom, in secret, was Queen Elizabeth. Defying Spanish protest, she brazenly knighted Drake on the deck of his barnacled ship. The bleak coast of Newfoundland was the scene of the ﬁ rst Eng lish attempt at colonization. This effort collapsed when its promoter, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, lost his life at sea in 1583. Gilbert’s ill-starred dream inspired his gallant half-brother Sir Walter Raleigh to try again in warmer climes. Raleigh orga nized an expedition that ﬁ rst landed in 1585 on North Carolina’s Roanoke Island, off the coast of Virginia—a vaguely deﬁ ned region named in honor of Elizabeth, the “Virgin Queen.” After several false starts, the hapless Roanoke colony mysteriously vanished, swallowed up by the wilderness. These pathetic Eng lish failures at colonization contrasted embarrassingly with the glories of the Spanish Empire, whose proﬁts were fabulously enriching Spain. Philip II of Spain, self-anointed foe of the Protestant Reformation, used part of his imperial gains to amass an “Invincible Armada” of ships for an invasion of Eng land. The showdown came in 1588, when the lumbering Spanish ﬂotilla, 130 strong, hove into the Eng lish Channel. The Eng lish sea dogs fought back. Using craft that were swifter, more maneuverable, and more ably manned, they inﬂ icted heavy damage on the cumbersome, overladen Spanish ships. Then a devastating storm arose (the “Protestant wind”), scattering the crippled Spanish ﬂeet.

England Prepares for Colonization




 In the years immediately following the defeat of the Spanish Armada, the English writer Richard Hakluyt (1552?–1616) extravagantly exhorted his countrymen to cast off their “sluggish security” and undertake the colonization of the New World:

“


 There is under our noses the great and ample country of Virginia; the inland whereof is found of late to be so sweet and wholesome a climate, so rich and abundant in silver mines, a better and richer country than Mexico itself. If it shall please the Almighty to stir up Her Majesty’s heart to continue with transporting one or two thousand of her people, she shall by God’s assistance, in short space, increase her dominions, enrich her coffers, and reduce many pagans to the faith of Christ.

”


 The rout of the Spanish Armada marked the beginning of the end of Spanish imperial dreams, though Spain’s New World empire would not fully collapse for three more centuries. Within a few decades, the SpanSir Walter Ralegh (Raleigh) (c. 1552–1618), ish Netherlands (Holland) would secure its indepen1588 A dashing courtier who was one of Queen dence, and much of the Spanish Caribbean would slip Elizabeth’s favorites for his wit, good looks, and courtly from Spain’s grasp. Bloated by Peruvian and Mexican manners, he launched important colonizing failures in silver and cockily convinced of its own invincibility, the New World. For this portrait, Raleigh presented Spain had overreached itself, sowing the seeds of its himself as the queen’s devoted servant, wearing her own decline. colors of black and white and her emblem of a pearl in Eng land’s victory over the Spanish Armada also his left ear. After seducing (and secretly marrying) one marked a red-letter day in American history. It dampof Queen Elizabeth’s maids of honor, he fell out of favor ened Spain’s ﬁghting spirit and helped ensure Engbut continued his colonial ventures in the hopes of challenging Catholic Spain’s dominance in the land’s naval dominance in the North Atlantic. It started Americas. He was ultimately beheaded for treason. Eng land on its way to becoming master of the world oceans—a fact of enormous importance to the American people. Indeed Eng land now had Table 2.1 The Tudor Rulers of England* many of the characteristics that Spain displayed on the eve of its colonizing Name, Reign Relation to America adventure a century earlier: a strong, Cabot voyages, 1497, 1498 uniﬁed national state under a pop- Henry VII, 1485–1509 Henry VIII, 1509–1547 Eng lish Reformation began ular monarch; a mea sure of religious Edward VI, 1547–1553 Strong Protestant tendencies unity after a protracted struggle be“Bloody” Mary, 1553–1558 Catholic reaction tween Protestants and Catholics; and Elizabeth I, 1558–1603 Break with Roman Catholic Church ﬁ nal; a vibrant sense of nationalism and Drake; Spanish Armada defeated national destiny. A wondrous ﬂowering of the Eng- *See Table 3.1, p. 55, for a continuation of the table. lish national spirit bloomed in the



Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 wake of the Spanish Armada’s defeat. A golden age of literature dawned in this exhilarating at mosphere, with William Shakespeare, at its forefront, making occasional poetical references to England’s American colonies. The English were seized with restlessness, with thirst for adventure, and with curiosity about the unknown. Everywhere there blossomed a new spirit of self-conﬁdence, of vibrant patriotism, and of boundless faith in the future of the Eng lish nation. When England and Spain ﬁ nally signed a treaty of peace in 1604, the Eng lish people were poised to plunge headlong into the planting of their own colonial empire in the New World.

England on the Eve of Empire
 Eng land’s scepter’d isle, as Shakespeare called it, throbbed with social and economic change as the seventeenth century opened. Its population was mushrooming, from some 3 million people in 1550 to about 4 million in 1600. In the ever-green Eng lish countryside, landlords were “enclosing” croplands for sheep grazing, forcing many small farmers into precarious tenancy or off the land altogether. It was no accident that the woolen districts of eastern and western Eng land—where Puritanism had taken strong root— supplied many of the earliest immigrants to America. When economic depression hit the woolen trade in the late 1500s, thousands of footloose farmers took to the roads. They drifted about Eng land, chronically unemployed, often ending up as beggars and paupers in cities like Bristol and London. This remarkably mobile population alarmed many contemporaries. They concluded that Eng land was burdened with a “surplus population,” though present-day London holds twice as many people as did all of England in 1600. At the same time, laws of primogeniture decreed that only eldest sons were eligible to inherit landed estates. Landholders’ ambitious younger sons, among them Gilbert, Raleigh, and Drake, were forced to seek their fortunes elsewhere. Bad luck plagued their early, lone-wolf enterprises. But by the early 1600s, the jointstock company, forerunner of the modern corporation, was perfected. It enabled a considerable number of investors, called “adventurers,” to pool their capital. Peace with a chastened Spain provided the opportunity for Eng lish colonization. Population growth provided the workers. Unemployment, as well as a thirst for

 adventure, for markets, and for religious freedom, provided the motives. Joint-stock companies provided the ﬁ nancial means. The stage was now set for a historic effort to establish an Eng lish beachhead in the still uncharted North American wilderness.

England Plants the
Jamestown Seedling
 In 1606, two years after peace with Spain, the hand of destiny beckoned toward Virginia. A joint-stock company, known as the Virginia Company of London, received a charter from King James I of Eng land for a settlement in the New World. The main attraction was the promise of gold, combined with a strong desire to ﬁ nd a passage through America to the Indies. Like most joint-stock companies of the day, the Virginia Company was intended to endure for only a few years, after which its stockholders hoped to liquidate it for a proﬁt. This arrangement put severe pressure on the luckless colonists, who were threatened with abandonment in the wilderness if they did not quickly strike it rich on the company’s behalf. Few of the investors thought in terms of long-term colonization. Apparently no one even faintly suspected that the seeds of a mighty nation were being planted. The charter of the Virginia Company is a signiﬁcant document in American history. It guaranteed to the overseas settlers the same rights of Eng lishmen that they would have enjoyed if they had stayed at home. This precious boon was gradually extended to subsequent Eng lish colonies, helping to reinforce the colonists’ sense that even on the far shores of the Atlantic, they remained comfortably within the embrace of traditional Eng lish institutions. But ironically, a century and a half later, their insistence on the “rights of Eng lishmen” fed the hot resentment of the colonists against an increasingly meddlesome mother country and nourished their appetite for independence. Setting sail in late 1606, the Virginia Company’s three ships landed near the mouth of Chesapeake Bay, where Indians attacked them. Pushing on up the bay, the tiny band of colonists eventually chose a location on the wooded and malarial banks of the James River, named in honor of King James I. The site was easy to defend, but it was mosquito-infested and devastatingly unhealthful. There, on May 24, 1607, about a hundred Eng lish settlers, all of them men, disembarked. They called the place Jamestown (see Map 2.1).



 Virginia's Beginnings

 to eating “dogges, Catts, Ratts, and Myce” and even to digging up corpses for food. One hungry man killed, salted, and ate his wife, for which misbehavior he was executed. Of the four hundred settlers who managed to make it to Virginia by 1609, only sixty survived the “starving time” winter of 1609–1610. Diseased and despairing, the remaining colonists dragged themselves aboard homeward-bound ships in the spring of 1610, only to be met at the mouth of the James River by a long-awaited relief party headed by a new governor, Lord De La Warr. He ordered the settlers back to Jamestown, imposed a harsh military regime on the colony, and soon undertook aggressive military action against the Indians.

 sq





 ue

 ha

 Areas settled by 1675

50 Km.


50 Mi.


 nn a

 Areas settled by 1700

Y


 LI

N


E


LE VA L

 FA

Annapolis


Ba


 LL

DO AH

 e

 AN

 ar

 EN

D


 law

 SH

40°N
R.


De


 ac

R.


 e ar

Del a


 w

R.


MA RY LA N

 tom

 y

Ra


N


 pp ah an

 St. Mary’s 1634 (capital to 1694)

R.


Fort Henry (Petersburg)


Yorktown


 AN

 OCE

Hampton 1691
Norfolk


 TIC

Williamsburg
Jamestown 1607
 (capital to 1699)

 AN

Henrico 1611


 es R.

38°N


B ay


V I R G I N I A


AT L

 ck

Chesapeake


 no

Jam


76°W


N


E


 PIEDMONT

”


 FA

“


 Our men were destroyed with cruel diseases as swellings, burning fevers, and by wars, and some departed suddenly, but for the most part they died of mere famine. There were never Englishmen left in a foreign country in such misery as we were in this new discovered Virginia.

 LL

 LI

 George Percy (1580–1631) accompanied Captain John Smith on his expedition to Virginia in 1606– 1607. He served as deputy governor of the colony in 1609–1610 and returned to England in 1612, where he wrote A Discourse of the Plantation of Virginia about his experiences:



Su


 Areas settled by 1650

Po


 The early years of Jamestown proved a nightmare for all concerned—except the buzzards. Forty wouldbe colonists perished during the initial voyage in 1606– 1607. Another expedition in 1609 lost its leaders and many of its precious supplies in a shipwreck off Bermuda. Once ashore in Virginia, the settlers died by the dozens from disease, malnutrition, and starvation. Ironically, the woods rustled with game and the rivers ﬂopped with ﬁsh, but the greenhorn settlers, many of them self-styled “gentlemen” unaccustomed to fending for themselves, wasted valuable time grubbing for nonexistent gold when they should have been gathering provisions. Virginia was saved from utter collapse at the start largely by the leadership and resourcefulness of an intrepid young adventurer, Captain John Smith. Taking over in 1608, he whipped the gold-hungry colonists into line with the rule, “He who shall not work shall not eat.” He had been kidnapped in December 1607 and subjected to a mock execution by the Indian chieftain Powhatan, whose daughter Pocahontas had “saved” Smith by dramatically interposing her head between his and the war clubs of his captors. The symbolism of this ritual was apparently intended to impress Smith with Powhatan’s power and with the Indians’ desire for peaceful relations with the Virginians. Pocahontas became an intermediary between the Indians and the settlers, helping to preserve a shaky peace and to provide needed foodstuffs. Still, the colonists died in droves, and living skeletons were driven to desperate acts. They were reduced

36°N


T I D E WAT E R


78°W


Map 2.1 Early Maryland and Virginia
Interactive Map




Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 The wife of a Virginia governor wrote to her sister in England in 1623 of her voyage:

“


 For our Shippe was so pestered with people and goods that we were so full of infection that after a while we saw little but throwing folkes over board: It pleased god to send me my helth till I came to shoare and 3 dayes after I fell sick but I thank god I am well recovered. Few else are left alive that came in that Shippe.

”


Cultural Clashes
 in the Chesapeake

 Pocahontas (ca. 1595–1617) Taken to England by her husband, she was received as a princess. She died when preparing to return, but her infant son ultimately reached Virginia, where hundreds of his descendants have lived, including the second Mrs. Woodrow Wilson.

 Disease continued to reap a gruesome harvest among the Virginians. By 1625 Virginia contained only some twelve hundred hard-bitten survivors of the nearly eight thousand adventurers who had tried to start life anew in the ill-fated colony.

 The authorities meted out harsh discipline in the young Virginia colony. One Jamestown settler who publicly criticized the governor was sentenced to

“


 be disarmed [and] have his arms broken and his tongue bored through with an awl [and] shall pass through a guard of 40 men and shall be butted [with muskets] by every one of them and at the head of the troop kicked down and footed out of the fort.

”


 When the Eng lish landed in 1607, the chieftain Powhatan dominated the native peoples living in the James River area. He had asserted supremacy over a few dozen small tribes, loosely afﬁ liated in what somewhat grandly came to be called Powhatan’s Confederacy. The English colonists dubbed all the local Indians, somewhat inaccurately, the Powhatans. Powhatan at ﬁrst may have considered the Eng lish potential allies in his struggle to extend his power still further over his Indian rivals, and he tried to be conciliatory. But relations between the Indians and the Eng lish remained tense, especially as the starving colonists took to raiding Indian food supplies. The at mosphere grew even more strained after Lord De La Warr arrived in 1610. He carried orders from the Virginia Company that amounted to a declaration of war against the Indians in the Jamestown region. A veteran of the vicious campaigns against the Irish, De La Warr now introduced “Irish tactics” against the Indians. His troops raided Indian villages, burned houses, conﬁscated provisions, and torched cornﬁelds. A peace settlement ended this First Anglo-Powhatan War in 1614, sealed by the marriage of Pocahontas to the colonist John Rolfe—the ﬁ rst known interracial union in Virginia. A fragile respite followed, which endured eight years. But the Indians, pressed by the land-hungry whites and ravaged by European diseases, struck back in 1622. A series of Indian attacks left 347 settlers dead, including John Rolfe. In response the Virginia Company issued new orders calling for “a perpetual war without peace or truce,” one that would prevent the In-

Virginians and Native Americans




 remained in Virginia, perhaps 10 percent of the population the original Eng lish settlers had encountered in 1607. By 1685 the Eng lish considered the Powhatan peoples extinct. It had been the Powhatans’ calamitous misfortune to fall victim to three Ds: disease, disorga ni zation, and disposability. Like native peoples throughout the New World, they were extremely susceptible to Europeanborne maladies. Epidemics of smallpox and measles raced mercilessly through their villages. The Powhatans also—despite the apparent cohesiveness of “Powhatan’s Confederacy”—lacked the unity with which to make effective opposition to the comparatively wellorga nized and militarily disciplined whites. Finally, unlike the Indians whom the Spaniards had encountered to the south, who could be put to work in the mines and had gold and silver to trade, the Powhatans served no economic function for the Virginia colonists. They provided no reliable labor source and, after the Virginians began growing their own food crops, had no valuable commodities to offer in commerce. The natives, as far as the Virginians were concerned, could be disposed of without harm to the colonial economy. Indeed the Indian presence frustrated the colonists’ desire for a local commodity the Europeans desperately wanted: land.

The Indians’ New World
A
Carolina Indian Woman and Child, by John  White The artist was a member of the Raleigh expedition of 1585. Notice that the Indian girl carries a European doll, illustrating the mingling of cultures that had already begun.

 dians “from being any longer a people.” Periodic punitive raids systematically reduced the native population and drove the survivors ever farther westward. In the Second Anglo-Powhatan War in 1644, the Indians made one last effort to dislodge the Virginians. They were again defeated. The peace treaty of 1646 repudiated any thought of assimilating the native peoples into Virginia society or of peacefully coexisting with them. Instead it effectively banished the Chesapeake Indians from their ancestral lands and formally separated Indian from white areas of settlement—the origins of the later reservation system. By 1669 an ofﬁcial census revealed that only about two thousand Indians

 The fate of the Powhatans foreshadowed the destinies of indigenous peoples throughout the continent as the process of European settlement went forward. Native Americans, of course, had a history well before Columbus’s arrival. They were no strangers to change, adaptation, and even catastrophe, as the rise and decline of civilizations such as the Mississippians and the Anasazis demonstrated. But the shock of large-scale European colonization disrupted Native American life on a vast scale, inducing unprecedented demographic and cultural transformations. Some changes were fairly benign. Horses—stolen, strayed, or purchased from Spanish invaders— catalyzed a substantial Indian migration onto the Great Plains in the eighteenth century. Peoples such as the Lakotas (Sioux), who had previously been sedentary forest dwellers, now moved onto the wide-open plains. There they thrived impressively, adopting an entirely new way of life as mounted nomadic hunters. But the effects of contact with Europeans proved less salutary for most other native peoples.



Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 Disease was by far the biggest disrupter, as Old World pathogens licked lethally through biologically defenseless Indian populations. Disease took more than human life; it extinguished entire cultures and occasionally helped shape new ones. Epidemics often robbed native peoples of the elders who preserved the oral traditions that held clans together. Devastated Indian bands then faced the daunting task of literally reinventing themselves without beneﬁt of accumulated wisdom or kin networks. The decimation and forced migration of native peoples sometimes scrambled them together in wholly new ways. The Catawba nation of the southern Piedmont region, for example, was formed from splintered remnants of several different groups uprooted by the shock of the Europeans’ arrival. Trade also transformed Indian life, as traditional barter-and-exchange networks gave way to the temptations of European commerce. Firearms, for example, conferred enormous advantages on those who could purchase them from Europeans. The desire for ﬁ rearms thus intensiﬁed competition among the tribes for access to prime hunting grounds that could supply the skins and pelts that the European arms traders wanted.

 Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790) in a 1753 letter to Peter Collinson commented on the attractiveness of Indian life to Europeans:

“


 When an Indian child has been brought up among us, taught our language and habituated to our customs, yet if he goes to see his relations and make one Indian ramble with them, there is no persuading him ever to return. [But] when white persons of either sex have been taken prisoners by the Indians, and lived awhile among them, though ransomed by their friends, and treated with all imaginable tenderness to prevail with them to stay among the English, yet in a short time they become disgusted with our manner of life, and the care and pains that are necessary to support it, and take the ﬁrst good opportunity of escaping again into the woods, from whence there is no reclaiming them.

 Carolina Indians German painter Philip Georg Friedrich von Reck drew these Yuchi Indians in the 1730s. The blanket and riﬂe show that trade with the English settlers had already begun to transform Native American culture.

”


Slavery and Democracy in Early Virginia


 The result was an escalating cycle of Indian-on-Indian violence, fueled by the lure and demands of European trade goods. Native Americans were swept up in the expanding Atlantic economy, but they usually struggled in vain to control their own place in it. One desperate band of Virginia Indians, resentful at the prices offered by British traders for their deerskins, loaded a ﬂeet of canoes with hides and tried to paddle to Eng land to sell their goods directly. Not far from the Virginia shore, a storm swamped their frail craft. Their cargo lost, the few survivors were picked up by an Eng lish ship and sold into slavery in the West Indies. Indians along the Atlantic seaboard felt the most ferocious effects of European contact. Farther inland, native peoples had the advantages of time, space, and numbers as they sought to adapt to the European incursion. The Algonquins in the Great Lakes area, for instance, became a substantial regional power. They bolstered their population by absorbing various surrounding bands and dealt from a position of strength with the few Europeans who managed to penetrate the interior. As a result, a British or French trader wanting to do business with the inland tribes had little choice but to conform to Indian ways, often taking an Indian wife. Thus was created a middle ground, a zone where both Europeans and Native Americans were compelled to accommodate to one another—at least until the Europeans began to arrive in large numbers.

Virginia: Child of Tobacco
 John Rolfe, the husband of Pocahontas, became father of the tobacco industry and an economic savior of the Virginia colony. By 1612 he had perfected methods of raising and curing the pungent weed, eliminating much of the bitter tang. Soon the European demand for tobacco was nearly insatiable. A tobacco rush swept over Virginia, as crops were planted in the streets of Jamestown and even between the numerous graves. So exclusively did the colonists concentrate on planting the yellow leaf that at ﬁ rst they had to import some of their foodstuffs. Colonists who had once hungered for food now hungered for land, ever more land on which to plant ever more tobacco. Relentlessly, they pressed the frontier of settlement up the river valleys to the west, abrasively edging against the Indians. Virginia’s prosperity was ﬁ nally built on tobacco smoke. This “bewitching weed” played a vital role in



 putting the colony on ﬁ rm economic foundations. But tobacco—King Nicotine—was something of a tyrant. It was ruinous to the soil when greedily planted in successive years, and it enchained the fortunes of Virginia to the ﬂuctuating price of a single crop. Fatefully, tobacco also promoted the broad-acred plantation system and with it a brisk demand for fresh labor. In 1619, the year before the Plymouth Pilgrims landed in New Eng land, what was described as a Dutch warship appeared off Jamestown and sold some twenty Africans. The scanty record does not reveal whether they were purchased as lifelong slaves or as servants committed to limited years of servitude. However it transpired, this simple commercial transaction planted

Advertisement for a Voyage to America, 1609




Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 the seeds of the North American slave system. Yet blacks were too costly for most of the hard-pinched white colonists to acquire, and for decades few were brought to Virginia. In 1650 Virginia counted but three hundred blacks, although by the end of the century blacks, most of them enslaved, made up approximately 14 percent of the colony’s population. Representative self-government was also born in primitive Virginia, in the same cradle with slavery and in the same year—1619. The Virginia Company authorized the settlers to summon an assembly, known as the House of Burgesses. A momentous precedent was thus feebly established, for this assemblage was the ﬁrst of many miniature parliaments to ﬂourish in the soil of America. As time passed, James I grew increasingly hostile to Virginia. He detested tobacco, and he distrusted the representative House of Burgesses, which he branded a “seminary of sedition.” In 1624 he revoked the charter of the bankrupt and beleaguered Virginia Company, thus making Virginia a royal colony directly under his control.

Maryland: Catholic Haven
 Maryland—the second plantation colony but the fourth Eng lish colony to be planted—was founded in 1634 by Lord Baltimore, of a prominent Eng lish Catholic family. He embarked upon the venture partly to reap ﬁnancial proﬁts and partly to create a refuge for his fellow Catholics. Protestant Eng land was still persecuting Roman Catholics; among numerous discriminations, a couple seeking wedlock could not be legally married by a Catholic priest. Absentee proprietor Lord Baltimore hoped that the two hundred settlers who founded Maryland at St. Marys, on Chesapeake Bay, would be the vanguard of a vast new feudal domain. Huge estates were to be awarded to his largely Catholic relatives, and gracious manor houses, modeled on those of Eng land’s aristocracy, were intended to arise amidst the fertile forests. As in Virginia, colonists proved willing to come only if offered the opportunity to acquire land of their own. Soon they were dispersed around the Chesapeake region on modest farms, and the haughty land barons, mostly Catholic, were surrounded by resentful backcountry planters, mostly Protestant. Resentment ﬂared into open rebellion near the end of the century, and the Baltimore family for a time lost its proprietary rights.

 Despite these tensions Maryland prospered. Like Virginia, it blossomed forth in acres of tobacco. Also like Virginia, it depended for labor in its early years mainly on white indentured servants—penniless persons who bound themselves to work for a number of years to pay their passage. In both colonies it was only in the later years of the seventeenth century that black slaves began to be imported in large numbers. Lord Baltimore, a canny soul, permitted unusual freedom of worship at the outset. He hoped that he would thus purchase toleration for his own fellow worshipers. But the heavy tide of Protestants threatened to submerge the Catholics and place severe restrictions on them, as in Eng land. Faced with disaster, the Catholics of Maryland threw their support behind the famed Act of Toleration, which was passed in 1649 by the local representative assembly. Maryland’s new religious statute guaranteed toleration to all Christians. But, less liberally, it decreed the death penalty for those, like Jews and atheists, who denied the divinity of Jesus. The law thus sanctioned less toleration than had previously existed in the settlement, but it did extend a temporary cloak of protection to the uneasy Catholic minority. One result was that when the colonial era ended, Maryland probably sheltered more Roman Catholics than any other Eng lishspeaking colony in the New World.

The West Indies: Way Station
 to Mainland America While the Eng lish were planting the ﬁrst frail colonial shoots in the Chesapeake, they also were busily colonizing the islands of the West Indies. Spain, weakened by military overextension and distracted by its rebellious Dutch provinces, relaxed its grip on much of the Caribbean in the early 1600s. By the mid-seventeenth century, Eng land had secured its claim to several West Indian islands, including the large prize of Jamaica in 1655. Sugar formed the foundation of the West Indian economy. What tobacco was to the Chesapeake, sugar cane was to the Caribbean—with one crucial difference. Tobacco was a poor man’s crop. It could be planted easily, it produced commercially marketable leaves within a year, and it required only simple processing. Sugar cane, in contrast, was a rich man’s crop. It had to be planted extensively to yield commercially viable quantities of sugar. Extensive planting, in turn, required extensive and arduous land clearing. And the

English Colonization in the Caribbean




 (above) Sugar Mill in Brazil, by Frans Post, ca. 1640; (left) Saccharum Ofﬁcinarum (sugar cane)

 African peoples throughout the New World in the three and a half centuries following Columbus’s discovery. To control this large and potentially restive slave population, Eng lish authorities devised formal “codes” that deﬁ ned the slaves’ legal status and their masters’ prerogatives. The notorious Barbados slave code of 1661 denied even the most fundamental rights to slaves and gave masters virtually complete control over their laborers, including the right to inﬂ ict vicious punishments for even slight infractions. cane stalks yielded their sugar only after an elaborate process of reﬁ ning in a sugar mill. The need for land and for the labor to clear it and to run the mills made sugar cultivation a capital-intensive business. Only wealthy growers with abundant capital to invest could succeed in sugar. The sugar lords extended their dominion over the West Indies in the seventeenth century. To work their sprawling plantations, they imported enormous numbers of enslaved Africans—more than a quarter of a million in the ﬁve decades after 1640. By about 1700, black slaves outnumbered white settlers in the Eng lish West Indies by nearly four to one, and the region’s population has remained predominantly black ever since. West Indians thus take their place among the numerous children of the African diaspora—the vast scattering of

 African slaves destined for the West Indian sugar plantations were bound and branded on West African beaches and ferried out in canoes to the waiting slave ships. An English sailor described the scene:

“


 The Negroes are so wilful and loth to leave their own country, that have often leap’d out of the canoes, boat and ship, into the sea, and kept under water till they were drowned, to avoid being taken up and saved by our boats, which pursued them; they having a more dreadful apprehension of Barbadoes than we can have of hell.

”




Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 The Barbados slave code (1661) declared,

“


 If any Negro or slave whatsoever shall offer any violence to any Christian by striking or the like, such Negro or slave shall for his or her ﬁrst offence be severely whipped by the Constable. For his second offence of that nature he shall be severely whipped, his nose slit, and be burned in some part of his face with a hot iron. And being brutish slaves, [they] deserve not, for the baseness of their condition, to be tried by the legal trial of twelve men of their peers, as the subjects of England are. And it is further enacted and ordained that if any Negro or other slave under punishment by his master unfortunately shall suffer in life or member, which seldom happens, no person whatsoever shall be liable to any ﬁne therefore.

”


 The proﬁtable sugar-plantation system soon crowded out almost all other forms of Caribbean agriculture. The West Indies increasingly depended on the North American mainland for foodstuffs and other basic supplies. And smaller Eng lish farmers, squeezed out by the greedy sugar barons, began to migrate to the newly founded southern mainland colonies. A group of displaced Eng lish settlers from Barbados arrived in Carolina in 1670. They brought with them a few enslaved Africans, as well as the model of the Barbados slave code, which eventually inspired statutes governing slavery throughout the mainland colonies. Carolina ofﬁcially adopted a version of the Barbados slave code in 1696. Just as the West Indies had been a testing ground for the encomienda system that the Spanish had brought to Mexico and South America, so the Caribbean islands now served as a staging area for the slave system that would take root elsewhere in Eng lish North America.

Colonizing the Carolinas
 Civil war convulsed Eng land in the 1640s. King Charles I had dismissed Parliament in 1629, and when he eventually recalled it in 1640, the members were mutinous.

 Finding their great champion in the Puritan-soldier Oliver Cromwell, they ultimately beheaded Charles in 1649, and Cromwell ruled Eng land for nearly a decade. Finally, Charles II, son of the decapitated king, was restored to the throne in 1660. Colonization had been interrupted during this period of bloody unrest. Now, in the so-called Restoration period, empire building resumed with even greater intensity—and royal involvement (see Table 2.2). Carolina, named for Charles II, was formally created in 1670, after the king granted to eight of his court favorites, the Lords Proprietors, an expanse of wilderness ribboning across the continent to the Paciﬁc. These aristocratic founders hoped to grow foodstuffs to provision the sugar plantations in Barbados and to export nonEng lish products like wine, silk, and olive oil. Carolina prospered by developing close economic ties with the ﬂourishing sugar islands of the Eng lish West Indies. In a broad sense, the mainland colony was but the most northerly of those outposts. Many original Carolina settlers, in fact, had emigrated from Barbados, bringing that island’s slave system with them. They also established a vigorous slave trade in Carolina itself. Enlisting the aid of the coastal Savannah Indians, they forayed into the interior in search of captives. The Lords Proprietors in London protested against Indian slave trading in their colony, but to no avail. Manacled Indians soon were among the young colony’s major exports. As many as ten thousand Indians were dispatched to lifelong labor in the West Indian caneﬁelds and sugar mills. Others were sent to New Eng land. One Rhode Island town in 1730 counted more than two hundred Indian slaves from Carolina in its midst.

 Early Carolina Coins These copper halfpennies bore the image of an elephant, an unofﬁcial symbol of the colony, and a prayer for the Lords Proprietors.

The "Restoration Colonies"


 In 1707 the Savannah Indians decided to end their alliance with the Carolinians and to migrate to the backcountry of Maryland and Pennsylvania, where a new colony founded by Quakers under William Penn promised better relations between whites and Indians. But the Carolinians determined to “thin” the Savannahs before they could depart. A series of bloody raids all but annihilated the Indian tribes of coastal Carolina by 1710. After much experimentation, rice emerged as the principal export crop in Carolina. Rice was then an exotic food in Eng land; no rice seeds were sent out from London in the ﬁ rst supply ships to Carolina. But rice was grown in Africa, and the Carolinians were soon

 paying premium prices for West African slaves experienced in rice cultivation. The Africans’ agricultural skill and their relative immunity to malaria (thanks to a genetic trait that also, unfortunately, made them and their descendants susceptible to sickle-cell anemia) made them ideal laborers on the hot and swampy rice plantations. By 1710 they constituted a majority of Carolinians. Moss-festooned Charles Town—also named for the king—rapidly became the busiest seaport in the South. Many high-spirited sons of Eng lish landed families, deprived of an inheritance, came to the Charleston area and gave it a rich aristocratic ﬂavor. The village became a colorfully diverse community, to which French

Table 2.2 The Thirteen Original Colonies
Name


Founded by


Year


1. Virginia


London Co.




2. New Hampshire




3. Massachusetts
Plymouth
Maine
4. Maryland


John Mason
 and others Puritans Separatists F. Gorges Lord Baltimore

5. Connecticut


 Mass. emigrants

Charter


{


 Royal (under the crown)







———


 Mass. emigrants



None


6. Rhode Island


R.
Williams 



7. Delaware


Swedes


N.
Carolina 

Virginians


9. New York


Dutch
Duke of York
Berkeley and
Carteret
 Eight nobles

11. Carolina
12. Pennsylvania
13. Georgia


William Penn
Oglethorpe and
 others

{


1775 Status




———


10. New Jersey


 ca. 1628



Made Royal


None


New Haven




———


 Royal (absorbed by Mass., 1641–1679) Royal (Merged with Mass., 1691) (Bought by Mass., 1677) Proprietary (controlled by proprietor) Self-governing (under local control) (Merged with Conn., 1662) Self-governing



None


———








None




Royal
Royal












———


 Royal (separated formally from N.C., 1712) Proprietary Royal

 ca. 1613



 Proprietary (merged with Pa., 1682; same governor, but separate assembly, granted 1703) Royal (separated informally from S.C., 1691)



Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 Fort and trading post VIRGINIA

200 Km.


NORTH CAROLINA GEORGIA

 n an

 ah

SOUTH CAROLINA

.


Fort
Moore


Savannah
Carolina Grant 1


35°N


Roanoke I.
N


R.


Fort
Augusta


NEW SPAIN

 ke R

New
Bern
Campbelltown


S


Grant to Trustees
 of Georgia 1732

The Emergence of
North Carolina
 The wild northern expanse of the huge Carolina grant bordered on Virginia. From the older colony there drifted down a ragtag group of poverty-stricken outcasts and religious dissenters. Many of them had been repelled by the rareﬁed at mosphere of Virginia, dominated as it was by big-plantation gentry belonging to the Church of Eng land. North Carolinians, as a result, have been called “the quintessence of Virginia’s discontent.” The newcomers, who frequently were “squatters” without legal right to the soil, raised their tobacco and other crops on small farms, with little need for slaves. Distinctive traits developed rapidly in North Carolina. The poor but sturdy inhabitants, regarded as riffraff by their snobbish neighbors, earned a reputation for being irreligious and hospitable to pirates. Isolated from neighbors by raw wilderness and stormy Cape Hatteras, “graveyard of the Atlantic,” the North Carolinians developed a strong spirit of resistance to authority. Their location between aristocratic Virginia and aristocratic South Carolina caused the area to be dubbed “a vale of humility between two mountains of conceit.” Following much friction with governors, North Carolina was ofﬁcially separated from South Carolina in 1712, and subsequently each segment became a royal colony (see Map 2.2). North Carolina shares with tiny Rhode Island several distinctions. These two outposts were the most democratic, the most independent-minded, and the least aristocratic of the original thirteen Eng lish colonies. Although northern Carolina, unlike the colony’s southern reaches, did not at ﬁ rst import large numbers of African slaves, both regions shared in the ongoing tragedy of bloody relations between Indians and Europeans. Tuscarora Indians fell upon the ﬂedgling settlement at New Bern in 1711. The North Carolinians,

Roa


200 Mi.


 no





 av

 Protestant refugees, Jews, and others were attracted by religious toleration. Nearby, in Florida, the Catholic Spaniards abhorred the intrusion of these Protestant heretics. Carolina’s frontier was often aﬂame. Spanish-incited Indians brandished their tomahawks, and armor-clad warriors of Spain frequently unsheathed their swords during the successive Anglo-Spanish wars. But by 1700 Carolina was too strong to be wiped out.

Dorchester
Charles Town
(Charleston)


ATLANTIC OCEAN

Fort King George
Fort St. Andrew
Fort William


Fort
St. George


Carolina Grant


30°N


80°W


Map 2.2 Early Carolina and Georgia Settlements
Interactive Map


 aided by their heavily armed brothers from the south, retaliated by crushing the Indians in the Tuscarora War, selling hundreds of them into slavery and leaving the survivors to wander northward to seek the protection of the Iroquois. The Tuscaroras eventually became the Sixth Nation of the Iroquois Confederacy. In another ferocious encounter four years later, the South Carolinians defeated and dispersed the Yamasee Indians. With the conquest of the Yamasees, virtually all the coastal Indian tribes in the southern colonies had been utterly devastated by about 1720. Yet in the interior, in the hills and valleys of the Appalachian Mountains, the powerful Cherokees, Creeks, and Iroquois (see “Makers of America: The Iroquois,” pp. 42–43) remained. Stronger and more numerous than their coastal cousins, they managed for half a century more to contain British settlement to the coastal plain east of the mountains.

The Colonial South


Late-Coming Georgia:
The Buffer Colony
 Pine-forested Georgia, with the harbor of Savannah nourishing its chief settlement, was formally founded in 1733. It proved to be the last of the thirteen colonies to be planted—126 years after the ﬁrst, Virginia, and 52 years after the twelfth, Pennsylvania. Chronologically Georgia belongs elsewhere, but geographically it may be grouped with its southern neighbors. The Eng lish crown intended Georgia to serve chieﬂy as a buffer. It would protect the more valuable Carolinas against vengeful Spaniards from Florida and against the hostile French from Louisiana. Georgia indeed suffered much buffeting, especially when wars broke out between Spain and Eng land in the European arena. As a vital link in imperial defense, the exposed colony received monetary subsidies from the British government at the outset—the only one of the “original thirteen” to enjoy this beneﬁt in its founding stage. Named in honor of King George II of Eng land, Georgia was launched by a high-minded group of philanthropists. In addition to protecting their neighboring northern colonies and producing silk and wine, they were determined to carve out a haven for wretched souls imprisoned for debt. They were also determined, at least at ﬁ rst, to keep slavery out of Georgia. The ablest of the founders was the dynamic soldier-statesman James Oglethorpe, who became keenly interested in prison reform after one of his friends died in a debtors’ jail. As an able military leader, Oglethorpe repelled Spanish attacks. As an imperialist and a philanthropist, he saved “the Charity Colony” by his energetic leadership and by heavily mortgaging his own personal fortune. The hamlet of Savannah, like Charleston, was a melting-pot community. German Lutherans and kilted Scots Highlanders, among others, added color to the pattern. All Christian worshipers except Catholics enjoyed religious toleration. Many missionaries armed



 with Bibles and hope arrived in Savannah to work among debtors and Indians. Prominent among them was young John Wesley, who later returned to Eng land and founded the Methodist Church. Georgia grew with painful slowness and at the end of the colonial era was perhaps the least populous of the colonies. The development of a plantation economy was thwarted by an unhealthy climate, by early restrictions on black slavery, and by demoralizing Spanish attacks.

The Plantation Colonies
 Certain distinctive features were shared by Eng land’s southern mainland colonies: Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia. Broad-acred, these outposts of empire were all in some degree devoted to exporting commercial agricultural products. Proﬁtable staple crops were the rule, notably tobacco and rice, though to a lesser extent in small-farm North Carolina. Slavery was found in all the plantation colonies, though only after 1750 in reform-minded Georgia. Immense acreage in the hands of a favored few fostered a strong aristocratic at mosphere, except in North Carolina and to some extent in debtor-tinged Georgia. The wide scattering of plantations and farms, often along stately rivers, retarded the growth of cities and made the establishment of churches and schools both difﬁcult and expensive. In 1671 the governor of Virginia actually thanked God that no free schools or printing presses existed in his colony. All the plantation colonies permitted some religious toleration. The tax-supported Church of Eng land became the dominant faith, though weakest of all in nonconformist North Carolina. These colonies were in some degree expansionary. “Soil butchery” by excessive tobacco growing drove settlers westward, and the long, lazy rivers invited penetration of the continent—and continuing confrontation with Native Americans.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Iroquois American Migration 
W


 ell before the crowned heads of Europe turned their eyes and their dreams of empire toward North America, a great military power had emerged in the Mohawk Valley of what is now New York State. The Iroquois Confederacy, dubbed by whites the “League

75°W
 MONTAGNAIS

Fort


 Québec

N


 ALGONQUIN

45°N


W


.


Fort Orange


 ue

 a nn ha

Delaware


Susq


R.


 NE

N EW
EN G L A N D
Connecticut R 
 HERL

Mo
 hawk R.

A


GA NDA

ON E ID

 CAYUGA

OIS IROQU

NF CO

 ONO

 SENECA

 rie

L. E


 MOHAWK

 ED

Lake Ontario


 AND

Y
AC ER

 HURON

 AKI

Lake
Champlain


 MAHICAN

100 Mi.


 ce en

 NET



 wr

 EN

Hudson R.




100 Km.


La




St
.




 Montréal

R.


 AB

N E W FR AN C E


New Amsterdam


R


.


 of the Iroquois,” bound together ﬁve Indian nations— the Mohawks, the Oneidas, the Onondagas, the Cayugas, and the Senecas (see Map 2.3). According to Iroquois legend, it was founded in the late 1500s by two leaders, Deganawidah and Hiawatha. This proud and potent league vied initially with neighboring Indians for territorial supremacy, then with the French, English, and Dutch for control of the fur trade. Ultimately, infected by the white man’s diseases, intoxicated by his whiskey, and intimidated by his muskets, the Iroquois struggled for their very survival as a people. The building block of Iroquois society was the longhouse. This wooden structure deserved its descriptive name. Only twenty-ﬁve feet in breadth, the longhouse stretched from eight to two hundred feet in length. Each building contained three to ﬁve ﬁ replaces, around which gathered two nuclear families consisting of parents and children. All families residing in the longhouse were related, their connections of blood running exclusively through the maternal line. A single longhouse might shelter a woman’s family and those of her mother, sisters, and daughters—with the oldest woman being the honored matriarch. When a man married, he left his childhood hearth in the home of his mother to join the longhouse of his wife. Men dominated in Iroquois society, but they owed their positions of prominence to their mothers’ families.

40°N


40°N
72°W


Map 2.3 Iroquois Lands and European Trade
Centers, ca. 1590–1650
Interactive Map




 An Iroquois Canoe In frail but artfully constructed craft like this, the Iroquois traversed the abundant waters of their confederacy and traded with their neighbors, Indians as well as whites.

The Longhouse
 (reconstruction) The photo shows a modernday reconstruction of a Delaware Indian longhouse (almost identical in design and building materials to the Iroquois longhouses), at Historic Waterloo Village on Winakung Island in New Jersey. (The Iroquois conquered the Delawares in the late 1600s.) Bent saplings and sheets of elm bark made for sturdy, weathertight shelters. Longhouses were typically furnished with deerskin-covered bunks and shelves for storing baskets, pots, fur pelts, and corn.

 As if sharing one great longhouse, the ﬁve nations joined in the Iroquois Confederacy but kept their own separate ﬁ res. Although they celebrated together and shared a common policy toward outsiders, they remained essentially independent of one another. On the eastern ﬂank of the league, the Mohawks, known as the Keepers of the Eastern Fire, specialized as middlemen with European traders, whereas the outlying Senecas, the Keepers of the Western Fire, became fur suppliers. After banding together to end generations of violent warfare among themselves, the Five Nations vanquished their rivals, the neighboring Hurons, Eries, and Petuns. Some other tribes, such as the Tuscaroras from the Carolina region, sought peaceful absorption into the Iroquois Confederacy. The Iroquois further expanded their numbers by means of periodic “mourning wars,” whose objective was the large-scale adoption of captives and refugees. But the arrival of gun-toting Europeans threatened Iroquois supremacy and enmeshed the confederacy in a tangled web of diplomatic intrigues. Throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, they allied alternately with the Eng lish against the French and vice versa, for a time success-

 fully working this perpetual rivalry to their own advantage. But when the American Revolution broke out, the confederacy could reach no consensus on which side to support. Each tribe was left to decide independently; most, though not all, sided with the British. The ultimate British defeat left the confederacy in tatters. Many Iroquois, especially the Mohawks, moved to new lands in British Canada; others were relegated to reservations in western New York. Reservation life proved unbearable for a proud people accustomed to domination over a vast territory. Morale sank; brawling, feuding, and alcoholism became rampant. Out of this morass arose a prophet, an Iroquois called Handsome Lake. In 1799 angelic ﬁgures clothed in traditional Iroquois garb appeared to Handsome Lake in a vision and warned him that the moral decline of his people must end if they were to endure. He awoke from his vision to warn his tribespeople to mend their ways. His socially oriented gospel inspired many Iroquois to forsake alcohol, to afﬁ rm family values, and to revive old Iroquois customs. Handsome Lake died in 1815, but his teachings, in the form of the Longhouse religion, survive to this day.





Chapter 2 The Planting of English America, 1500–1733


 CHRONOLOGY

 Elizabeth I becomes queen of Eng land

 ca. 1565–

 Eng lish crush Irish uprising



 Drake circumnavigates the globe



 Raleigh founds “lost colony” at Roanoke Island



 Eng land defeats Spanish Armada



 James I becomes king of Eng land



 Spain and Eng land sign peace treaty



 1640s

 Large-scale slave-labor system established in Eng lish West Indies



Second Anglo-Powhatan War




Act of Toleration in Maryland
 Charles I beheaded; Cromwell rules Eng land



 Charles II restored to Eng lish throne



 Barbados slave code adopted



 Carolina colony created

1711–


Tuscarora War in North Carolina


 Virginia colony founded at Jamestown



 Rolfe perfects tobacco culture in Virginia





 North Carolina formally separates from South Carolina

 First Anglo-Powhatan War ends



1715–


Yamasee War in South Carolina


 First Africans arrive in Jamestown Virginia House of Burgesses established





 Georgia colony founded

 Virginia becomes royal colony



 Maryland colony founded

KEY TERMS
Protestant Reformation (27) Roanoke Island (28) Spanish Armada (29) primogeniture (30) joint-stock company (30) charter (30) Jamestown (30) First Anglo-Powhatan War (32) Second Anglo-Powhatan War (33) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Act of Toleration (36) Barbados slave code (37) squatters (40) Tuscarora War (40) Yamasee Indians (40) buffer (41) Iroquois Confederacy (42) 
 Henry VIII Elizabeth I Sir Francis Drake Sir Walter Raleigh James I Captain John Smith Powhatan

Pocahontas
Lord De La Warr
John Rolfe
Lord Baltimore
Oliver Cromwell
James Oglethorpe
Hiawatha


To Learn More


To Learn More
Ira Berlin, Generations of Captivity: A History of African
American Slaves (2003)
———, Many Thousands Gone: The First Two Centuries of
Slavery in North America (1998)
Kathleen Brown, Good Wives, Nasty Wenches, and
Anxious Patriarchs: Gender, Race, and Power in Colonial
Virginia (1996)
Colin G. Calloway, New Worlds for All: Indians, Europeans,
 and the Remaking of America (1997) Ralph Davis, The Rise of the Atlantic Economies (1973) Jack P. Greene, Pursuits of Happiness: The Social Development of Early Modern British Colonies and the Formation of American Culture (1988) Peter Laslett, The World We Have Lost (1965) Edmund S. Morgan, American Slavery, American Freedom (1975)

David B. Quinn, England and the Discovery of America,
1481–1620 (1974)
 Daniel K. Richter, Facing East from Indian Country: A Native History of Early America (2003) Nancy Shoemaker, A Strange Likeness: Becoming Red and White in Eighteenth-Century North America (2004) Alan Taylor, American Colonies: The Settling of North America (2001) Camilla Townsend, Pocahontas and the Powhatan Dilemma (2004)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Settling the
Northern Colonies





1619–1700
 God hath sifted a nation that he might send Choice Grain into this Wilderness.

A


 lthough colonists both north and south were bound together by a common language and a common allegiance to Mother Eng land, they established different patterns of settlement, different economies, different political systems, and even different sets of values— deﬁ ning distinctive regional characteristics that would persist for generations. The promise of riches— especially from golden-leaved tobacco—drew the ﬁ rst settlers to the southern colonies. But to the north, in the fertile valleys of the middle Atlantic region and especially along the rocky shores of New Eng land, it was not worldly wealth but religious devotion that principally shaped the earliest settlements.

The Protestant Reformation
Produces Puritanism
 Little did the German friar Martin Luther suspect, when he nailed his protests against Catholic doctrines to the door of Wittenberg’s cathedral in 1517, that he was shaping the destiny of a yet unknown nation. Denounc-

 ing the authority of priests and popes, Luther declared that the Bible alone was the source of God’s word. He ignited a ﬁ re of religious reform (the “Protestant Reformation”) that licked its way across Europe for more than a century, dividing peoples, toppling sovereigns, and kindling the spiritual fervor of millions of men and women—some of whom helped to found America. The reforming ﬂame burned especially brightly in the bosom of John Calvin of Geneva. This somber and severe religious leader elaborated Martin Luther’s ideas in ways that profoundly affected the thought and character of generations of Americans yet unborn. Calvinism became the dominant theological credo not only of the New Eng land Puritans but of other American settlers as well, including the Scottish Presbyterians, French Huguenots, and communicants of the Dutch Reformed Church. Calvin spelled out his basic doctrine in a learned Latin tome of 1536, entitled Institutes of the Christian Religion. God, Calvin argued, was all-powerful and allgood. Humans, because of the corrupting effect of original sin, were weak and wicked. God was also all-

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Plymouth Plantation


 knowing—and he knew who was going to heaven and who was going to hell. Since the ﬁ rst moment of creation, some souls—the elect—had been destined for eternal bliss and others for eternal torment. Good works could not save those whom predestination had marked for the infernal ﬁ res. But neither could the elect count on their predetermined salvation and lead lives of wild, immoral abandon. For one thing, no one could be certain of his or her status in the heavenly ledger. Gnawing doubts about their eternal fate plagued Calvinists. They constantly sought, in themselves and others, signs of conversion, or the receipt of God’s free gift of saving grace. Conversion was thought to be an intense, identiﬁable personal experience in which God revealed to the elect their heavenly destiny. Thereafter they were expected to lead “sanctiﬁed” lives, demonstrating by their holy behavior that they were among the “visible saints.” These doctrines swept into Eng land just as King Henry VIII was breaking his ties with the Roman Catholic Church in the 1530s, making himself the head of the Church of Eng land. Henry would have been content to retain Roman rituals and creeds, but his action powerfully stimulated some Eng lish religious reformers to undertake a total puriﬁcation of Eng lish Christianity. Many of these Puritans, as it happened, came from the commercially depressed woolen districts (see p. 30). Calvinism, with its message of stark but reassuring order in the divine plan, fed on this social unrest and provided spiritual comfort to the economically disadvantaged. As time went on, Puritans grew increasingly unhappy over the snail-like progress of the Protestant Reformation in Eng land. They burned with pious zeal to see the Church of Eng land wholly decatholicized. The most devout Puritans, including those who eventually settled New Eng land, believed that only “visible saints” (that is, persons who felt the stirrings of grace in their souls and could demonstrate its presence to their fellow Puritans) should be admitted to church membership. But the Church of Eng land enrolled all the king’s subjects, which meant that the “saints” had to share pews and communion rails with the “damned.” Appalled by this unholy fraternizing, a tiny group of dedicated Puritans, known as Separatists, vowed to break away entirely from the Church of Eng land. King James I, a shrewd Scotsman, was head of both the state and the church in Eng land from 1603 to 1625. He quickly perceived that if his subjects could defy him as their spiritual leader, they might one day defy him as



 their political leader (as in fact they would later defy and behead his son, Charles I). He therefore threatened to harass the more bothersome Separatists out of the land.

The Pilgrims End Their
Pilgrimage at Plymouth
 The most famous congregation of Separatists, ﬂeeing royal wrath, departed for Holland in 1608. During the ensuing twelve years of toil and poverty, they were increasingly distressed by the “Dutchiﬁcation” of their children. They longed to ﬁ nd a haven where they could live and die as Eng lish men and women—and as puriﬁed Protestants. America was the logical refuge, despite the early ordeals of Jamestown, and despite tales of New World cannibals roasting steaks from their white victims over open ﬁ res. A group of the Separatists in Holland, after negotiating with the Virginia Company, at length secured rights to settle under its jurisdiction. But their crowded Mayﬂower, sixty-ﬁve days at sea, missed its destination and arrived off the stony coast of New Eng land in 1620, with a total of 102 persons. One had died en route—an unusually short casualty list—and one had been born and appropriately named Oceanus. Fewer than half of the entire party were Separatists. Prominent among the nonbelongers was a peppery and stocky soldier of fortune, Captain Myles Standish, dubbed by one of his critics “Captain Shrimp.” He later rendered indispensable ser vice as an Indian ﬁghter and negotiator. The Pilgrims did not make their initial landing at Plymouth Rock, as commonly supposed, but undertook a number of preliminary surveys. They ﬁ nally chose for their site the shore of inhospitable Plymouth Bay. This area was outside the domain of the Virginia Company, and consequently the settlers became squatters. They were without legal right to the land and without speciﬁc authority to establish a government. Before disembarking, the Pilgrim leaders drew up and signed the brief Mayﬂower Compact. Although setting an invaluable precedent for later written constitutions, this document was not a constitution at all. It was a simple agreement to form a crude government and to submit to the will of the majority under the regulations agreed upon. The compact was signed by forty-one adult males, eleven of them with the exalted rank of “mister,” though not by the servants and two seamen. The pact was a promising step toward genuine



Chapter 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 1619–1700


Plymouth Plantation
 Carefully restored, the modest village at Plymouth looks today much as it did nearly four hundred years ago.

 self-government, for soon the adult male settlers were assembling to make their own laws in open-discussion town meetings—a vital laboratory of liberty. The Pilgrims’ ﬁ rst winter of 1620–1621 took a grisly toll. Only 44 out of the 102 survived. At one time only 7 were well enough to lay the dead in their frosty graves. Yet when the Mayﬂower sailed back to Eng land in the spring, not a single one of the courageous band of Separatists left. As one of them wrote, “It is not with us as with other men, whom small things can discourage.” God made his children prosperous, so the Pilgrims believed. The next autumn, that of 1621, brought bountiful harvests and with them the ﬁ rst Thanksgiving Day in New Eng land. In time the frail colony found sound economic legs in fur, ﬁsh, and lumber. The beaver and the Bible were the early mainstays: the one for the sustenance of the body, the other for the sustenance of the soul. Plymouth proved that the Eng lish could maintain themselves in this uninviting region. The Pilgrims were extremely fortunate in their leaders. Prominent among them was the cultured William Bradford, a self-taught scholar who read Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, and Dutch. He was chosen governor thirty times in the annual elections. Among his major worries was his fear that independent, nonPuritan settlers “on their particular” might corrupt his

 godly experiment in the wilderness. Bustling ﬁshing villages and other settlements did sprout to the north of Plymouth, on the storm-lashed shores of Massachusetts Bay, where many people were as much interested in cod as God. Quiet and quaint, the little colony of Plymouth was never important economically or numerically. Its population numbered only seven thousand by 1691, when, still charterless, it merged with its giant neighbor, the Massachusetts Bay Colony. But the tiny settlement of Pilgrims was big both morally and spiritually.

 William Bradford (1590–1657) wrote in Of Plymouth Plantation,

“


 Thus out of small beginnings greater things have been produced by His hand that made all things of nothing, and gives being to all things that are; and, as one small candle may light a thousand, so the light here kindled hath shone unto many, yea in some sort to our whole nation.

”


Religion in the Bay Colony


The Bay Colony Bible
Commonwealth
 The Separatist Pilgrims were dedicated extremists— the purest Puritans. More moderate Puritans sought to reform the Church of Eng land from within. Though resented by bishops and monarchs, they slowly gathered support, especially in Parliament. But when Charles I dismissed Parliament in 1629 and sanctioned the antiPuritan persecutions of the reactionary Archbishop William Laud, many Puritans saw catastrophe in the making. In 1629 an energetic group of non-Separatist Puritans, fearing for their faith and for Eng land’s future, secured a royal charter to form the Massachusetts Bay Company. They proposed to establish a sizable settlement in the infertile Massachusetts area, with Boston soon becoming its hub. Stealing a march on both king and church, the newcomers brought their charter with them. For many years they used it as a kind of constitu-

 Map 3.1a Sources of the Puritan “Great Migration” to New England, 1620–1650 The shaded areas indicate the main sources of the migration.

56°N


 SCOTLAND



 tion, out of easy reach of royal authority. They steadfastly denied that they wanted to separate from the Church of Eng land, only from its impurities. But back in Eng land, the highly orthodox Archbishop Laud snorted that the Bay Colony Puritans were “swine which rooted in God’s vineyard.” The Massachusetts Bay Colony was singularly blessed. The well-equipped expedition of 1630, with eleven vessels carrying nearly a thousand immigrants, started the colony off on a larger scale than any of the other Eng lish settlements. Continuing turmoil in Eng land tossed up additional enriching waves of Puritans on the shores of Massachusetts in the following decade. During the Great Migration of the 1630s, about seventy thousand refugees left Eng land (see Map 3.1). But not all of them were Puritans, and only about twenty thousand came to Massachusetts. Many were attracted to the warm and fertile West Indies, especially the sugar-rich island of Barbados. More Puritans came to this Caribbean islet than to all of Massachusetts.

 Map 3.1b The Great English Migration, ca. 1630– 1642 Much of the early history of the United States was written by New Englanders, who were not disposed to emphasize the larger exodus of English migrants to the Caribbean islands. When the mainland colonists declared independence in 1776, they hoped that these island outposts would join them, but the existence of the British navy had a dissuading effect. Interactive Map

54°N


Irish
Sea
 IRELAND

North
Sea


EN G L AN D





2000 Km.


 ENGLAND



2000 Mi.


 EA

N


 ST



50 Mi.


 DEVON

To Ches


 KENT

 han English C

50°N


 ne

Car


 l

FRANCE 2°W

0°


: 50,00
 apeake

In
 st We o T

4°W


 Main sources of migration

 ngland:

25,000




 m Fro land: Eng ,000

,000
 uda: 4 To Berm

Districts


 DORSET

Woolen
Districts
6°W


To New E


N ORTH AMERI CA

HERTFORDSHIRE ESSEX
Woolen 
London
Bristol
WILTSHIRE SOMERSET

50 Km.




A NORFOLK N GL IA SUFFOLK

 WALES

52°N


30°W


60°W


2°E


 ibbe

0,0
:
 s die

30°N


Tropic of Cancer


 AFRICA

 an Sea

SOU TH AMERI CA

 EUROPE

N


ATLANTIC OCEAN



Chapter 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 1619–1700


 Many fairly prosperous, educated persons immigrated to the Bay Colony, including John Winthrop, a well-to-do pillar of Eng lish society, who became the colony’s ﬁ rst governor. A successful attorney and manor lord in Eng land, Winthrop eagerly accepted the offer to become governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, believing that he had a “calling” from God to lead the new religious experiment. He served as governor or deputy governor for nineteen years. The resources and skills of talented settlers like Winthrop helped Massachusetts prosper, as fur trading, ﬁshing, and shipbuilding blossomed into important industries, especially ﬁsh and ships. The Massachusetts Bay Colony rapidly shot to the fore as both the biggest and the most inﬂuential of the New Eng land outposts. Massachusetts also beneﬁted from a shared sense of purpose among most of the ﬁrst settlers. “We shall be as a city upon a hill,” a beacon to humanity, declared Governor Winthrop. The Puritan bay colonists believed that they had a covenant with God, an agreement to build a holy society that would be a model for humankind.

Building the Bay Colony
 These common convictions deeply shaped the infant colony’s life. Soon after the colonists’ arrival, the franchise was extended to all “freemen”—adult males who belonged to the Puritan congregations, which in time came to be called collectively the Congregational Church. Unchurched men remained voteless in provincial elections, as did women. On this basis about twoﬁ fths of adult males enjoyed the franchise in provincial affairs, a far larger proportion than in contemporary Eng land. Town governments, which conducted much important business, were even more inclusive. There all male property holders, and in some cases other residents as well, enjoyed the priceless boon of publicly discussing local issues, often with much heat, and of voting on them by a majority-rule show of hands. Yet the provincial government, liberal by the standards of the time, was not a democracy. The able Governor Winthrop feared and distrusted the “commons” as the “meaner sort” and thought that democracy was the “meanest and worst” of all forms of government. “If the people be governors,” asked one Puritan clergyman, “who shall be governed?” True, the freemen annually elected the governor and his assistants, as well as a representative assembly called the General Court. But only Puritans—the “visible saints” who alone were eligible for church membership— could be freemen.

 And according to the doctrine of the covenant, the whole purpose of government was to enforce God’s laws—which applied to believers and nonbelievers alike. Moreover, nonbelievers as well as believers paid taxes for the government-supported church. Religious leaders thus wielded enormous inﬂuence in the Massachusetts “Bible Commonwealth.” They powerfully inﬂuenced admission to church membership by conducting public interrogations of persons claiming to have experienced conversion. Prominent among the early clergy was ﬁery John Cotton. Educated at Eng land’s Cambridge University, a Puritan citadel, he emigrated to Massachusetts to avoid persecution for his criticism of the Church of Eng land. In the Bay Colony, he devoted his considerable learning to defending the government’s duty to enforce religious rules. Profoundly pious, he sometimes preached and prayed up to six hours in a single day. But the power of the preachers was not absolute. A congregation had the right to hire and ﬁ re its minister and to set his salary. Clergymen were also barred from holding formal political ofﬁce. Puritans in Eng land had suffered too much at the hands of a “political” Anglican clergy to permit in the New World another unholy union of religious and government power. In a limited way, the bay colonists thus endorsed the idea of the separation of church and state. The Puritans were a worldly lot, despite—or even because of—their spiritual intensity. Like John Winthrop, they believed in the doctrine of a “calling” to do God’s work on earth. They shared in what was later called the “Protestant ethic,” which involved serious commitment to work and to engagement in worldly pursuits. Legend to the contrary, they also enjoyed simple pleasures: they ate plentifully, drank heartily, sang songs occasionally, and made love mostly monogamously. Like other peoples of their time in both America and Europe, they passed laws aimed at making sure these plea sures stayed simple by repressing certain human instincts. In New Haven, for example, a young married couple was ﬁ ned twenty shillings for the crime of kissing in public, and in later years Connecticut came to be dubbed “the Blue Law State.” (It was so named for the blue paper on which the repressive laws—also known as “sumptuary laws”—were printed.) Yet, to the Puritans, life was serious business, and hellﬁ re was real—a hell where sinners shriveled and shrieked in vain for divine mercy. An immensely popular poem in New Eng land, selling one copy for every twenty people, was clergyman Michael Wigglesworth’s

Puritans and Dissenters




 “Day of Doom” (1662). Especially horrifying were his descriptions of the fate of the damned: They cry, they roar for anguish sore, and gnaw their tongues for horrour. But get away without delay, Christ pitties not your cry: Depart to Hell, there may you yell, and roar Eternally.

Trouble in the Bible
Commonwealth
 The Bay Colony enjoyed a high degree of social harmony, stemming from common beliefs, in its early years. But even in this tightly knit community, dissension soon appeared. Quakers, who ﬂouted the authority of the Puritan clergy, were persecuted with ﬁ nes, ﬂoggings, and banishment. In one extreme case, four Quakers who deﬁed expulsion, one of them a woman, were hanged on the Boston Common. A sharp challenge to Puritan orthodoxy came from Anne Hutchinson. She was an exceptionally intelligent, strong-willed, and talkative woman, ultimately the mother of fourteen children. Swift and sharp in theological argument, she carried to logical extremes the Puritan doctrine of predestination. She claimed that a holy life was no sure sign of salvation and that the truly saved need not bother to obey the law of either God or man. This assertion, known as antinomianism (from the Greek, “against the law”), was high heresy. Brought to trial in 1638, the quick-witted Hutchinson bamboozled her clerical inquisitors for days, until she eventually boasted that she had come by her beliefs through a direct revelation from God. This was even higher heresy. The Puritan magistrates had little choice but to banish her, lest she pollute the entire Puritan experiment. With her family, she set out on foot for Rhode Island, though pregnant. She ﬁ nally moved to New York, where she and all but one of her household were killed by Indians. Back in the Bay Colony, the pious John Winthrop saw “God’s hand” in her fate. More threatening to the Puritan leaders was a personable and popular Salem minister, Roger Williams. Williams was a young man with radical ideas and an unrestrained tongue. An extreme Separatist, he hounded his fellow clergymen to make a clean break with the corrupt Church of Eng land. He also challenged the legality of the Bay Colony’s charter, which he condemned for expropriating the land from the Indians without

Anne Hutchinson, Dissenter Mistress Hutchinson
 (1591–1643) held unorthodox views that challenged the authority of the clergy and the very integrity of the Puritan experiment in the Massachusetts Bay Colony. An outcast in her day, she has been judged a heroine in the eye of history. This statue in her honor, erected in the nineteenth century, now graces the front of the Boston, Massachusetts, Statehouse.

 fair compensation. As if all this were not enough, he went on to deny the authority of civil government to regulate religious behavior—a seditious blow at the Puritan idea of government’s very purpose. Their patience exhausted by 1635, the Bay Colony authorities found Williams guilty of disseminating “newe & dangerous opinions” and ordered him banished. He was permitted to remain several months longer because of illness, but he kept up his criticisms. The outraged magistrates, fearing that he might organize a rival colony of malcontents, made plans to exile him to Eng land. But Williams foiled them.



Chapter 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 1619–1700


The Rhode Island “Sewer”


72°W


70°W


44°N


 MAINE

 The smiling valley of the Connecticut River, one of the few highly fertile expanses of any size in all New England, had meanwhile attracted a sprinkling of Dutch and Eng lish settlers. Hartford was founded in 1635 (see



100 Km.






NEW HAMPSHIRE

Portsmouth


N
R.




Connecticut




100 Mi.


Salem


MASSACHUSETTS
Cambridge BAY Boston 
Hudson R.


Springfield
Hartford


 CONNECTICUT 1635–1636

Long Island


42°N


 PLYMOUTH

Providence




RHODE ISLAND

NEW
New Haven HAVEN 
Plymouth
(Pilgrims)




New England Spreads Out






 Aided by friendly Indians, Roger Williams ﬂed to the Rhode Island area in 1636, in the midst of a bitter winter. At Providence the courageous and far-visioned Williams built a Baptist church, probably the ﬁ rst in America. He established complete freedom of religion, even for Jews and Catholics. He demanded no oaths regarding religious beliefs, no compulsory attendance at worship, no taxes to support a state church. He even sheltered the abused Quakers, although disagreeing sharply with their views. Williams’s endorsement of religious tolerance made Rhode Island more liberal than any of the other Eng lish settlements in the New World, and more advanced than most Old World communities as well. Those outcasts who clustered about Roger Williams enjoyed additional blessings. They exercised simple manhood suffrage from the start, though this broadminded practice was later narrowed by a property qualiﬁcation. Opposed to special privilege of any sort, the intrepid Rhode Islanders managed to achieve remarkable freedom of opportunity. Other scattered settlements soon dotted Rhode Island. They consisted largely of malcontents and exiles, some of whom could not bear the stiﬂ ing theological atmosphere of the Bay Colony. Many of these restless souls in “Rogues’ Island,” including Anne Hutchinson, had little in common with Roger Williams—except being unwelcome anywhere else. The Puritan clergy back in Boston sneered at Rhode Island as “that sewer” in which the “Lord’s debris” had collected and rotted. Planted by dissenters and exiles, Rhode Island became strongly individualistic and stubbornly independent. With good reason “Little Rhody” was later known as “the traditional home of the otherwise minded.” Begun as a squatter colony in 1636 without legal standing, it ﬁ nally established rights to the soil when it secured a charter from Parliament in 1644. A huge bronze statue of the “Independent Man” appropriately stands today on the dome of the statehouse in Providence.

Portsmouth


ATLANTIC OCEAN

 Colonies absorbed by Massachusetts Bay Colony Colonies founded by migrants from Massachusetts Bay Colony

Map 3.2 Seventeenth-Century New England
Settlements The Massachusetts Bay Colony was the
 hub of New England. All earlier colonies grew into it; all later colonies grew out of it. Interactive Map

 Map 3.2). The next year witnessed a spectacular beginning of the centuries-long westward movement across the continent. An energetic group of Boston Puritans, led by the Reverend Thomas Hooker, swarmed as a body into the Hartford area, with the ailing Mrs. Hooker carried on a horse litter. Three years later, in 1639, the settlers of the new Connecticut River colony drafted in open meeting a trailblazing document known as the Fundamental Orders. It was in effect a modern constitution, which established a regime democratically controlled by the “substantial” citizens. Essential features of the Fundamental Orders were later borrowed by Connecticut for its colonial charter and ultimately for its state constitution. Another ﬂourishing Connecticut settlement began to spring up at New Haven in 1638. It was a prosperous community, founded by Puritans who contrived to set up an even closer church-government alliance than

The Expansion of New England


 in Massachusetts. Although only squatters without a charter, the colonists dreamed of making New Haven a bustling seaport. But they fell into disfavor with Charles II as a result of having sheltered two of the judges who had condemned his father, Charles I, to death. In 1662, to the acute distress of the New Havenites, the crown granted a charter to Connecticut that merged New Haven with the more democratic settlements in the Connecticut Valley. Far to the north, enterprising ﬁshermen and furtraders had been active on the coast of Maine for a dozen or so years before the founding of Plymouth. After disheartening attempts at colonization in 1623 by Sir Ferdinando Gorges, this land of lakes and forests was absorbed by Massachusetts Bay after a formal purchase in 1677 from the Gorges heirs. It remained a part of Massachusetts for nearly a century and a half before becoming a separate state. Granite-ribbed New Hampshire also sprang from the ﬁshing and trading activities along its narrow coast. It was absorbed in 1641 by the grasping Bay Colony, under a strained interpretation of the Massachusetts charter. The king, annoyed by this display of greed, arbitrarily separated New Hampshire from Massachusetts in 1679 and made it a royal colony.



Puritans Versus Indians
 The spread of Eng lish settlements inevitably led to clashes with the Indians, who were particularly weak in New Eng land. Shortly before the Pilgrims had arrived at Plymouth in 1620, an epidemic, probably triggered by contact with Eng lish ﬁshermen, had swept through the coastal tribes and killed more than threequarters of the native people. Deserted Indian ﬁelds, ready for tillage, greeted the Plymouth settlers, and scattered skulls and bones provided grim evidence of the impact of the disease. In no position to resist the Eng lish incursion, the local Wampanoag Indians at ﬁ rst befriended the settlers. Cultural accommodation was facilitated by Squanto, a Wampanoag who had learned Eng lish from a ship’s captain who had kidnapped him some years earlier. The Wampanoag chieftain Massasoit signed a treaty with the Plymouth Pilgrims in 1621 and helped them celebrate the ﬁ rst Thanksgiving after the autumn harvests that same year. As more Eng lish settlers arrived and pushed inland into the Connecticut River valley, confrontations between Indians and whites ruptured these peaceful relations. Hostilities exploded in 1637 between the

 Attack on a Pequot Fort During the Pequot War of 1637, engraving by J. W. Barber, 1830 This was the ﬁrst war between natives and Europeans in British North America. It culminated in the Puritan militia’s vicious burning out and slaughtering of nearly three hundred Pequot men, women, and children. The defeat of the Pequots eliminated armed resistance to the new settlements of New Haven and Guildford. The Connecticut Valley would not see signiﬁcant “Indian troubles” again for forty years, when the Indians of New England united in their ﬁnal stand against the encroachments of English settlers, King Philip’s War. King Philip, also known as Metacom, is shown on the right.



Chapter 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 1619–1700


 Eng lish settlers and the powerful Pequot tribe. Besieging a Pequot village on Connecticut’s Mystic River, English militiamen and their Narragansett Indian allies set ﬁ re to the Indian wigwams and shot the ﬂeeing survivors. The slaughter wrote a brutal ﬁ nish to the Pequot War, virtually annihilated the Pequot tribe, and inaugurated four decades of uneasy peace between Puritans and Indians. Lashed by critics in Eng land, the Puritans made some feeble efforts at converting the remaining Indians to Christianity, although Puritan missionary zeal never equaled that of the Catholic Spanish and French. A mere handful of Indians were gathered into Puritan “praying towns” to make the acquaintance of the English God and to learn the ways of Eng lish culture. The Indians’ only hope for resisting Eng lish encroachment lay in intertribal unity—a pan-Indian alliance against the swiftly spreading Eng lish settlements. In 1675 Massasoit’s son, Metacom, called King Philip by the Eng lish, forged such an alliance and mounted a series of coordinated assaults on Eng lish villages throughout New Eng land. Frontier settlements were especially hard hit, and refugees fell back toward the relative safety of Boston. When the war ended in 1676, ﬁ fty-two Puritan towns had been attacked, and twelve destroyed entirely. Hundreds of colonists and many more Indians lay dead. Metacom’s wife and son were sold into slavery; he himself was captured, beheaded, and drawn and quartered. His head was carried on a pike back to Plymouth, where it was mounted on grisly display for years. King Philip’s War slowed the westward march of Eng lish settlement in New Eng land for several decades. But the war inﬂ icted a lasting defeat on New Eng land’s Indians. Drastically reduced in numbers, dispirited, and disbanded, they thereafter posed only sporadic threats to the New Eng land colonists.

Seeds of Colonial Unity
 and Independence A path-breaking experiment in union was launched in 1643, when four colonies banded together to form the New Eng land Confederation. The Eng lish Civil War was then deeply distracting old Eng land, throwing the colonists upon their own resources. The primary purpose of the confederation was defense against foes or potential foes, notably the Indians, the French, and the Dutch. Purely intercolonial problems, such as run-

 away servants and criminals who had ﬂed from one colony to another, also came within the jurisdiction of the confederation. Each member colony, regardless of size, wielded two votes—an arrangement highly displeasing to the most populous colony, Massachusetts Bay. The confederation was essentially an exclusive Puritan club. It consisted of the two Massachusetts colonies (the Bay Colony and bantam-sized Plymouth) and the two Connecticut colonies (New Haven and the scattered valley settlements). The Puritan leaders blackballed Rhode Island as well as the Maine outposts. These places, it was charged, harbored too many heretical or otherwise undesirable characters. Shockingly, one of the Maine towns had made a tailor its mayor and had even sheltered an excommunicated minister of the gospel. Weak though it was, the confederation was the ﬁ rst notable milestone on the long and rocky road toward colonial unity. The delegates took tottering but longoverdue steps toward acting together on matters of intercolonial importance. Rank-and-ﬁ le colonists, for their part, received valuable experience in delegating their votes to properly chosen representatives. Back in Eng land the king had paid little attention to the American colonies during the early years of their planting. They were allowed, in effect, to become semiautonomous commonwealths. This era of benign neglect was prolonged when the crown, struggling to retain its power, became enmeshed during the 1640s in civil wars with the parliamentarians. But when Charles II was restored to the Eng lish throne in 1660 (see Table 3.1), the royalists and their Church of Eng land allies were once more ﬁrmly in the saddle. Puritan hopes of eventually purifying the old Eng lish church withered. Worse, Charles II was determined to take an active, aggressive hand in the management of the colonies. His plans ran headlong against the habits that decades of relative independence had bred in the colonists. Deepening colonial deﬁance was nowhere more glaringly revealed than in Massachusetts. One of the king’s agents in Boston was mortiﬁed to ﬁ nd that royal orders had no more effect than old issues of the London Gazette. Punishment was soon forthcoming. As a slap at Massachusetts, Charles II gave rival Connecticut in 1662 a sea-to-sea charter grant, which legalized the squatter settlements. The very next year, the outcasts in Rhode Island received a new charter, which gave kingly sanction to the most religiously tolerant

Confederation and Dominion in New England




 Table 3.1 The Stuart Dynasty in Eng land* Name, Reign

Relation to America


James I, 1603–1625
Charles I, 1625–1649
(Interregnum, 1649–1660)
Charles II, 1660–1685
James II, 1685–1688
William & Mary, 1689–1702
 (Mary died 1694)

 Va., Plymouth founded; Separatists persecuted Civil wars, 1642–1649; Mass., Md. founded Commonwealth; Protectorate (Oliver Cromwell) The Restoration; Carolinas, Pa., N.Y. founded; Conn. chartered Catholic trend; Glorious Revolution, 1688 King William’s War, 1689–1697

*


 See p. 29 for predecessors; p. 113 for successors.

 government yet devised in America. A ﬁ nal and crushing blow fell on the stiff-necked Bay Colony in 1684, when its precious charter was revoked by the London authorities.

Andros Promotes the First
American Revolution
 Massachusetts suffered further humiliation in 1686, when the Dominion of New Eng land was created by royal authority (see Map 3.3). Unlike the homegrown New Eng land Confederation, it was imposed from London. Embracing at ﬁ rst all of New Eng land, it was expanded two years later to include New York and East and West Jersey. The dominion also aimed at bolstering colonial defense in the event of war with the Indians and hence, from the imperial viewpoint of Parliament, was a statesmanlike move. More importantly, the Dominion of New Eng land was designed to promote urgently needed efﬁciency in the administration of the Eng lish Navigation Laws. Those laws reﬂected the intensifying colonial rivalries of the seventeenth century. They sought to stitch England’s overseas possessions more tightly to the motherland by throttling American trade with countries not ruled by the Eng lish crown. Like colonial peoples everywhere, the Americans chafed at such conﬁ nements, and smuggling became an increasingly common and honorable occupation. At the head of the new dominion stood autocratic Sir Edmund Andros, an able Eng lish military man, conscientious but tactless. Establishing headquarters in Puritanical Boston, he generated much hostility by his open afﬁ liation with the despised Church of Eng land.

 The colonists were also outraged by his noisy and Sabbath-profaning soldiers, who were accused of teaching the people “to drink, blaspheme, curse, and damn.” Andros was prompt to use the mailed ﬁst. He ruthlessly curbed the cherished town meetings; laid heavy restrictions on the courts, the press, and the schools; and revoked all land titles. Dispensing with the popular assemblies, he taxed the people without the consent of their duly elected representatives. He also strove to enforce the unpopular Navigation Laws and suppress smuggling. Liberty-loving colonists, accustomed to unusual privileges during long decades of neglect, were goaded to the verge of revolt. The people of old Eng land soon taught the people of New Eng land a few lessons in resisting oppression. In 1688–1689 they engineered the memorable Glorious (or Bloodless) Revolution. Dethroning the despotic and unpopular Catholic James II, they enthroned the Protestant rulers of the Netherlands, the Dutch-born William III and his Eng lish wife, Mary II, daughter of James II. When the news of the Glorious Revolution reached America, the ramshackle Dominion of New Eng land collapsed like a house of cards. A Boston mob, catching the fever, rose against the existing regime. Sir Edmund Andros attempted to ﬂee in women’s clothing but was betrayed by boots protruding beneath his dress. He was hastily shipped off to Eng land. Massachusetts, though rid of the despotic Andros, did not gain as much from the upheaval as it had hoped. In 1691 it was arbitrarily made a royal colony, with a new charter and a new royal governor. The permanent loss of the ancient charter was a staggering blow to the proud Puritans, who never fully recovered. Worst of all, the privilege of voting, once a monopoly of church



Chapter 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 1619–1700


 Andros’s Dominion of New England





70°W


200 Km.


MAINE (MASS.)

200 Mi.
NEW HAMPSHIRE

FIVE NATIONS (IROQUOIS)

ATLANTIC OCEAN

MASSACHUSETTS BAY PLYMOUTH N.Y. CONN. R.I.

 PA.

40°N
 MD.

Sir Edmund Andros (1637–1714); a Boston Broadside Urging Him to
 Surrender, 1689 After being expelled from New England, Andros eventually returned to the New World as governor of Virginia (1692–1697).

 members, was now to be enjoyed by all qualiﬁed male property holders. Eng land’s Glorious Revolution reverberated throughout the colonies from New Eng land to the Chesapeake. Inspired by the challenge to the crown in old Eng land, many colonists seized the occasion to strike against royal authority in America. Unrest rocked both New York and Maryland from 1689 to 1691, until newly appointed royal governors restored a semblance of order. Most importantly, the new monarchs relaxed the royal grip on colonial trade, inaugurating a period of “salutary neglect” when the much-resented Navigation Laws were only weakly enforced. Yet residues remained of Charles II’s effort to assert tighter administrative control over his empire. More Eng lish ofﬁcials—judges, clerks, customs ofﬁcials—

EAST JERSEY WEST JERSEY

N


 Map 3.3 Andros’s Dominion of New England Interactive Map

 now staffed the courts and strolled the wharves of English America. Many were incompetent, corrupt hacks who knew little and cared less about American affairs. Appointed by inﬂuential patrons in far-off Eng land, they blocked the rise of local leaders to positions of political power by their very presence. Aggrieved Americans viewed them with mounting contempt and resentment as the eighteenth century wore on.

Old Netherlanders at
New Netherland
 Late in the sixteenth century, the oppressed people of the Netherlands unfurled the standard of rebellion against Catholic Spain. After bloody and protracted



Dutch Explorers


 ocratic practices; and the governors appointed by the company as directors-general were usually harsh and despotic. Religious dissenters who opposed the ofﬁcial Dutch Reformed Church were regarded with suspicion, and for a while Quakers were savagely abused. In response to repeated protests by the aggravated colonists,



Tadoussac 1600




50 100 Km.


100 Mi.


W


 Trois-Rivières 1634

N
IN QU

E


A


 ta

IS MOH UO ON AW Q O EID K

 SE

 SQ

 CA

D


 SU

 NE

R L AN


A
NO O IR CAYU NDAG GA A

D


 AN

Rensselaerwyck 1630
Fort Orange 1614 P
 OK

 EW

On


N


L.


I
AK 45°N

Esopus 1653
Hudson A N
G
R.
HE MO

Salem 1630
Boston 1630
Plymouth 1620
 AN

O K PLYMOUTH ET

RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT NEW HAVEN 40°N

Yonkers 1646
New Amsterdam 1626
UE H A
Delaware NN R. PE A NA LE 
NEW SWEDEN

MASSACHUSETTS BAY

 GL

N


Connecticut R.


AN MAHIC

St


 RO

 EN

.L
 aw

Lake
Champlain


 rio

 HU

N
 BE

R.


 re

 ce

C


Fort Richelieu 1642


N
G O
Montréal 1642 
 n

 AL

 MA

 FR

Beauport
 Québec 1608

 AN

 CE

 MIC

TH E N EW N E

N


Tinicum 1643


Fort Christina 1638
Fort Casimir 1651


Fort Nya Elfsborg 1643


 NA

 NT

O


 IC

MARYLAND K E

Swaanendael 1631


(Destroyed, 1632)


 St. Mary’s 1634 POW

 HATA

N


 p esa Ch

 VIRGINIA

70°W


 Area of English settlement

 y

Jamestown


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

 Area of Dutch settlement

 a eake B

 ﬁghting, they ﬁ nally succeeded, with the aid of Protestant Eng land, in winning their independence. The seventeenth century—the era of Rembrandt and other famous artists—was a golden age in Dutch history. This vigorous little lowland nation ﬁ nally emerged as a major commercial and naval power, and then it ungratefully challenged the supremacy of its former benefactor, Eng land. Three great Anglo-Dutch naval wars were fought in the seventeenth century, with as many as a hundred ships on each side. The sturdy Dutch dealt blows about as heavy as they received. The Dutch republic also became a leading colonial power, with by far its greatest activity in the East Indies. There it maintained an enormous and proﬁtable empire for over three hundred years. The Dutch East India Company was virtually a state within a state and at one time supported an army of 10,000 men and a ﬂeet of 190 ships, 40 of them men-of-war. Seeking greater riches, this enterprising company employed an Eng lish explorer, Henry Hudson. Disregarding orders to sail northeast, he ventured into Delaware Bay and New York Bay in 1609 and then ascended the Hudson River, hoping that at last he had chanced upon the coveted shortcut through the continent. But, as the event proved, he merely ﬁ led a Dutch claim to a magniﬁcently wooded and watered area. Much less powerful than the mighty Dutch East India Company was the Dutch West India Company, which maintained proﬁtable enterprises in the Caribbean. At times it was less interested in trading than in raiding and at one fell swoop in 1628 captured a ﬂeet of Spanish trea sure ships laden with loot worth $15 million. The company also established outposts in Africa and a thriving sugar industry in Brazil, which for several decades was its principal center of activity in the New World. New Netherland, in the beautiful Hudson River area, was planted in 1623–1624 on a permanent basis (see Map 3.4). Established by the Dutch West India Company for its quick-proﬁt fur trade, it was never more than a secondary interest of the founders. The company’s most brilliant stroke was to buy Manhattan Island from the Indians (who did not actually “own” it) for virtually worthless trinkets—twenty-two thousand acres of what is now perhaps the most valuable real estate in the world for pennies per acre. New Amsterdam—later New York City—was a company town. It was run by and for the Dutch company, in the interests of the stockholders. The investors had no enthusiasm for religious toleration, free speech, or dem-

 Area of French settlement 75°W

 Area of Swedish settlement

Map 3.4 Early Settlements in the Middle Colonies,
 with Founding Dates Interactive Map



Chapter 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 1619–1700


New York Aristocrats This
 prosperous family exempliﬁed the comfortable lives and aristocratic pretensions of the “Hudson River lords” in colonial New York.

 a local body with limited lawmaking power was ﬁ nally established. This picturesque Dutch colony took on a strongly aristocratic tint and retained it for generations. Vast feudal estates fronting the Hudson River, known as patroonships, were granted to promoters who agreed to settle ﬁ fty people on them. One patroonship in the Albany area was slightly larger than the later state of Rhode Island. Colorful little New Amsterdam attracted a cosmopolitan population, as is common in seaport towns. Twenty-three Jews arrived in 1654, refugees from religious persecution in Catholic Brazil—a harbinger of the city’s later reputation as a haven for the homeless and the harried. A French Jesuit missionary, visiting in the 1640s, noted that eighteen different languages were being spoken in the streets. New York’s later babel of immigrant tongues was thus foreshadowed.

 Friction with English and Swedish Neighbors Vexations beset the Dutch company-colony from the beginning. The directors-general were largely incompetent. Company shareholders demanded their dividends, even at the expense of the colony’s welfare. The Indians, infuriated by Dutch cruelties, retaliated with

 horrible massacres. As a defense mea sure, the hardpressed settlers on Manhattan Island erected a stout wall, from which Wall Street derives its name. New Eng land was hostile to the growth of its Dutch neighbor, and the people of Connecticut ﬁ nally ejected intruding Hollanders from their verdant valley. The Swedes also trespassed on Dutch preserves, from 1638 to 1655, by planting the anemic colony of New Sweden on the Delaware River (see Map 3.4). This was the golden age of Sweden, during and following the Thirty Years’ War of 1618–1648, in which its brilliant King Gustavus Adolphus had carried the torch for Protestantism. This outburst of energy in Sweden caused it to enter the costly colonial game in America, though on something of a shoestring. Resenting the Swedish intrusion on the Delaware, the Dutch dispatched a small military expedition in 1655. It was led by the ablest of the directors-general, Peter Stuyvesant, who had lost a leg while soldiering in the West Indies and was dubbed “Father Wooden Leg” by the Indians. The main fort fell after a bloodless siege, whereupon Swedish rule came to an abrupt end. The colonists were absorbed by New Netherland. New Sweden, never important, soon faded away, leaving behind in later Delaware a sprinkling of Swedish place names and Swedish log cabins (the ﬁ rst in America), as well as an admixture of Swedish blood.

The Dutch Plant New York




 New Amsterdam, 1664 The future metropolis, already a bustling port, is shown here as it was in the year that the English took over New Netherland and renamed it New York.

Dutch Residues in New York
 Lacking vitality, and representing only a secondary commercial interest of the Dutch, New Netherland lay under the menacing shadow of the vigorous English colonies to the north. In addition, it was honeycombed with New Eng land immigrants. Numbering about one-half of New Netherland’s ten thousand souls in 1664, they might in time have seized control from within. The days of the Dutch on the Hudson were numbered, for the Eng lish regarded them as intruders. In 1664, after the imperially ambitious Charles II had granted the area to his brother, the Duke of York, a strong Eng lish squadron appeared off the decrepit defenses of New Amsterdam. A fuming Peter Stuyvesant, short of all munitions except courage, was forced to surrender without ﬁ ring a shot. New Amsterdam was

 thereupon renamed New York, in honor of the Duke of York. Eng land won a splendid harbor, strategically located in the middle of the mainland colonies, and the stately Hudson River penetrating the interior. With the removal of this foreign wedge, the Eng lish banner now waved triumphantly over a solid stretch of territory from Maine to the Carolinas. The conquered Dutch province tenaciously retained many of the illiberal features of earlier days. An autocratic spirit survived, and the aristocratic element gained strength when certain corrupt Eng lish governors granted immense acreage to their favorites. Inﬂuential landowning families—such as the Livingstons and the De Lanceys—wielded disproportionate power in the affairs of colonial New York. These monopolistic land policies, combined with the lordly at mosphere, discouraged many European immigrants from coming. The physical growth of New York was correspondingly retarded.



Chapter 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 1619–1700


Quakers in the Colonial Era Quakers, or Friends,
 were renowned for their simplicity of architecture, dress, manner, and speech. They also distinguished themselves from most other Protestant denominations by allowing women to speak in Quaker meetings and to share in making decisions for the church and the family.

 The Dutch peppered place names over the land, including Harlem (Haarlem), Brooklyn (Breuckelen), and Hell Gate (Hellegat). They likewise left their imprint on the gambrel-roofed architecture. As for social customs and folkways, no other foreign group of comparable size has made so colorful a contribution. Noteworthy are Easter eggs, Santa Claus, wafﬂes, sauerkraut, bowling, sleighing, skating, and kolf (golf)—a dangerous game played with heavy clubs and forbidden in settled areas.

 Penn’s Holy Experiment in Pennsylvania A remarkable group of dissenters, commonly known as Quakers, arose in Eng land during the mid-1600s. Their name derived from the report that they “quaked” when under deep religious emotion. Ofﬁcially they were known as the Religious Society of Friends. Quakers were especially offensive to the authorities, both religious and civil. They refused to support the established Church of Eng land with taxes. They built simple meetinghouses, congregated without a paid clergy, and “spoke up” themselves in meetings when moved. Believing that they were all children in the sight of God, they kept their broad-brimmed hats on in the presence of their “betters” and addressed others with simple “thee”s and “thou”s, rather than with conventional titles. They would take no oaths because Jesus had commanded, “Swear not at all.” This pecu-

 liarity often embroiled them with government ofﬁcials, for “test oaths” were still required to establish the fact that a person was not a Roman Catholic. The Quakers, beyond a doubt, were a people of deep conviction. They abhorred strife and warfare and refused military ser vice. As advocates of passive resistance, they would turn the other cheek and rebuild their meetinghouse on the site where their enemies had torn it down. Their courage and devotion to principle ﬁ nally triumphed. Although at times they seemed stubborn and unreasonable, they were a simple, devoted, democratic people, contending in their own high-minded way for religious and civic freedom. William Penn, a wellborn and athletic young Englishman, was attracted to the Quaker faith in 1660, when only sixteen years old. His father, disapproving, administered a sound ﬂogging. After various adventures in the army (the best portrait of the peaceful Quaker has him in armor), the youth ﬁ rmly embraced the despised faith and suffered much persecution. The courts branded him a “saucy” and “impertinent” fellow. Several hundred of his less fortunate fellow Quakers died of cruel treatment, and thousands more were ﬁ ned, ﬂogged, or cast into dank prisons.

The Quakers in Pennsylvania


 Penn’s thoughts naturally turned to the New World, where a sprinkling of Quakers had already ﬂed, notably to Rhode Island, North Carolina, and New Jersey. Eager to establish an asylum for his people, he also hoped to experiment with liberal ideas in government and at the same time make a proﬁt. Finally, in 1681, he managed to secure from the king an immense grant of fertile land, in consideration of a monetary debt owed to his deceased father by the crown. The king called the area Pennsylvania (“Penn’s Woodland”) in honor of the sire. The modest son, fearing that critics would accuse him of naming it after himself, sought unsuccessfully to change the name. Pennsylvania was by far the best advertised of all the colonies. Its founder—the “ﬁrst American advertising man”—sent out paid agents and distributed countless pamphlets printed in Eng lish, Dutch, French, and German. Unlike the lures of many other American real estate promoters, then and later, Penn’s inducements were generally truthful. He especially welcomed forward-looking spirits and substantial citizens, including industrious carpenters, masons, shoemakers, and other manual workers. His liberal land policy, which encouraged substantial holdings, was instrumental in attracting a heavy inﬂow of immigrants.



Quaker Pennsylvania
 and Its Neighbors Penn formally launched his colony in 1681. His task was simpliﬁed by the presence of several thousand “squatters”—Dutch, Swedish, Eng lish, Welsh—who were already scattered along the banks of the Delaware River. Philadelphia, meaning “brotherly love” in Greek, was more carefully planned than most colonial cities and consequently enjoyed wide and attractive streets. Penn farsightedly bought land from the Indians, including Chief Tammany, later patron saint of New York’s political Tammany Hall. His treatment of the native peoples was so fair that the Quaker “broad brims” went among them unarmed and even employed them as baby-sitters. For a brief period, Pennsylvania seemed the promised land of amicable Indian-white relations. Some southern tribes even migrated to Pennsylvania, seeking the Quaker haven. But ironically, Quaker tolerance proved the undoing of Quaker Indian policy. As non-Quaker European immigrants ﬂooded into the province, they undermined the Quakers’ own benevolent policy toward the Indians. The feisty Scots-Irish were particularly unpersuaded by Quaker idealism.

 Penn’s Treaty, by Edward Hicks The peace-loving Quaker founder of Pennsylvania made a serious effort to live in harmony with the Indians, as this treaty-signing scene illustrates. But the westward thrust of white settlement eventually caused friction between the two groups, as in other colonies.



Chapter 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 1619–1700


 In a Boston lecture in 1869, Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882) declared,

“


 The sect of the Quakers in their best representatives appear to me to have come nearer to the sublime history and genius of Christ than any other of the sects.

”


 Penn’s new proprietary regime was unusually liberal and included a representative assembly elected by the landowners. No tax-supported state church drained coffers or demanded allegiance. Freedom of worship was guaranteed to all residents, although Penn, under pressure from London, was forced to deny Catholics and Jews the privilege of voting or holding ofﬁce. The death penalty was imposed only for treason and murder, as compared with some two hundred capital crimes in Eng land. Among other noteworthy features, no provision was made by the peace-loving Quakers of Pennsylvania for a military defense. No restrictions were placed on immigration, and naturalization was made easy. The humane Quakers early developed a strong dislike of black slavery, and in the genial glow of Pennsylvania some progress was made toward social reform. With its many liberal features, Pennsylvania attracted a rich mix of ethnic groups. They included numerous religious misﬁts who were repelled by the harsh practices of neighboring colonies. This Quaker refuge boasted a surprisingly modern at mosphere in an unmodern age and to an unusual degree afforded economic opportunity, civil liberty, and religious freedom. Even so, “blue laws” prohibited “ungodly revelers,” stage plays, playing cards, dice, games, and excessive hilarity. Under such generally happy auspices, Penn’s brainchild grew lustily. The Quakers were shrewd businesspeople, and in a short time the settlers were exporting grain and other foodstuffs. Within two years Philadelphia claimed three hundred houses and twenty-ﬁve hundred people. Within nineteen years—by 1700—the colony was surpassed in population and wealth only by long-established Virginia and Massachusetts. William Penn, who altogether spent about four years in Pennsylvania, was never fully appreciated by his colonists. His governors, some of them incompetent and tactless, quarreled bitterly with the people, who were constantly demanding greater political control. Penn himself became too friendly with James II, the

 deposed Catholic king. Thrice arrested for treason, thrust for a time into a debtors’ prison, and afﬂ icted by a paralytic stroke, he died full of sorrows. His enduring monument was not only a noble experiment in government but also a new commonwealth. Based on civil and religious liberty, and dedicated to freedom of conscience and worship, it held aloft a hopeful torch in a world of semidarkness. Small Quaker settlements ﬂourished next door to Pennsylvania. New Jersey was started in 1664 when two noble proprietors received the area from the Duke of York. A substantial number of New Eng landers, including many whose weary soil had petered out, ﬂocked to the new colony. One of the proprietors sold West New Jersey in 1674 to a group of Quakers, who here set up a sanctuary even before Pennsylvania was launched. East New Jersey was also acquired in later years by the Quakers, whose wings were clipped in 1702 when the crown combined the two Jerseys in a royal colony. Swedish-tinged Delaware consisted of only three counties—two at high tide, the witticism goes—and was named after Lord De La Warr, the harsh military governor who had arrived in Virginia in 1610. Harboring some Quakers, and closely associated with Penn’s prosperous colony, Delaware was granted its own assembly in 1703. But until the American Revolution, it remained under the governor of Pennsylvania.

The Middle Way in
 the Middle Colonies The middle colonies—New York, New Jersey, Delaware, and Pennsylvania—enjoyed certain features in common. In general, the soil was fertile and the expanse of land was broad, unlike rock-bestrewn New Eng land. Pennsylvania, New York, and New Jersey came to be known as the “bread colonies,” by virtue of their heavy exports of grain. Rivers also played a vital role. Broad, languid streams—notably the Susquehanna, the Delaware, and the Hudson—tapped the fur trade of the interior and beckoned adventuresome spirits into the backcountry. The rivers had few cascading waterfalls, unlike New Eng land’s, and hence presented little inducement to milling or manufacturing with water-wheel power. A surprising amount of industry nonetheless hummed in the middle colonies. Virginal forests abounded for lumbering and shipbuilding. The presence of deep river estuaries and landlocked harbors

A
Seventeenth-Century Valuables Cabinet  n 1999 a boatyard worker on Cape Cod and his sister, a New Hampshire teacher, inherited a small (20-pound, 16½-inch-high) chest that had always stood on their grandmother’s hall table, known in the family as the “Franklin chest.” Eager to learn more about it, they set out to discover the original owner, tracing their family genealogy and consulting with furniture experts. In January 2000 this rare seventeenth-century cabinet, its full provenance now known, appeared on the auction block and sold for a record $2.4 million to the Peabody Essex Museum in Salem, Massachusetts. No less extraordinary than the price was the history of its creator and its owners embodied in the piece. Salem cabinetmaker James Symonds (1636–1726) had made the chest for his relatives Joseph Pope (1650–1712) and Bathsheba Folger (1652–1726) to commemorate their 1679 marriage. Symonds carved the Popes’ initials and the date

I


 on the door of the cabinet. He also put elaborate S curves on the sides remarkably similar to the Mannerist carved oak paneling produced in Norfolk, England, from which his own cabinetmaker father had emigrated. Behind the chest’s door are ten drawers where the Popes would have kept jewelry, money, deeds, and writing materials. Surely they prized the chest as a sign of reﬁ nement to be shown off in their best room, a sentiment passed down through the next thirteen generations even as the Popes’ identities were lost. The chest may have become known as the “Franklin chest” because Bathsheba was Benjamin Franklin’s aunt, but also because that identiﬁcation appealed more to descendants ashamed that the Quaker Popes, whose own parents had been persecuted for their faith, were virulent accusers during the Salem witch trials of 1692.





Chapter 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 1619–1700


 stimulated both commerce and the growth of seaports, such as New York and Philadelphia. Even Albany, more than a hundred miles up the Hudson, was a port of some consequence in colonial days. The middle colonies were in many respects midway between New Eng land and the southern plantation group. Except in aristocratic New York, the landholdings were generally intermediate in size—smaller than in the plantation South but larger than in small-farm New Eng land. Local government lay somewhere between the personalized town meeting of New Eng land and the diffused county government of the South. There were fewer industries in the middle colonies than in New Eng land, more than in the South. Yet the middle colonies, which in some ways were the most American part of America, could claim certain distinctions in their own right. Generally speaking, the population was more ethnically mixed than that of other settlements. The people were blessed with an unusual degree of religious toleration and democratic control. Earnest and devout Quakers, in particular, made a compassionate contribution to human freedom out of all proportion to their numbers. Desirable land was more easily acquired in the middle colonies than in New Eng land or in the tidewater South.

 One result was that a considerable amount of economic and social democracy prevailed, though less so in aristocratic New York. Modern-minded Benjamin Franklin, often regarded as the most representative American personality of his era, was a child of the middle colonies. Although it is true that Franklin was born a Yankee in puritanical Boston, he entered Philadelphia as a seventeen-yearold in 1720 with a loaf of bread under each arm and immediately found a congenial home in the urbane, open at mosphere of what was then North America’s biggest city. One Pennsylvanian later boasted that Franklin “came to life at seventeen, in Philadelphia.” By the time Franklin arrived in the City of Brotherly Love, the American colonies were themselves “coming to life.” Population was growing robustly. Transportation and communication were gradually improving. The British, for the most part, continued their handsoff policies, leaving the colonists to fashion their own local governments, run their own churches, and develop networks of intercolonial trade. As people and products crisscrossed the colonies with increasing frequency and in increasing volume, Americans began to realize that—far removed from Mother Eng land—they were not merely surviving, but truly thriving.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Martin Luther begins Protestant Reformation

1642–


 Eng lish Civil War



 John Calvin of Geneva publishes Institutes of the Christian Religion



 New Eng land Confederation formed



 Pilgrims sail on the Mayﬂower to Plymouth Bay



 William Bradford completes Of Plymouth Plantation



 Dutch found New Netherland



 New Netherland conquers New Sweden



 Charles I dismisses Parliament and persecutes Puritans



 Eng land seizes New Netherland from Dutch East and West Jersey colonies founded



 Puritans found Massachusetts Bay Colony Roger Williams convicted of heresy and founds Rhode Island colony

1675–


 King Philip’s War

1635–




 William Penn founds Pennsylvania colony

1635–


 Connecticut and New Haven colonies founded



 Royal authority creates Dominion of New Eng land



Pequot War




 Anne Hutchinson banished from Massachusetts colony

1688–


 Glorious Revolution overthrows Stuarts and Dominion of New Eng land



 Connecticut’s Fundamental Orders drafted

Varying Viewpoints


KEY TERMS



PEOPLE TO KNOW

Calvinism (46)
 predestination (47) conversion (47) Puritans (47) Separatists (47) Mayﬂower Compact (47) Massachusetts Bay Colony (49) Great Migration (49) antinomianism (51) Fundamental Orders (52) Pequot War (54)

 King Philip’s War (54) Eng lish Civil War (54) Dominion of New Eng land (55) Navigation Laws (55) Glorious (or Bloodless) Revolution (55) salutary neglect (56) patroonships (58) blue laws (62)

Martin Luther
John Calvin
William Bradford
John Winthrop
Anne Hutchinson
Roger Williams
Massasoit
Metacom (King Philip)


Charles II
Sir Edmund Andros
William III
Mary II
Henry Hudson
Peter Stuyvesant
Duke of York
William Penn


Europeanizing America or Americanizing Europe?


T


 he history of discovery and colonization raises perhaps the most fundamental question about all American history. Should it be understood as the extension of European civilization into the two continents of the New World or as the gradual development of uniquely “American” cultures? An older school of thought tended to emphasize the Europeanization of America. Historians of that persuasion paid close attention to the situation in Europe, particularly Eng land and Spain, in the ﬁ fteenth and sixteenth centuries. They also focused on the exportation of the values and institutions of the mother countries to the new lands in the western sea. Although some historians also examined the transforming effect of America on Europe, this approach, too, remained essentially Eurocentric. More recently, historians have concentrated on the distinctiveness of America. The concern with European origins has evolved into a comparative treatment of European settlements in the New World. Eng land, Spain, Holland, and France now attract more attention for the divergent kinds of societies they fostered in America than for the way they commonly pursued Old World ambitions in the New. The newest trend to emerge is a transatlantic history that views European

 empires and their American colonies as part of a process of cultural cross-fertilization affecting not only the colonies but Europe and Africa as well. This less Eurocentric approach has also changed the way historians explain the colonial development of America. Rather than telling the story of colonization as the imposition of European ways of life through “discovery” and “conquest,” historians increasingly view the colonial period as one of “contact” and “adaptation” between European, African, and Native American ways of life. Scholars, including Richard White, Alfred Crosby, William Cronon, Karen Kupperman, and Timothy Silver, have enhanced understanding of the cultural as well as the physical transformations that resulted from contact. An environment of forests and meadows, for example, gave way to a landscape of ﬁelds and fences as Europeans sought to replicate the agricultural villages they had known in Europe. Aggressive deforestation even produced climatic changes, as treeless tracts made for colder winters, hotter summers, and earth-gouging ﬂoods. Ramon Gutierrez’s When Jesus Came, the Corn Mothers Went Away (1991) has expanded the colonial stage to include interactions between Spanish settlers and Native Americans in the Southwest.



Chapter 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 1619–1700


J. H.
Elliott’s magisterial work Empires of the Atlantic World (2006) makes brilliant use of the comparative approach to illuminate the worlds of the British and Spanish Empires. Spain had a grand imperial plan that it pursued with notable consistency: exclude Jews and Moors (Muslims) from its domains, convert the native peoples to Catholicism, follow military conquest with military rule, and eventually defer to colonial elites for the orderly administration of its possessions. Britain had no comparably systematic plan. It showed relatively little interest in converting the Indians, tolerated all kinds of immigrants to its colonies, long left them alone to cultivate institutions of self-government and representative democracy, and when it eventually tried to tighten its imperial grip, pressured local elites into open revolt. The two empires left consequential and contrasting legacies of political stability in the United States and chronic political turmoil in Latin America. As one reviewer summarized the argument, “George Washington could draw on an inherited political culture, whereas [the great Latin American liberator] Simón Bolívar had to invent one.” The variety of American societies that emerged out of the interaction of Europeans and Native Americans is now well appreciated. Early histories by esteemed historians like Perry Miller exaggerated the extent to which the New Eng land Puritan experience deﬁ ned the essence of America. Not only did these historians overlook non-Eng lish experiences, but they failed to recognize the diversity in motives, methods, and consequences that existed even within Eng lish colonization. The numbers alone tell an interesting story. By 1700 about 220,000 Eng lish colonists had immigrated to the Caribbean, about 120,000 to the southern mainland colonies, and only about 40,000 to the middle Atlantic and New Eng land colonies (although by the mid-eighteenth century, those headed for the latter destination would account for more than half of the total). 
 Studies such as Richard S. Dunn’s Sugar and Slaves (1972) emphasize the importance of the Caribbean in early Eng lish colonization efforts and make clear that the desire for economic gain, more than the quest for religious freedom, fueled the migration to the Caribbean islands. Similarly, Edmund S. Morgan’s American Slavery, American Freedom (1975) stresses the role of economic ambition in explaining the Eng lish peopling of the Chesapeake and the eventual importation of African slaves to that region. Studies by Bernard Bailyn and David Hackett Fischer demonstrate that there was scarcely a “typical” Eng lish migrant to the New World. Eng lish colonists migrated both singly and in families, and for economic, social, political, and religious reasons. Recent studies have also paid more attention to the conﬂ icts that emerged out of this diversity in settler populations and colonial societies. This perspective emphasizes the contests for economic and political supremacy within the colonies, such as the efforts of the Massachusetts Bay elite to ward off the challenges of religious “heretics” and the pressures that an increasingly restless lower class put on wealthy merchants and large landowners. Nowhere was internal conﬂ ict so prevalent as in the ethnically diverse middle colonies, where factional antagonisms became the deﬁ ning feature of public life. The picture of British colonial North America that is emerging from all this new scholarship is of a society unique—and diverse—from inception. No longer simply Europe transplanted, British America by 1700 is now viewed as an outgrowth of many intertwining roots—of different European and African heritages, of varied encounters with native peoples and a wilderness environment, and of complicated mixtures of settler populations, each with its own distinctive set of ambitions.

To Learn More




To Learn More
Patricia Bonomi, A Factious People: Politics and Society in
Colonial New York (1971)
Timothy H. Breen, Puritans and Adventurers (1980)
Jon Butler, Awash in a Sea of Faith: Christianizing the
American People (1990)
 John Demos, The Unredeemed Captive: A Family Story from Early America (1994). David Hall, Worlds of Wonder, Days of Judgment: Popular Religious Belief in Early New England (1989) Donna Merwick, The Shame and the Sorrow: DutchAmerindian Encounters in New Netherland (2006) Edmund S. Morgan, Roger Williams: The Church and State (1967)

 Jenny Hale Pulsipher, Subjects unto the Same King: Indians, English, and the Contest for Authority in Colonial New England (2005) Oliver A. Rink, Holland on the Hudson: An Economic and Social History of Dutch New York (1986) Harry Stout, The New England Soul: Preaching and Culture in Colonial New England (1986) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

American Life in the
Seventeenth Century





1607–1692
 Being thus passed the vast ocean, and a sea of troubles before in their preparation . . . , they had now no friends to wellcome them, nor inns to entertaine or refresh their weatherbeaten bodys, no houses or much less towns to repaire too, to seeke for succore.

A


 s the seventeenth century unfolded, the crude encampments of the ﬁ rst colonists slowly gave way to permanent settlements. Durable and distinctive ways of life emerged as Europeans and Africans adapted to the New World and as Native Americans adapted to the newcomers. Even the rigid doctrines of Puritanism softened somewhat in response to the circumstances of life in America. And though all the colonies remained tied to Eng land, and all were stitched tightly into the fabric of an Atlantic economy, regional differences continued to crystallize, notably the increasing importance of slave labor to the southern way of life.

The Unhealthy Chesapeake
 Life in the American wilderness was nasty, brutish, and short for the earliest Chesapeake settlers. Malaria, dysentery, and typhoid took a cruel toll, cutting ten years

 off the life expectancy of newcomers from Eng land. Half the people born in early Virginia and Maryland did not survive to celebrate their twentieth birthdays. Few of the remaining half lived to see their ﬁ ftieth—or even their fortieth, if they were women. The disease-ravaged settlements of the Chesapeake grew only slowly in the seventeenth century, mostly through fresh immigration from Eng land. The great majority of immigrants were single men in their late teens and early twenties, and most perished soon after arrival. Surviving males competed for the affections of the extremely scarce women, whom they outnumbered nearly six to one in 1650 and still outnumbered by three to two at the end of the century. Eligible women did not remain single for long. Families were both few and fragile in this ferocious environment. Most men could not ﬁ nd mates. Most marriages were destroyed by the death of a partner within seven years. Scarcely any children reached

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Importance of Tobacco




 adulthood under the care of two parents, and almost no one knew a grandparent. Weak family ties were reﬂected in the many pregnancies among unmarried young girls. In one Maryland county, more than a third of all brides were already pregnant when they wed. Yet despite these hardships, the Chesapeake colonies struggled on. The native-born inhabitants eventually acquired immunity to the killer diseases that had ravaged the original immigrants. The presence of more women allowed more families to form, and by the end of the seventeenth century the white population of the Chesapeake was growing on the basis of its own birthrate. As the eighteenth century opened, Virginia, with some ﬁ fty-nine thousand people, was the most populous colony. Maryland, with about thirty thousand, was the third largest (after Massachusetts).

The Tobacco Economy
 Although unhealthy for human life, the Chesapeake was immensely hospitable to tobacco cultivation. Proﬁt-hungry settlers often planted tobacco to sell before they planted corn to eat. But intense tobacco cultivation quickly exhausted the soil, creating a nearly insatiable demand for new land. Relentlessly seeking fresh ﬁelds to plant in tobacco, commercial growers plunged ever farther up the river valleys, provoking ever more Indian attacks. Leaf-laden ships annually hauled some 1.5 million pounds of tobacco out of Chesapeake Bay by the 1630s and almost 40 million pounds a year by the end of the century. This enormous production depressed prices, but colonial Chesapeake tobacco growers responded to falling prices in the familiar way of farmers: by planting still more acres to tobacco and bringing still more product to market.

 An agent for the Virginia Company in London submitted the following description of the Virginia colony in 1622:

“


 I found the plantations generally seated upon mere salt marshes full of infectious bogs and muddy creeks and lakes, and thereby subjected to all those inconveniences and diseases which are so commonly found in the most unsound and most unhealthy parts of England.

”


 Early Tobacco Advertising Crude woodcuts like this one were used to identify various “brands” of tobacco—one of the ﬁrst products to be sold by brandname advertising.

 More tobacco meant more labor, but where was it to come from? Families procreated too slowly to provide it by natural population increase. Indians died too quickly on contact with whites to be a reliable labor force. African slaves cost too much money. But Eng land still had a “surplus” of displaced workers and farmers, desperate for employment. Many of them were young men who had ﬂed the disastrous slump in the cloth trades that hit Eng land in the early seventeenth century. Others were tenants who had been forced from their modest farms when landlords “enclosed” ever more acreage for sheep grazing. Making their way from town to town in search of wages, they eventually drifted into port cities like Bristol and London. There they boarded ship for America as indentured servants, voluntarily mortgaging the sweat of their bodies for several years (usually four to seven) to Chesapeake masters. In exchange they received transatlantic passage and eventual “freedom dues,” including an ax and



Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


 a hoe, a few barrels of corn, a suit of clothes, and perhaps a small parcel of land. Both Virginia and Maryland employed the headright system to encourage the importation of servant workers. Under its terms, whoever paid the passage of a laborer received the right to acquire ﬁ fty acres of land. Masters—not the servants themselves—thus reaped the beneﬁts of landownership from the headright system. Some masters, men who already had at least modest ﬁ nancial means, soon parlayed their investments in servants into vast holdings in real estate. They became the great merchant-planters, lords of sprawling riverfront estates that came to dominate the agriculture and commerce of the southern colonies. Ravenous for both labor and land, Chesapeake planters brought some 100,000 indentured servants to the region by 1700. These “white slaves” represented more than threequarters of all European immigrants to Virginia and Maryland in the seventeenth century. Indentured servants led a hard but hopeful life in the early days of the Chesapeake settlements. They looked forward to becoming free and acquiring land of their own after completing their term of servitude. But as prime land became scarcer, masters became increasingly resistant to including land grants in “freedom dues.” The servants’ lot grew harsher as the seventeenth century wore on. Misbehaving servants, such as a housemaid who became pregnant or a laborer who killed a hog, might be punished with an extended term of ser vice. Even after formal freedom was granted, penniless freed workers often had little choice but to hire themselves out for pitifully low wages to their former masters.

Frustrated Freemen and
 Bacon’s Rebellion An accumulating mass of footloose, impoverished freemen drifted discontentedly about the Chesapeake region by the late seventeenth century. Mostly single young men, they were frustrated by their broken hopes of acquiring land, as well as by their gnawing failure to ﬁ nd single women to marry. The swelling numbers of these wretched bachelors rattled the established planters. The Virginia assembly in 1670 disfranchised most of the landless knockabouts, accusing them of “having little interest in the country” and causing “tumults at the election to the disturbance of his majesty’s peace.” Virginia’s Governor William Berkeley lamented his lot as ruler of this rabble: “How

 miserable that man is that governs a people where six parts of seven at least are poor, endebted, discontented, and armed.” Berkeley’s misery soon increased. About a thousand Virginians broke out of control in 1676, led by a twenty-nine-year-old planter, Nathaniel Bacon. Many of the rebels were frontiersmen who had been forced into the untamed backcountry in search of arable land. They ﬁercely resented Berkeley’s friendly policies toward the Indians, whose thriving fur trade the governor monopolized. When Berkeley refused to retaliate against a series of brutal Indian attacks on frontier settlements, Bacon and his followers took matters into their own hands. They fell murderously upon the Indians, friendly and hostile alike, chased Berkeley from Jamestown, and put the torch to the capital. Chaos swept the raw colony, as frustrated freemen and resentful servants—described as “a rabble of the basest sort of people”—went on a rampage of plundering and pilfering. As this civil war in Virginia ground on, Bacon suddenly died of disease, like so many of his fellow colonists. Berkeley thereupon crushed the uprising with brutal cruelty, hanging more than twenty rebels. Back in Eng land Charles II complained, “That old fool has put to death more people in that naked country than I did here for the murder of my father.”

 Nathaniel Bacon (ca. 1647-1676) assailed Virginia’s Governor William Berkeley (1606-1677) in 1676

“


 for having protected, favored, and emboldened the Indians against His Majesty’s loyal subjects, never contriving, requiring, or appointing any due or proper means of satisfaction for their many invasions, robberies, and murders committed upon us.

 For his part, Governor Berkeley declared,

“


”


 I have lived thirty-four years amongst you [Virginians], as uncorrupt and diligent as ever [a] Governor was, [while] Bacon is a man of two years amongst you, his person and qualities unknown to most of you, and to all men else, by any virtuous act that ever I heard of. . . . I will take counsel of wiser men than myself, but Mr. Bacon has none about him but the lowest of the people.

”


 An Indentured Servant’s Contract, 1746 egal documents, such as this contract signed in Virginia in 1746, not only provide evidence about the ever-changing rules by which societies have regulated their affairs, but also furnish rich information about the conditions of life and the terms of human relationships in the past. This agreement between Thomas Clayton and James Grifﬁ n provides a reminder that not all indentured servants in early America came from abroad. Indentured servitude could be equivalent to an apprenticeship, in which a young person traded several years of ser vice to a master in exchange for instruction in the master’s craft. Here Clayton pledges himself to ﬁve years in Grifﬁ n’s employ in return for a promise to initiate the young man into the “Mystery” of the master’s craft. Why might the master’s trade be described as a “mystery”? From the evidence of this contract, what are the principal objectives of each of the parties to it? What problems does each anticipate? What obligations does each assume? What does the consent of Clayton’s mother to the contract suggest about the young man’s situation?

L




THINKING GLOBALLY

The Atlantic Slave Trade, 1500–1860


I


 n the three and a half centuries following Columbus’s discovery, slave merchants crammed more than 11 million African men, women, and children into the holds of ships and carried them like common cargo to the New World. Roughly 2 million souls perished midvoyage before confronting the agonies and indignities of slavery in the Americas. As Table 4.1 shows, some 400,000 enslaved Africans came ashore in North America, while the overwhelming majority were destined for Latin America and the Caribbean (see Map 4.1). European trading companies and New England merchants reaped enormous proﬁts from this human trafﬁcking, and the slavers were not the only ones to beneﬁt. Slave trading fed off the insatiable appetite for sugar, tobacco, cotton, and other New World products that Europeans and Americans craved. It thrived, too, on the willingness of

 Africans themselves to sell their fellow Africans to European and American slavers. Marketing human beings on such a vast scale required the complicity of African warlords, slave-ship captains and crews, stevedores, planters, tea drinkers, tailors, bakers, smokers, bankers, and a host of middlemen on four continents. Only in the nineteenth century did nations in Europe and the Americas begin to outlaw the international slave trade (see “The Struggle to Abolish Slavery,” p. 388), beginning with Britain in 1807. After Congress banned further slave importations to the United States in 1808, a ﬂourishing internal market developed. Masters in the upper South bred slaves for sale on the rapidly expanding cotton frontier in the Old Southwest. Europeans, as well as Americans in the “free states,” lent indirect support to that domestic slave trade as they continued to consume slave-produced goods.

 An African Slave Cofﬂe Yoked and bound, these men, women, and children were on their way to a coastal slave market, where they would be herded aboard ship for the Americas.



Liverpool
Bristol


EUROPE NORTH AMERICA

Constantinople
New York
Baltimore


Azores


Charleston


90°W


30°N


 st

Ind


Cape Verde
Is.


 ies

4,


 GUIANA zon R Am a



0,




ARGUIN SENEGAMBIA

SIERRA LEONE WINDWARD COAST GOLD COAST



Bight of Benin
Bight
 of Biafra

Equator 0°


.


SOUTH AMERICA

Brazi


 BRAZIL

00,
 l 3,9

Co


 n go R

 LOANGO

INDIAN OCEAN



N


Benguela
MADAGASCAR
Tropic of Capricorn 
Paraná
R


.


Rio de Janeiro


Buenos
Aires


60°W


Muscat


 AFRICA

ANGOLA
Luanda 
Recife
Bahia


 ARABIA

.


 Main sources of African slaves Main slave-trade routes from Africa Main areas of slave importation in the Western Hemisphere

We


R.


 OCEAN

O C EA N


Cartagena
 VENEZUELA

 ECUADOR

PACIF IC

 ASIA

Baghdad


R.
 er Nig

 HAITI

Spanish
Mainland
430,000


Euro
10 0 , 0 p e


A TLA N TI C
PUERTO RICO

Canary
Is.


Nile


 JAMAICA

 erica Am 0,0

MEXICO
Mexico City 
Damascus
Sea
Cairo




Tropic of Cancer


 rra nea n Tripoli

Tangier


Madeira


N.


New
Orleans
 CUBA

Lisbon
M
Algiers Tunis e d i t e


1,000




2,000 Km.
1,000


30°W


30°S
2,000 Mi.


0°


Map 4.1 Main Sources and Destinations of African Slaves, c. 1500-1860 More
 than three centuries of the “African Diaspora” scattered blacks throughout the New World. Britain’s North American colonies (the future United States) constituted the extreme northern periphery of this system, receiving about 400,000 of the nearly ten million arrivals, the great majority of whom ended up in the West Indies and Brazil.

30°E


60°E


Interactive Map


The “Middle Passage”
 The “middle passage” referred to the transatlantic sea voyage that brought slaves to the New World—the long and hazardous “middle” segment of a journey that began with a forced march to the African coast and ended with a trek into the American interior.





Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


 The distant Eng lish king could scarcely imagine the depths of passion and fear that Bacon’s Rebellion excited in Virginia. Bacon had ignited the smoldering resentments of landless former servants, and he had pitted the hardscrabble backcountry frontiersmen against the haughty gentry of the tidewater plantations. The rebellion was now suppressed, but these tensions remained. Lordly planters, surrounded by a still-seething sea of malcontents, anxiously looked about for less troublesome laborers to toil in the restless tobacco kingdom. Their eyes soon lit on Africa.

Colonial Slavery
 More than 7 million Africans were carried in chains to the New World in the three centuries or so following Columbus’s landing (see “Thinking Globally: The Atlantic Slave Trade, 1500–1860,” pp. 72–73). Only about 400,000 of them ended up in North America, the great majority arriving after 1700. Most of the early human cargoes were hauled to Spanish and Portuguese South America or to the sugar-rich West Indies. Africans had been brought to Jamestown as early as 1619, but as late as 1670 they numbered only about 2,000 in Virginia (out of a total population of some 35,000 persons) and about 7 percent of the 50,000 people in the southern plantation colonies as a whole. Hard-pinched white colonists, struggling to stay alive and to hack crude clearings out of the forests, could not afford to pay high prices for slaves who might die soon after arrival. White servants might die, too, but they were far less costly.

The Mennonites of Germantown, Pennsylvania,
 recorded the earliest known protest against slavery in America in 1688:

“


 There is a saying, that we should do to all men like as we will be done ourselves. . . . But to bring men hither, or to rob and sell them against their will, we stand against. . . . Pray, what thing in the world can be done worse towards us, than if men should rob or steal us away, and sell us for slaves to strange countries, separating husbands from their wives and children?

”


 Drastic change came in the 1680s. Rising wages in Eng land shrank the pool of penniless folk willing to gamble on a new life or an early death as indentured servants in America. At the same time, the large planters were growing increasingly fearful of the multitudes of potentially mutinous former servants in their midst. By the mid-1680s, for the ﬁ rst time, black slaves outnumbered white servants among the plantation colonies’ new arrivals. In 1698 the Royal African Company, ﬁ rst chartered in 1672, lost its crown-granted monopoly on carrying slaves to the colonies. Enterprising Americans, especially Rhode Islanders, rushed to cash in on the lucrative slave trade, and the supply of slaves rose steeply. More than ten thousand Africans were pushed ashore in America in the decade after 1700, and tens of thousands more in the next half-century. Blacks accounted for nearly half the population of Virginia by 1750. In South Carolina they outnumbered whites two to one. Most of the slaves who reached North America came from the west coast of Africa, especially the area stretching from present-day Senegal to Angola. They were originally captured by African coastal tribes, who traded them in crude markets on the shimmering tropical beaches to itinerant European—and American— ﬂesh merchants. Usually branded and bound, the captives were herded aboard sweltering ships for the gruesome middle passage, on which death rates ran as high as 20 percent. Terriﬁed survivors were eventually shoved onto auction blocks in New World ports like Newport, Rhode Island, or Charleston, South Carolina, where a giant slave market traded in human misery for more than a century. A few of the earliest African immigrants gained their freedom, and some even became slaveowners themselves. But as the number of Africans in their midst increased dramatically toward the end of the seventeenth century, white colonists reacted remorselessly to this supposed racial threat. Earlier in the century, the legal difference between a slave and a servant was unclear. But now the law began to make sharp distinctions between the two— largely on the basis of race. Beginning in Virginia in 1662, statutes appeared that formally decreed the iron conditions of slavery for blacks. These earliest “slave codes” made blacks and their children the property (or “chattels”) for life of their white masters. Some colonies made it a crime to teach a slave to read or write. Not even conversion to Christianity could qualify a slave for freedom. Thus did the God-fearing whites put the fear of God into their hapless black laborers. Slavery might have begun in America for economic reasons,

The Origins of American Slavery




The Slave Ship
Albatross, 1846
 This eyewitness painting captures the dankness, gloom, and despair that reigned in the slaver’s cargo hold.

 but by the end of the seventeenth century, it was clear that racial discrimination also powerfully molded the American slave system.

Africans in America
 In the deepest South, slave life was especially severe. The climate was hostile to health, and the labor was life-draining. The widely scattered South Carolina rice and indigo plantations were lonely hells on earth where gangs of mostly male Africans toiled and perished. Only fresh imports could sustain the slave population under these loathsome conditions. Blacks in the tobacco-growing Chesapeake region had a somewhat easier lot. Tobacco was a less physically demanding crop than those of the deeper South. Tobacco plantations were larger and closer to one another than rice plantations. The size and proximity of these plantations permitted the slaves more frequent contact with friends and relatives. By about 1720 the proportion of females in the Chesapeake slave population had begun to rise, making family life possible. The captive black population of the Chesapeake area soon began to grow not only through new imports but also

 through its own fertility—making it one of the few slave societies in history to perpetuate itself by its own natural reproduction. Native-born African Americans contributed to the growth of a stable and distinctive slave culture, a mixture of African and American elements of speech, religion, and folkways (see “Makers of America: From African to African American,” pp. 78–79). On the sea islands off South Carolina’s coast, blacks evolved a unique language, Gullah (probably a corruption of Angola, the African region from which many of them had come). It blended Eng lish with several African languages, including Yoruba, Igbo, and Hausa. Through it many African words have passed into American speech—such as goober (peanut), gumbo (okra), and voodoo (witchcraft). The ringshout, a West African religious dance performed by shufﬂ ing in a circle while answering a preacher’s shouts, was brought to colonial America by slaves and eventually contributed to the development of jazz. The banjo and the bongo drum were other African contributions to American culture. Slaves also helped mightily to build the country with their labor. A few became skilled artisans— carpenters, bricklayers, and tanners. But chieﬂy they performed the sweaty toil of clearing swamps, grubbing



Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


Rice Cultivation in
 the Colonial South Rice growing, imported from Africa along with African slaves to work the swampy rice ﬁelds, made South Carolina the rice basket of the British Empire.

 out trees, and other menial tasks. Condemned to life under the lash, slaves naturally pined for freedom. The New York slave revolt that erupted in 1712 cost the lives of nine whites and caused the execution of twenty-one blacks, some of them burned at the stake over a slow ﬁre. A South Carolina slave revolt erupted in 1739 when more than ﬁ fty resentful blacks along the Stono River tried to march to Spanish Florida, only to be stopped by the local militia. But in the end, enslaved Africans in the South proved to be a more tightly controlled labor force than the white indentured servants they gradually replaced. No slave uprising in American history matched the scale of Bacon’s Rebellion.

Southern Society
 As slavery spread, the gaps in the South’s social structure widened. The rough equality of poverty and disease of the early days was giving way to a deﬁ ned hierarchy of wealth and status in the early eighteenth century. At the top of this southern social ladder perched a small but powerful covey of great planters. Owning gangs of slaves and vast domains of land, the planters ruled the region’s economy and virtually monopolized political power. A clutch of extended clans—such as the Fitzhughs, the Lees, and the Washingtons—possessed among them horizonless tracts of Virginia real estate, and together they dominated the House of Burgesses. Just before the Revolu-

 tionary War, 70 percent of the leaders of the Virginia legislature came from families established in Virginia before 1690—the famed “ﬁ rst families of Virginia,” or “FFVs.” Yet, legend to the contrary, these great seventeenthcentury merchant-planters were not silk-swathed cavaliers gallantly imitating the ways of Eng lish country gentlemen. They did eventually build stately riverfront manors, occasionally rode to the hounds, and some of them even cultivated the arts and accumulated distinguished libraries. But for the most part, they were a hard-working, businesslike lot, laboring long hours over the problems of plantation management. Few problems were more vexatious than the unruly, often surly, servants. One Virginia governor had such difﬁculty keeping his servants sober that he struck a deal allowing them to get drunk the next day if they would only lay off the liquor long enough to look after his guests at a celebration of the queen’s birthday in 1711. Beneath the planters—far beneath them in wealth, prestige, and political power—were the small farmers, the largest social group. They tilled their modest plots and might own one or two slaves, but they lived a ragged, hand-to-mouth existence. Still lower on the social scale were the landless whites, most of them luckless former indentured servants. Beneath them were those persons still serving out the term of their indenture. Their numbers gradually diminished as black slaves increasingly replaced white indentured servants toward the end of the seventeenth century. The op-

The Colonial South




A
Merchant-Planter’s Home and Its Dining Room Simple by later standards, this house was home to the family of a substantial planter in the early eighteenth century. It stands on land in the Virginia tidewater region ﬁrst acquired by Adam Thoroughgood, who arrived in the Virginia colony as an indentured servant in 1621. By 1635, as a freeman, he had recruited 105 settlers to the colony and was rewarded, according to the practice of the headright system, with the title to some 5,250 acres along the Lynnhaven River. There his great-grandson erected this house in about 1720. It was continuously occupied by the Thoroughgood family for more than a century, until the 1860’s. 
 pressed black slaves, of course, remained enchained in society’s basement. Few cities sprouted in the colonial South, and consequently an urban professional class, including lawyers and ﬁnanciers, was slow to emerge. Southern life revolved around the great plantations, distantly isolated

 from one another. Waterways provided the principal means of transportation. Roads were so wretched that in bad weather funeral parties could not reach church burial grounds—an obstacle that accounts for the development of family burial plots in the South, a practice unlike anything in old Eng land or New Eng land.

 Charleston, South Carolina Founded in 1680, Charleston grew to become the bustling seaport pictured in this drawing done in the 1730s. Charleston was by then the largest city in the mostly rural southern colonies. It ﬂourished as a seaport for the shipment to England of slave-grown Carolina rice.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
From African to The Great AfricanAfrican American American Migration 
D


 ragged in chains from West African shores, the ﬁ rst African Americans struggled to preserve their diverse heritages from the ravages of slavery. Their children, the ﬁ rst generation of American-born slaves, melded these various African traditions—Guinean, Igbo, Yoruba, Angolan—into a distinctive African American culture. Their achievement sustained them during the cruelties of enslavement and has endured to enrich American life to this day. With the arrival of the ﬁ rst Africans in the seventeenth century, a cornucopia of African traditions poured into the New World: handicrafts and skills in numerous trades; a plethora of languages, styles of music, and cuisines; even rice-planting techniques that conquered the inhospitable soil of South Carolina. It was North America’s rice paddies, tilled by experienced West Africans, that introduced rice into the English diet and furnished so many Eng lish tables with the sticky staple. These ﬁ rst American slaves were mostly males. Upon arrival they were sent off to small isolated farms,

 where social contact with other Africans, especially women, was an unheard-of luxury. Yet their legal status was at ﬁ rst uncertain. A few slaves were able to buy their freedom in the seventeenth century. One, Anthony Johnson of Northampton County, Virginia, actually became a slaveholder himself. But by the beginning of the eighteenth century, a settled slave society was emerging in the southern colonies. Laws tightened; slave traders stepped up their deliveries of human cargo; large plantations formed. Most signiﬁcantly, a new generation of American-born slaves joined their forebears at labor in the ﬁelds. By 1740 large groups of slaves lived together on sprawling plantations, the American-born outnumbered the Africanborn, and the importation of African slaves slowed. Forging a common culture and ﬁ nding a psychological weapon with which to resist their masters and preserve their dignity were daunting challenges for American-born slaves. Plantation life was beastly, an endless cycle of miserable toil in the ﬁeld or foundry from sunup to sundown. Female slaves were forced to

 (above) Africans Destined for Slavery This engraving from 1830 is an example of antislavery propaganda in the pre–Civil War era. It shows hapless Africans being brought ashore in America under the whips of slave traders and, ironically, under the ﬁgurative shadow of the national Capitol. (right) Advertisements for Slave Sales in Charleston, South Carolina, 1753 Charleston had the largest slave market in the colonies.



 (left) Yarrow Mamout, by Charles Willson Peale, 1819 When Peale painted this portrait, Mamout was over one hundred years old. A devout Muslim brought to Maryland as a slave, he eventually bought his freedom and settled in Georgetown. (right) The Emergence of an African American Culture In this scene from the mid-nineteenth century, African Americans play musical instruments of European derivation, like the ﬁddle, as well as instruments of African origin, like the bones and banjo—a vivid illustration of the blending of the two cultures in the crucible of the New World.

 perform double duty. After a day’s backbreaking work, women were expected to sit up for hours spinning, weaving, or sewing to clothe themselves and their families. Enslaved women also lived in constant fear of sexual exploitation by predatory masters. Yet eventually a vibrant slave culture began to ﬂower. And precisely because of the diversity of African peoples represented in America, the culture that emerged was a uniquely New World creation. It derived from no single African model and incorporated many Western elements, though often with signiﬁcant modiﬁcations. Slave religion illustrates this pattern. Cut off from their native African religions, most slaves became Christians but fused elements of African and Western traditions and drew their own conclusions from Scripture. White Christians might point to Christ’s teachings of humility and obedience to encourage slaves to “stay in their place,” but black Christians emphasized God’s role in freeing the Hebrews from slavery and saw Jesus as the Messiah who would deliver them from bondage. They also often retained an African deﬁnition of heaven as a place where they would be reunited with their ancestors. At their Sunday and evening-time prayer meetings, slaves also patched African remnants onto conventional

 Christian ritual. Black Methodists, for example, ingeniously evaded the traditional Methodist ban on dancing as sinful: three or four people would stand still in a ring, clapping hands and beating time with their feet (but never crossing their legs, thus not ofﬁcially “dancing”), while others walked around the ring, singing in unison. This “ringshout” derived from African practices; modern American dances, including the Charleston, in turn derived from this African American hybrid. Christian slaves also often used outwardly religious songs as encoded messages about escape or rebellion. “Good News, the Chariot’s Comin’” might sound like an innocent hymn about divine deliverance, but it could also announce the arrival of a guide to lead fugitives safely to the North. Similarly, “Wade in the Water” taught ﬂeeing slaves one way of covering their trail. The “Negro spirituals” that took shape as a distinctive form of American music thus had their origins in both Christianity and slavery. Indeed much American music was born in the slave quarters from African importations. Jazz, with its meandering improvisations and complex syncopations and rhythms, constitutes the most famous example. But this rich cultural harvest came at the cost of generations of human agony.



Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


The New England Family
 Nature smiled more benignly on pioneer New Englanders than on their disease-plagued fellow colonists to the south. Clean water and cool temperatures retarded the spread of killer microbes. In stark contrast to the fate of Chesapeake immigrants, settlers in seventeenth-century New Eng land added ten years to their life spans by migrating from the Old World. One settler claimed that “a sip of New England’s air is better than a whole draft of old Eng land’s ale.” The ﬁ rst generations of Puritan colonists enjoyed, on the average, about seventy years on this earth—not very different from the life expectancy of present-day Americans. In further contrast with the Chesapeake, New Englanders tended to migrate not as single individuals but as families, and the family remained at the center of New Eng land life. Almost from the outset, New Eng-

 land’s population grew from natural reproductive increase. The people were remarkably fertile, even if the soil was not. Early marriage encouraged the booming birthrate. Women typically wed by their early twenties and produced babies about every two years thereafter until menopause. Ceaseless childbearing drained the vitality of many pioneer women, as the weather-eroded colonial tombstones eloquently reveal. A number of the largest families were borne by several mothers, though claims about the frequency of death in childbirth have probably been exaggerated. But the dread of death in the birthing bed haunted many women, and it was small wonder that they came to fear pregnancy. A married woman could expect to experience up to ten pregnancies and rear as many as eight surviving children. Massachusetts governor William Phips was one of twenty-seven children, all by the same mother. A New Eng land woman might well have dependent children living in her household from the earliest days of her marriage up until the day of her death, and child raising became in essence her full-time occupation. The longevity of the New Eng landers contributed to family stability. Children grew up in nurturing environments where they were expected to learn habits of obedience, above all. They received guidance not only from their parents but from their grandparents as well. This novel intergenerational continuity has inspired the observation that New Eng land “invented” grandparents. Family stability was reﬂected in low

 New England early acquired a reputation as a healthy environment. Urging his fellow Englishmen to emigrate to the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630, the Reverend John White described New England (somewhat fancifully) as follows:

“
 Mrs. Elizabeth Freake and Baby Mary This portrait of a Boston mother and child in about 1674 suggests the strong family ties that characterized early New England society.

 No country yields a more propitious air for our temper than New England. . . . Many of our people that have found themselves always weak and sickly at home, have become strong and healthy there: perhaps by the dryness of the air and constant temper[ature] of it, which seldom varies from cold to heat, as it does with us. . . . Neither are the natives at any time troubled with pain of teeth, soreness of eyes, or ache in their limbs.

”


Pioneering New Englanders




 Graveyard Art These New England colonists evidently died in the prime of life. Carving likenesses on grave markers was a common way of commemorating the dead.

 premarital pregnancy rates (again in contrast with the Chesapeake) and in the generally strong, tranquil social structure characteristic of colonial New Eng land. Still other contrasts came to differentiate the southern and New Eng land ways of life. Oddly enough, the fragility of southern families advanced the economic security of southern women, especially of women’s property rights. Because southern men frequently died young, leaving widows with small children to support, the southern colonies generally allowed married women to retain separate title to their property and gave widows the right to inherit their husbands’ estates. But in New Eng land, Puritan lawmakers worried that recognizing women’s separate property rights would undercut the unity of married persons by acknowledging conﬂ icting interests between husband and wife. New Eng land women, therefore, usually gave up their property rights when they married. Yet in contrast to old Eng land, the laws of New Eng land made secure provision for the property rights of widows—and even extended important protections to women within marriage. “A true wife accounts subjection her honor,” one Massachusetts Puritan leader declared, expressing a sentiment then common in Europe as well as America. But in the New World, a rudimentary conception of

 women’s rights as individuals was beginning to appear in the seventeenth century. Women still could not vote, and the popular attitude persisted that they were morally weaker than men—a belief rooted in the biblical tale of Eve’s treachery in the Garden of Eden. But a husband’s power over his wife was not absolute. The New Eng land authorities could and did intervene to restrain abusive spouses. One man was punished for kicking his wife off a stool; another was disciplined for drawing an “uncivil” portrait of his mate in the snow. Women also had some spheres of autonomy. Midwifery—assisting with childbirths—was a virtual female monopoly, and midwives often fostered networks of women bonded by the common travails of motherhood. One Boston midwife alone delivered over three thousand babies. Above all, the laws of Puritan New Eng land sought to defend the integrity of marriages. Divorce was exceedingly rare, and the authorities commonly ordered separated couples to reunite. Outright abandonment was among the very few permissible grounds for divorce. Adultery was another. Convicted adulterers— especially if they were women—were whipped in public and forced forever after to wear the capital letter “A” cut out in cloth and sewed on their outer garments— the basis for Nathaniel Hawthorne’s famous 1850 tale The Scarlet Letter.



Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


Life in the New England Towns
 Sturdy New Eng landers evolved a tightly knit society, the basis of which was small villages and farms. This development was natural in a people anchored by geography and hemmed in by the Indians, the French, and the Dutch. Puritanism likewise made for unity of purpose—and for concern about the moral health of the whole community. It was no accident that the nineteenth-century crusade for abolishing black slavery—with Massachusetts agitators at the forefront—sprang in some degree from the New Eng land conscience, with its Puritan roots. In the Chesapeake region, the expansion of settlement was somewhat random and was usually undertaken by lone-wolf planters on their own initiative, but New Eng land society grew in a more orderly fashion. New towns were legally chartered by the colonial authorities, and the distribution of land was entrusted to the steady hands of sober-minded town fathers, or “proprietors.” After receiving a grant of land from the colonial legislature, the proprietors moved themselves and their families to the designated place and laid out their town. It usually consisted of a meetinghouse, which served as both the place of worship and the town hall, surrounded by houses. Also marked out was a village green, where the militia could drill. Each family received several parcels of land, including a woodlot for fuel, a tract suitable for growing crops, and another for pasturing animals.

A
Colonial Primer  Religious instruction loomed large in early colonial schools. This eighteenth-century textbook from Germantown, Pennsylvania, taught lessons of social duty and Christian faith, as well as reading and writing.

 The Massachusetts School Law of 1647 stated,

“


 It being one chief project of the old deluder, Satan, to keep men from the knowledge of the Scriptures, as in former times by keeping them in an unknown tongue, it is therefore ordered that every township in this jurisdiction, after the Lord has increased them [in] number to ﬁfty householders, shall then forthwith appoint one within their town to teach all such children as shall resort to him to write and read, whose wages shall be paid either by the parents or masters of such children, or by the inhabitants in general.

”


 Towns of more than ﬁ fty families were required to provide elementary education, and roughly half of the adults knew how to read and write. As early as 1636, just six years after the colony’s founding, the Massachusetts Puritans established Harvard College, today the oldest corporation in America, to train local boys for the ministry. Only in 1693, eighty-six years after staking out Jamestown, did the Virginians establish their ﬁrst college, William and Mary. Puritans ran their own churches, and democracy in Congregational Church government led logically to democracy in political government. The town meeting,

The New England Character


 in which the adult males met together and each man voted, was a showcase and a classroom for democracy. New Eng land villagers from the outset gathered regularly in their meetinghouses to elect their ofﬁcials, appoint schoolmasters, and discuss such mundane matters as road repairs. The town meeting, observed Thomas Jefferson, was “the best school of political liberty the world ever saw.”



The Half-Way Covenant and
 the Salem Witch Trials

 from about this time onward, women were in the majority in the Puritan congregations. Women also played a prominent role in one of New Eng land’s most frightening religious episodes. A group of adolescent girls in Salem, Massachusetts, claimed to have been bewitched by certain older women. A hysterical “witch hunt” ensued, leading to the legal lynching in 1692 of twenty individuals, nineteen of whom were hanged and one of whom was pressed to death. Two dogs were also hanged. Larger-scale witchcraft persecutions were then common in Europe, and several outbreaks had already

 Yet worries plagued the God-fearing pioneers of these tidy New Eng land settlements. The pressure of a growing population was gradually dispersing the Puritans onto outlying farms, far from the control of church and neighbors. And although the core of Puritan belief still burned brightly, the passage of time was dampening the ﬁ rst generation’s ﬂaming religious zeal. About the middle of the seventeenth century, a new form of sermon began to be heard from Puritan pulpits—the jeremiad. Taking their cue from the doom-saying Old Testament prophet Jeremiah, earnest preachers scolded parishioners for their waning piety. Especially alarming was the apparent decline in conversions— testimonials by individuals that they had received God’s grace and therefore deserved to be admitted to the church as members of the elect. Troubled ministers in 1662 announced a new formula for church membership, the Half-Way Covenant. This new arrangement modiﬁed the “covenant,” or the agreement between the church and its adherents, to admit to baptism—but not “full communion”—the children of baptized but not-yet-converted existing members. (On “conversion,” see p. 47.) By conferring partial membership rights in the once-exclusive Puritan congregations, the Half-Way Covenant weakened the distinction between the “elect” and others, further diluting the spiritual purity of the original settlers’ godly community. The Half-Way Covenant dramatized the difﬁculty of maintaining at fever pitch the religious devotion of the founding generation. Jeremiads continued to thunder from the pulpits, but as time went on, the doors of the Puritan churches swung fully open to all comers, whether converted or not. This widening of church membership gradually erased the distinction between the “elect” and other members of society. In effect, strict religious purity was sacriﬁced somewhat to the cause of wider religious participation. Interestingly,

 Matthew Hopkins’s Witch Finder Hopkins was a seventeenth-century English witch-hunter whose techniques included watching suspects to see if diabolical creatures, in the form of common animals, fed on the alleged witch’s blood. He also urged that suspected witches be bound hand and foot and tossed in a pond. The innocent, he claimed, would sink (and often drown), while the guilty would ﬂoat to the surface. His methods brought death to hundreds of women, men, and children in eastern England in the 1640s.



Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


 ﬂared forth in the colonies—often directed at propertyowning women. But the reign of horror in Salem grew not only from the superstitions and prejudices of the age but also from the turmoil of the wars with the Indians, as well as the unsettled social and religious conditions of the rapidly evolving Massachusetts village. Most of the accused witches came from families associated with Salem’s burgeoning market economy; their accusers came largely from subsistence farming families in Salem’s hinterland. The Salem witch trials thus reﬂected the widening social stratiﬁcation of New Eng land, as well as the fear of many religious traditionalists that the Puritan heritage was being eclipsed by Yankee commercialism. The witchcraft hysteria eventually ended in 1693 when the governor, alarmed by an accusation against his own wife and supported by the more responsible members of the clergy, prohibited any further trials and pardoned those already convicted. Twenty years later a penitent Massachusetts legislature annulled the “convictions” of the “witches” and made reparations to their heirs. The Salem witchcraft delusion marked an all-time high in the American experience of popular passions run wild. “Witch-hunting” passed into the American vocabulary as a metaphor for the often dangerously irrational urge to ﬁ nd a scapegoat for social resentments.

The New England Way of Life
 Oddly enough, the story of New Eng land was largely written by rocks. The heavily glaciated soil was strewn with countless stones, many of which were forced to the surface after a winter freeze. In a sense the Puritans did not possess the soil; it possessed them by shaping their character. Scratching a living from the protesting earth was an early American success story. Backbending toil put a premium on industry and pennypinching frugality, for which New Eng landers became famous. Traditionally sharp Yankee traders, some of them palming off wooden nutmegs, made their mark. Connecticut came in time to be called good-humoredly “the Nutmeg State.” Cynics exaggerated when they said that the three stages of progress in New Eng land were “to get on, to get honor, to get honest.” The grudging land also left colonial New Eng land less ethnically mixed than its southern neighbors. NonEng lish immigrants were less attracted to a site where the soil was so stony—and the sermons so sulfurous.

 Climate likewise molded New Eng land, where the summers were often uncomfortably hot and the winters cruelly cold. Many early immigrants complained of the region’s extremes of weather. Yet the soil and climate of New Eng land eventually encouraged a diversiﬁed agriculture and industry. Staple products like tobacco did not ﬂourish, as in the South. Black slavery, although attempted, could not exist proﬁtably on small farms, especially where the surest crop was stones. No broad, fertile expanses comparable to those in the tidewater South beckoned people inland. The mountains ran fairly close to the shore, and the rivers were generally short and rapid. And just as the land shaped New Eng landers, so they shaped the land. The Native Americans had left an early imprint on the New Eng land earth. They traditionally beat trails through the woods as they migrated seasonally for hunting and ﬁshing. They periodically burned the woodlands to restore leafy ﬁ rst-growth forests that would sustain the deer population. The Indians recognized the right to use the land, but the concept of exclusive, individual ownership of the land was alien to them. The Eng lish settlers had a different philosophy. They condemned the Indians for “wasting” the earth by underutilizing its bounty and used this logic to justify their own expropriation of the land from the native inhabitants. Consistent with this outlook, the Europeans felt a virtual duty to “improve” the land by clearing woodlands for pasturage and tillage, building roads and fences, and laying out permanent settlements. Some of the greatest changes resulted from the introduction of livestock. The Eng lish brought pigs, horses, sheep, and cattle from Europe to the settlements. Because the growing herds needed ever more pastureland, the colonists were continually clearing forests. The animals’ voracious appetites and heavy hooves compacted the soil, speeding erosion and ﬂooding. In some cases the combined effect of these developments actually may have changed local climates and made some areas even more susceptible to extremes of heat and cold. Repelled by the rocks, the hardy New Eng landers turned instinctively to their ﬁne natural harbors. Hacking timber from their dense forests, they became experts in shipbuilding and commerce. They also ceaselessly exploited the self-perpetuating codﬁsh lode off the coast of Newfoundland—the ﬁshy “gold mines of New Eng land,” which have yielded more wealth than all the trea sure chests of the Aztecs. During colonial

The Early Settlers and the Land


 days the wayfarer seldom got far from the sound of the ax and hammer, or the swift rush of the ship down the ways to the sea, or the smell of rotting ﬁsh. As a reminder of the importance of ﬁshing, a handsome replica of the “sacred cod” is proudly displayed to this day in the Massachusetts Statehouse in Boston. The combination of Calvinism, soil, and climate in New Eng land made for energy, purposefulness, sternness, stubbornness, self-reliance, and resourcefulness. Righteous New Eng landers prided themselves on being God’s chosen people. They long boasted that Boston was “the hub of the universe”—at least in spirit. A famous jingle of later days ran, I come from the city of Boston The home of the bean and the cod Where the Cabots speak only to Lowells And the Lowells speak only to God. New Eng land has had an incalculable impact on the rest of the nation. Ousted by their sterile soil, thousands of New Eng landers scattered from Ohio to Oregon and even Hawaii. They sprinkled the land with new communities modeled on the orderly New Eng land town, with its central green and tidy schoolhouse, and its simple town-meeting democracy. “Yankee ingenuity,” originally fostered by the ﬂ inty ﬁelds and comfortless climate of New Eng land, came to be claimed by all Americans as a proud national trait. And the fabled



 “New Eng land conscience,” born of the steadfast Puritan heritage, left a legacy of high idealism in the national character and inspired many later reformers.

The Early Settlers’ Days
 and Ways The cycles of the seasons and the sun set the schedules of all the earliest American colonists, men as well as women, northerners as well as southerners, blacks as well as whites. The overwhelming majority of colonists were farmers. They planted in the spring, tended their crops in the summer, harvested in the fall, and prepared in the winter to begin the cycle anew. They usually rose at dawn and went to bed at dusk. Chores might be performed after nightfall only if they were “worth the candle,” a phrase that has persisted in American speech. Women, slave or free, on southern plantations or northern farms, wove, cooked, cleaned, and cared for children. Men cleared land; fenced, planted, and cropped it; cut ﬁ rewood; and butchered livestock as needed. Children helped with all these tasks, while picking up such schooling as they could. Life was humble but comfortable by contemporary standards. Compared to most seventeenth-century Europeans, Americans lived in afﬂuent abundance.

Life and Death in Colonial America, by
 Prudence Punderson Note the artist’s initials, “P.P.,” on the cofﬁn. This embroidery suggests the stoic resolve of a colonial woman, calmly depicting the inevitable progression of her own life from the cradle to the grave.



Chapter 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 1607–1692


 Land was relatively cheap, though somewhat less available in the planter-dominated South than elsewhere. In the northern and middle colonies, an acre of virgin soil cost about what American carpenters could earn in one day as wages, which were roughly three times those of their Eng lish counterparts. “Dukes don’t emigrate,” the saying goes, for if people enjoy wealth and security, they are not likely to risk exposing their lives in the wilderness. Similarly, the very poorest members of a society may not possess even the modest means needed to pull up stakes and seek a fresh start in life. Accordingly, most white migrants to early colonial America came neither from the aristocracy nor from the dregs of European society— with the partial exception of the impoverished indentured servants. Crude frontier life did not in any case permit the ﬂagrant display of class distinctions, and seventeenthcentury society in all the colonies had a certain simple sameness to it, especially in the more egalitarian New Eng land and middle colonies. Yet many settlers, who considered themselves to be of the “better sort,” tried

 to re-create on a modiﬁed scale the social structure they had known in the Old World. To some extent they succeeded, though yeasty democratic forces frustrated their full triumph. Resentment against upper-class pretensions helped to spark outbursts like Bacon’s Rebellion of 1676 in Virginia and the uprising of Maryland’s Protestants toward the end of the seventeenth century. In New York animosity between lordly landholders and aspiring merchants fueled Leisler’s Rebellion, an ill-starred and bloody insurgence that rocked New York City from 1689 to 1691. For their part, would-be American blue bloods resented the pretensions of the “meaner sort” and passed laws to try to keep them in their place. Massachusetts in 1651 prohibited poorer folk from “wearing gold or silver lace,” and in eighteenth-century Virginia a tailor was ﬁ ned and jailed for arranging to race his horse— “a sport only for gentlemen.” But these efforts to reproduce the ﬁ nely stratiﬁed societies of Europe proved feeble in the early American wilderness, where equality and democracy found fertile soil—at least for white people.

 CHRONOLOGY

 First Africans arrive in Virginia

1689–


 Leisler’s Rebellion in New York



 Population of Eng lish colonies in America about 2,000



 Salem witch trials in Massachusetts



 Harvard College founded



 College of William and Mary founded



Half-Way Covenant for Congregational
 Church membership established



 Royal African Company slave trade monopoly ended



 Virginia assembly disfranchises landless freemen



 Population of Eng lish colonies in America about 250,000



 Bacon’s Rebellion in Virginia



 New York City slave revolt

 1680s

 Mass expansion of slavery in colonies



 South Carolina slave revolt

To Learn More


KEY TERMS
indentured servants (69) headright system (70) Bacon’s Rebellion (74) Royal African Company (74) middle passage (74) New York slave revolt (76) South Carolina slave revolt (Stono River) (76) 


PEOPLE TO KNOW
Congregational Church (82) jeremiad (83) Half-Way Covenant (83) Salem witch trials (84) Leisler’s Rebellion (86) 
William Berkeley
Nathaniel Bacon
Anthony Johnson


To Learn More
David Cressy, Coming Over: Migration and Communication
Between England and New England in the Seventeenth
Century (1987)
William Cronon, Changes in the Land (1983)
John Demos, Entertaining Satan (1982)
A
Little Commonwealth: Family Life in Plymouth Colony (1970)
 David Hackett Fischer, Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways in America (1989) Richard Godbeer, Escaping Salem: The Other Witch Hunt of 1692 (2005) Patrick Grifﬁ n, The People with No Name: Ireland’s Ulster Scots, America’s Scots Irish, and the Creation of a British Atlantic World, 1689–1764 (2001) Kenneth Lockridge, New England Town: Dedham (1970)

 Mary Beth Norton, In the Devil’s Snare: The Salem Witchcraft Crisis of 1692 (2002) Daniel Blake Smith, Inside the Great House: Planter Family Life in Eighteenth-Century Chesapeake Society (1980) Laurel T. Ulrich, Good Wives: Image and Reality in the Lives of Women in Northern New England, 1650–1750 (1982) Daniel Vickers, Farmers and Fishermen: Two Centuries of Work in Essex County, Massachusetts, 1630–1850 (1994)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Colonial Society on the
Eve of Revolution





1700–1775
 Driven from every other corner of the earth, freedom of thought and the right of private judgment in matters of conscience direct their course to this happy country as their last asylum.

T


 he common term thirteen original colonies is misleading. Britain ruled thirty-two colonies in North America by 1775, including Canada, the Floridas, and various Caribbean islands. But only thirteen of them unfurled the standard of rebellion. A few of the nonrebels, such as Canada and Jamaica, were larger, wealthier, or more populous than some of the revolting thirteen. Why, then, did some British colonies eventually strike for their independence, while others did not? Part of the answer is to be found in the distinctive social, economic, and political structures of the thirteen Atlantic seaboard colonies—and in the halting, gradual appearance of a recognizably American way of life.

Conquest by the Cradle
 Among the distinguishing characteristics that the eventually rebellious settlements shared was lusty population growth. In 1700 they contained fewer than 300,000

 souls, about 20,000 of whom were black. By 1775, 2.5 million people inhabited the thirteen colonies, of whom about half a million were black. White immigrants made up nearly 400,000 of the increased number, and black “forced immigrants” accounted for almost as many again. But most of the spurt stemmed from the remarkable natural fertility of all Americans, white and black. To the amazement and dismay of Europeans, the colonists were doubling their numbers every twenty-ﬁve years. Unfriendly Dr. Samuel Johnson, back in Eng land, growled that the Americans were multiplying like their own rattlesnakes. They were also a youthful people, whose average age in 1775 was about sixteen. This population boom had political consequences. In 1700 there were twenty Eng lish subjects for each American colonist. By 1775 the Eng lish advantage in numbers had fallen to three to one—setting the stage for a momentous shift in the balance of power between the colonies and Britain.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Immigration to the Colonies


 ce r en

St. L
 aw

ABENAKI MAINE (MASS.)







200 Km.


N.H.


200 Mi.


NEW YORK

 DE

Er


 i

 e

L.


 PENNSYLVANIA

°N 70°W




New York
N.J.


 hi O

 SH

 AW

NE E
oR . 
MO UN TAI NS

Philadelphia


N


 MD.

R.I.
Newport 

 CONN.

 LA

 SE

 MASS.

 RA

 ario

TU WA SCA RO RE

 nt L. O

A
Mingling of the Races 

 DEL.

 VIRGINIA

To Philadelphia:
Germans,
Scots-Irish


To the Chesapeake:
Africans,
 British convicts

AT L A N T I C OC EAN

 TA

 CH

NORTH CAROLINA

 CA

ERO AP KEE PAL ACH IAN

N
35°


W


BA SOUTH CAROLINA

To Charleston:
Africans, Germans,
Charleston Scots-Irish, Scots


 CR

 Colonial America was a melting pot and had been from the outset. The population, although basically Eng lish in stock and language, was picturesquely mottled with numerous foreign groups (see Map 5.1). Heavy-accented Germans constituted about 6 percent of the total population, or 150,000, by 1775. Fleeing religious persecution, economic oppression, and the ravages of war, they had ﬂocked to America in the early 1700s and had settled chieﬂy in Pennsylvania. They belonged to several different Protestant sects—primarily Lutheran—and thus further enhanced the religious diversity of the colony. Known popularly but erroneously as the Pennsylvania Dutch (a corruption of the German word Deutsch, for “German”), they totaled about onethird of the colony’s population. In parts of Philadelphia, the street signs were painted in both German and Eng lish. These German newcomers moved into the backcountry of Pennsylvania, where their splendid stone barns gave—and still give—mute evidence of industry and prosperity. Not having been brought up Eng lish, they had no deep-rooted loyalty to the British crown, and they clung tenaciously to their German language and customs. The Scots-Irish, who in 1775 numbered around 175,000, or 7 percent of the population, were an important non-Eng lish group, although they spoke Eng lish. They were not Irish at all, but turbulent Scots Lowlanders. Over many decades, they had been transplanted to northern Ireland, where they had not prospered. The Irish Catholics already there, hating Scottish Presbyterianism, resented the intruders and still do—the source of many of the modern-day “troubles” in the Northern Ireland province of Ulster. The economic life of the Scots-Irish was severely hampered, especially when the Eng lish government placed burdensome restrictions on their production of linens and woolens.

°N




R.


NE CA CA YU ON GA ON ON DAG EI A MO DA HA WK

 The bulk of the population was cooped up east of the Alleghenies, although by 1775 a vanguard of pioneers had trickled into the stump-studded clearings of Tennessee and Kentucky. The most populous colonies in 1775 were Virginia, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, and Maryland—in that order. Only four communities could properly be called cities: Philadelphia, including suburbs, was ﬁ rst with about 34,000 residents, trailed by New York, Boston, and Charleston. About 90 percent of the people lived in rural areas.

 EE

K


80°W


 GEORGIA

Savannah


CREEK
Indian lands 
30°N


75°W


 Predominant immigrant group African

Scots-Irish


Dutch
English
 and Welsh German

Scottish
No European
 settlement

Map 5.1 Immigrant Groups in 1775 America was
 already a nation of diverse nationalities in the colonial period. This map shows the great variety of immigrant groups, especially in Pennsylvania and New York. It also illustrates the tendency of later arrivals, particularly the Scots-Irish, to push into the backcountry. Interactive Map



Chapter 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 1700–1775


 Early in the 1700s, tens of thousands of embittered Scots-Irish ﬁ nally abandoned Ireland and came to America, chieﬂy to tolerant and deep-soiled Pennsylvania. Finding the best acres already taken by Germans and Quakers, they pushed out onto the frontier, making them among the ﬁ rst settlers of the American West. There many of them illegally but deﬁantly squatted on unoccupied lands and quarreled with both Indian and white owners. When the westward-ﬂowing Scots-Irish tide lapped up against the Allegheny barrier, it was deﬂected southward into the backcountry of Maryland, down Virginia’s Shenandoah Valley, and into the western Carolinas. Their often rickety settlements bore the marks of Scots-Irish restlessness. Whereas their German neighbors typically erected sturdy homes and cleared their ﬁelds meticulously, the Scots-Irish satisﬁed themselves with ﬂoorless, ﬂ imsy log cabins. As beﬁtted an uprooted, questing people, they chopped down trees, planted crops between the stumps, exhausted the soil swiftly, and moved on. Already experienced colonizers and agitators in Ireland, the Scots-Irish proved to be superb frontiersmen, though their readiness to visit violence on the Indians repeatedly inﬂamed the western districts. By the mid-eighteenth century, a chain of Scots-Irish settlements lay scattered along the “great wagon road,” which hugged the eastern Appalachian foothills from Pennsylvania to Georgia. It was said, somewhat unfairly, that the Scots-Irish kept the Sabbath—and all else they could lay their hands on. Pugnacious, lawless, and individualistic, they brought with them the Scottish secrets of whiskey distilling and dotted the Appalachian hills and hollows with their stills. They cherished no love for the British government that had uprooted them and still lorded over them—or for any other government, it seemed. They led the armed march of the Paxton Boys on Philadelphia in 1764, protesting the Quaker oligarchy’s lenient policy toward the Indians, and a few years later spearheaded the Regulator movement in North Carolina, a small but nasty insurrection against eastern domination of the colony’s affairs. Many of these hotheads—including the young Andrew Jackson— eventually joined the embattled American revolutionaries. All told, about a dozen future presidents were of Scots-Irish descent. Approximately 5 percent of the multicolored colonial population consisted of other European groups. These embraced French Huguenots, Welsh, Dutch, Swedes, Jews, Irish, Swiss, and Scots Highlanders—as distinguished from the Scots-Irish. Except for the Scots

49%


English
19%


African
Scottish


7%


German


7%
5%


Scots-Irish
Irish


3%


Dutch


3%


Other
European


9%


Figure 5.1 Ethnic and Racial Composition of the
 American People, 1790 Based on surnames. (Source: Adapted from the American Council of Learned Societies, “Report of Committee on Linguistic and National Stocks in the Population of the United States,” 1932. Percentages total more than 100 percent due to rounding.)

 Highlanders, such hodgepodge elements felt little loyalty to the British crown. By far the largest single nonEng lish group was African, accounting for nearly 20 percent of the colonial population in 1775 and heavily concentrated in the South. The population of the thirteen colonies, though mainly Anglo-Saxon, was perhaps the most mixed to be found anywhere in the world (see Figure 5.1). The South, holding about 90 percent of the slaves, already

 The young Frenchman Michel-Guillaume Jean de Crèvecoeur (1735–1813) wrote of the diverse population in about 1770,

“


 They are a mixture of English, Scotch, Irish, French, Dutch, Germans, and Swedes. From this promiscuous breed, that race now called Americans have arisen. . . . I could point out to you a family whose grandfather was an Englishman, whose wife was Dutch, whose son married a French woman, and whose present four sons have now four wives of different nations.

”


Colonial Social Classes


 displayed its historic black-and-white racial composition. New Eng land, mostly staked out by the original Puritan migrants, showed the least ethnic diversity. The middle colonies, especially Pennsylvania, received the bulk of later white immigrants and boasted an astonishing variety of peoples. Outside of New Eng land, about one-half the population was non-Eng lish in 1775. Of the ﬁ fty-six signers of the Declaration of Independence in 1776, eighteen were non-Eng lish and eight had not been born in the colonies. As these various immigrant groups mingled and intermarried, they laid the foundations for a new multicultural American national identity unlike anything known in Europe. The French settler Michel-Guillaume Jean de Crèvecoeur saw in America in the 1770s a “strange mixture of blood, which you will ﬁ nd in no other country,” and he posed his classic question, “What then is the American, this new man?” Nor were white colonists alone in creating new societies out of diverse ethnic groups. The African slave trade long had mixed peoples from many different tribal backgrounds, giving birth to an African American community far more variegated in its cultural origins than anything to be found in Africa itself. Similarly, in the New Eng land “praying towns,” where Indians were gathered to be Christianized, and in Great Lakes villages such as Detroit, home to dozens of different displaced indigenous peoples, polyglot Native American communities emerged, blurring the boundaries of individual tribal identities.

The Structure of
Colonial Society
 In comparison to contemporary Europe, eighteenthcentury America seemed like a shining land of equality and opportunity—with the notorious exception of slavery. No titled nobility dominated society from on high, and no pauperized underclass threatened it from below. Most white Americans, and even a handful of free blacks, were small farmers. Clad in buckskin breeches, they owned modest holdings and tilled them with their own hands and horses. The cities contained a small class of skilled artisans, with their well-greased leather aprons, as well as shopkeepers, tradespeople, and some unskilled day laborers. The most remarkable feature of the social ladder was its openness. An ambitious colonist, even a former indentured servant, could rise from a lower rung to a higher one, a rare step in old Eng land.



 Yet in contrast with seventeenth-century America, colonial society on the eve of the Revolution was beginning to show signs of stratiﬁcation and barriers to mobility that raised worries about the “Europeanization” of America. The gods of war contributed to these developments. The armed conﬂ icts of the 1690s and early 1700s had enriched a number of merchant princes in the New Eng land and middle colonies. They laid the foundations of their fortunes with proﬁts made as military suppliers. Roosting regally atop the social ladder, these elites now feathered their nests more ﬁ nely. They sported imported clothing and dined at tables laid with Eng lish china and gleaming silverware. Prominent individuals came to be seated in churches and schools according to their social rank. By midcentury the richest 10 percent of Bostonians and Philadelphians owned nearly two-thirds of the taxable wealth in their cities. The plague of war also created a class of widows and orphans, who became dependent for their survival on charity. Both Philadelphia and New York built almshouses in the 1730s to care for the destitute. Yet the numbers of poor people remained tiny compared to the numbers in Eng land, where about a third of the population lived in impoverished squalor. In the New Eng land countryside, the descendants of the original settlers faced more limited prospects than had their pioneering forebears. As the supply of unclaimed soil dwindled and families grew, existing landholdings were repeatedly subdivided. The average size of farms shrank drastically. Younger sons, as well as daughters, were forced to hire out as wage laborers, or eventually to seek virgin tracts of land beyond the Alleghenies. By 1750 Boston contained a large number of homeless poor, who were supported by public charity and compelled to wear a large red “P” on their clothing. In the South the power of the great planters continued to be bolstered by their disproportionate ownership of slaves. The riches created by the growing slave population in the eighteenth century were not distributed evenly among the whites. Wealth was concentrated in the hands of the largest slaveowners, widening the gap between the prosperous gentry and the “poor whites,” who were more and more likely to become tenant farmers. In all the colonies, the ranks of the lower classes were further swelled by the continuing stream of indentured servants, many of whom ultimately achieved prosperity and prestige. Two became signers of the Declaration of Independence.



Chapter 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 1700–1775


 present in a heavy concentration of resentful slaves and attempted to restrict or halt their importation. But the British authorities, seeking to preserve the supply of cheap labor for the colonies, especially the West Indies sugar plantations, repeatedly vetoed all efforts to stem the transatlantic trafﬁc in slaves. Many North American colonists condemned these vetoes as morally callous, although New Eng land slave traders beneﬁted handsomely from the British policy. The cruel complexity of the slavery issue was further revealed when Thomas Jefferson, himself a slaveholder, assailed the British vetoes in an early draft of the Declaration of Independence, but was forced to withdraw the proposed clause by a torrent of protest from southern slavemasters.

Clerics, Physicians, and Jurists


A
South Carolina Advertisement for Slaves in the  1760s Note the reference to these slaves’ origin on West Africa’s “Rice Coast,” a reminder of South Carolina’s reliance on African skill and labor for rice cultivation. Note, too, that half the slaves were said to have survived smallpox and thus acquired immunity from further infection—and that care had been taken to insulate the others from a smallpox epidemic apparently then raging in Charleston.

 Far less fortunate than the voluntary indentured servants were the paupers and convicts involuntarily shipped to America. Altogether, about ﬁ fty thousand “jayle birds” were dumped on the colonies by the London authorities. This riffraff crowd—including robbers, rapists, and murderers—was generally sullen and undesirable, and not bubbling over with goodwill for the king’s government. But many convicts were the unfortunate victims of circumstances and of a viciously unfair Eng lish penal code that included about two hundred capital crimes. Some of the deportees, in fact, came to be highly respectable citizens. Least fortunate of all, of course, were the black slaves. They enjoyed no equality with whites and dared not even dream of ascending, or even approaching, the ladder of opportunity. Oppressed and downtrodden, the slaves were America’s closest approximation to Europe’s volatile lower classes, and fears of black rebellion plagued the white colonists. Some colonial legislatures, notably South Carolina’s in 1760, sensed the dangers

 Most honored of the professions was the Christian ministry. In 1775 the clergy wielded less inﬂuence than in the early days of Massachusetts, when piety had burned more warmly. But they still occupied a position of high prestige. Most physicians, on the other hand, were poorly trained and not highly esteemed. Not until 1765 was the ﬁ rst medical school established, although European centers attracted some students. Aspiring young doctors served for a while as apprentices to older practitioners and were then turned loose on their “victims.” Bleeding was a favorite and frequently fatal remedy; when the physician was not available, a barber was often summoned.

 Cotton Mather (1663–1728), Puritan clergyman and avid scientist, became frustrated with Boston residents’ opposition to inoculation during the Boston smallpox epidemic of 1721. He wrote to a doctor friend,

“


 Never till now was that rule contested, of two evils, choose the least. . . . I would ask them whether it be not a most criminal ingratitude unto the God of Health, when He has acquainted us with a most invaluable method of the saving of our lives from so great a death, to treat with neglect and contempt, and multiply abuses on them who thankfully and in a spirit of obedience to Him, embrace His blessings?

”


The Colonial Economy


 Epidemics were a constant nightmare. Especially dreaded was smallpox, which afﬂ icted one out of ﬁve persons, including the heavily pockmarked George Washington. A crude form of inoculation was introduced in 1721, despite the objections of many physicians and some of the clergy, who opposed tampering with the will of God. Powdered dried toad was a favorite prescription for smallpox. Diphtheria was also a deadly killer, especially of young people. One epidemic in the 1730s took the lives of thousands. This grim reminder of their mortality may have helped to prepare many colonists in their hearts and minds for the religious revival that was soon to sweep them up. At ﬁ rst the law profession was not favorably regarded. In this pioneering society, which required much honest manual labor, the parties to a dispute often presented their own cases in court. Lawyers were commonly regarded as noisy windbags or troublemaking



 rogues; an early Connecticut law classed them with drunkards and brothel keepers. When future president John Adams was a young law student, the father of his wife-to-be frowned upon him as a suitor because of his chosen profession.

Workaday America
 Agriculture was the leading industry, involving about 90 percent of the people. Tobacco continued to be the staple crop in Maryland and Virginia, though wheat cultivation also spread through the Chesapeake, often on lands depleted by the overgrowth of tobacco. The fertile middle (“bread”) colonies produced large quantities of grain, and by 1759 New York alone was exporting eighty thousand barrels of ﬂour a year. Seemingly the farmer had only to tickle the soil with a hoe, and it

 Codﬁshing in Newfoundland, ca. 1760 Early European explorers were awed by the enormous schools of cod on the Grand Banks off Newfoundland. Fish were so numerous that they sometimes impeded the progress of sailing vessels. By the eighteenth century, New Englanders were aggressively exploiting the apparently limitless Grand Banks ﬁshery, drying and salting huge catches for export to Europe and the West Indies. Two centuries later the accumulated predation of generations of overﬁshing threatened to extinguish the once-fabulous Grand Banks cod population.



Chapter 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 1700–1775


N


45°


Portsmouth
N


S


Boston
S


Albany


Newport
New London
S


N


40°


New York


W
70°


S


50 100 Km.


Philadelphia


S


Baltimore




100 Mi.


 ATLANTIC

 of 1

 OCEAN

 ation Line

75°W


Norfolk


 Sea industries Fishing Whaling

 lam

N


 oc

 Forest industries

Pr


New Bern


 Lumber and timber Shipbuilding N

 Naval stores

 General industries Iron works

N


Ft. Augusta


Charleston


Savannah


 Rum distilleries

N


S


S


 Trading and shipping

 Agriculture and trapping S

 Cattle and grain Tobacco 80°W

30°N


 Rice and indigo Furs and skins

 Map 5.2 The Colonial Economy By the eighteenth century, the various colonial regions had distinct economic identities. The northern colonies grew grain and raised cattle, harvested timber and ﬁsh, and built ships. The Chesapeake colonies and North Carolina were still heavily dependent on tobacco, whereas the southernmost colonies grew mostly rice and indigo. Cotton, so important to the southern economy in the nineteenth century, had not yet emerged as a major crop. Interactive Map

 would laugh with a harvest. Overall, Americans probably enjoyed a higher standard of living than the masses of any country in history up to that time. Fishing (including whaling), though ranking far below agriculture, was rewarding. Pursued in all the American colonies, this harvesting of the sea was a major industry in New Eng land, which exported smelly shiploads of dried cod to the Catholic countries of Europe. The ﬁshing ﬂeet also stimulated shipbuilding and served as a nursery for the seamen who manned the navy and merchant marine. A bustling commerce, both coastwise and overseas, enriched all the colonies, especially the New England group, New York, and Pennsylvania (see Map 5.2). Commercial ventures and land speculation, in the absence of later get-rich-quick schemes, were the surest avenues to speedy wealth. Yankee seamen were famous in many climes not only as skilled mariners but as tightﬁsted traders. They provisioned the Caribbean sugar islands with food and forest products. They also hauled Spanish and Portuguese gold, wine, and oranges to London, to be exchanged for industrial goods, which were then sold for a juicy proﬁt in America. The so-called triangular trade was infamously proﬁtable, though small in relation to total colonial commerce (see Map 5.3). A skipper, for example, would leave a New Eng land port with a cargo of rum and sail to the Gold Coast of Africa. Bartering the ﬁery liquor with African chiefs for captured African slaves, he would proceed to the West Indies with his sobbing and suffocating cargo sardined below deck. There he would exchange the survivors for molasses, which he would then carry to New Eng land, where it would be distilled into rum. He would then repeat the trip, making a handsome proﬁt on each leg of the triangle. Manufacturing in the colonies was of only secondary importance, although there was a surprising variety of small enterprises. As a rule, workers could get ahead faster in soil-rich America by tilling the land. Huge quantities of “kill devil” rum were distilled in Rhode Island and Massachusetts, and even some of the “elect of the Lord” developed an overfondness for it. Handsome beaver hats were manufactured in quantity, despite British restrictions. Smoking iron forges, including Pennsylvania’s Valley Forge, likewise dotted the land and in fact were more numerous in 1775, though generally smaller, than those of Eng land. In addition, household manufacturing, including spinning and weaving by women, added up to an impressive output. As in all pioneering countries, strong-backed laborers and skilled craftspeople were scarce and highly

Colonial Commerce


 prized. In early Virginia a carpenter who had committed a murder was freed because his woodworking skills were needed. Lumbering was perhaps the most important single manufacturing activity. Countless cartloads of freshfelled timber were consumed by shipbuilders, at ﬁ rst chieﬂy in New Eng land and then elsewhere in the colonies. By 1770 about four hundred vessels of assorted sizes were splashing down the ways each year, and about one-third of the British merchant marine was American-built. Colonial naval stores—such as tar, pitch, rosin, and turpentine—were highly valued, for Britain was anxious to gain and retain a mastery of the seas. London

 offered generous bounties to stimulate production of these items; otherwise Britain would have had to turn to the uncertain and possibly hostile Baltic areas. Towering trees, ideal as masts for His Majesty’s navy, were marked with the king’s broad arrow for future use. The luckless colonist who was caught cutting down this reserved timber was subject to a ﬁ ne. Even though there were countless unreserved trees and the blazed ones were being saved for the common defense, this shackle on free enterprise engendered considerable bitterness. Americans held an important ﬂank of a thriving, many-sided Atlantic economy by the dawn of the eighteenth century. Yet strains appeared in this complex network as early as the 1730s. Fast-breeding Americans

 Map 5.3 Colonial Trade Patterns, ca. 1770 Future president John Adams noted about this time that “the commerce of the West Indies is a part of the American system of commerce. They can neither do without us, nor we without them. The Creator has placed us upon the globe in such a situation that we have occasion for each other.” 100°W

Hudson 80°W
Bay


60°W


40°W


 s

 ve s

Guadeloupe


 lve

Si


 r,

Ru


Cartagena


SOUTH AMERICA

1000 Mi.


 es

Sl


 av

 es

PERU
Bahia Potosí 
 o rs e

 ,h

 ns

F
 wi ruit ne , e Win

Mediterra


 ne

 an

Sea


Tropic of Cancer


 AFRICA

 s

Sla


 Major trade route

Lisbon
Cadiz


N


IVORY COAST

GOLD COAST

SLAVE COAST

 BRAZIL

Lima


 Intercoastal trade route

 cts

 t

Silver


 m

Barbados
Slav


 Major points of trade

 ea

 du

 uc



 rop

 ro np

PO R T U G AL

Madeira
Islands


 rod



 es

 EUROPE

 dp

500 1000 Km.


 ss

 e

 c tu re



 ola

Eu


Martinique


PAC I F IC OC EAN
Equator 
S


 ug

 ,m ar

Hispaniola


N
Caribbean D I E S
Sea Gold


0°


 las

GREAT BRITAIN
London N ETH ER L AN DS Bristol 
Manuf a


I


 mo r,

, fr


 e

Sla


T


S


 a ug

 ses

 s

20°E


Glasgow


SPA I N

 uit

 Sugar, gold, c of fe

 e

 ES

Jamaica


Slaves, m
 olasse

Ric


W


20°N


Cuba


 tock, lives Fish, r, lumber ses olas flou es, m Slav

Charleston


0°


Li n


 l stores rs, nava ctured Fish, fu Manufa cts cts rodu produ cts red p Newport Boston produ factu d u re n a tu M fac New York Manu cco Meat, fish, rum Philadelphia Toba lumber, grain , ENGLISH Manufactu o, red COLONIES indig W i ne products Rice, furs

40°N


Interactive Map


20°W


AT L A N T I C O C EA N NORTH AMERICA



 ves

Luanda


AT L A N T I C O C EA N

 ANGOLA



Chapter 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 1700–1775


 demanded more and more British products—yet the slow-growing British population early reached the saturation point for absorbing imports from America. This trade imbalance raised a question: how could the colonists sell the goods to make the money to buy what they wanted in Britain? The answer was obvious: by seeking foreign (non-British) markets. By the eve of the Revolution, the bulk of Chesapeake tobacco was ﬁ lling pipes in France and in other European countries, though it passed through the hands of British re-exporters, who took a slice of the proﬁts for themselves. More important was the trade with the West Indies, especially the French islands. West Indian purchases of North American timber and foodstuffs provided the crucial cash for the colonists to continue to make their own purchases in Britain. But in 1733, bowing to pressure from inﬂuential British West Indian planters, Parliament passed the Molasses Act, aimed at squelching North American trade with the French West Indies. If successful, this scheme would have struck a crippling blow to American international trade and to the colonists’ standard of living. American merchants responded to the act by bribing and smuggling their way around the law. Thus was foreshadowed the impending imperial crisis, when headstrong Americans would revolt rather than submit to the dictates of the far-off Parliament, apparently bent on destroying their very livelihood.

Horsepower and Sailpower
 All sprawling and sparsely populated pioneer communities are cursed with oppressive problems of transportation. America, with a scarcity of both money and workers, was no exception. Not until the 1700s did roads connect even the major cities, and these dirt thoroughfares were treacherously deﬁcient. A wayfarer could have rumbled along more rapidly over the Roman highways in the days of Julius Caesar, nearly two thousand years earlier. It took young Benjamin Franklin nine long, rain-drenched days in 1720 to journey from Boston to Philadelphia, traveling by sailing sloop, rowboat, and foot. News of the Declaration of Independence in 1776 reached Charleston from Philadelphia twenty-nine days after the Fourth of July. Roads were often clouds of dust in the summer and quagmires of mud in the winter. Stagecoach travelers braved such additional dangers as tree-strewn roads,

 Sign of the Pine Tree Inn, 1768 Inns like Joseph Read III’s in Lisbon, Connecticut, not only provided food, drink, shelter, and entertainment for colonial Americans but also were raucous arenas for debating political issues. This sign, with its circular yellow orb (sun) over a pine tree, may have been intended as a veiled reference to the Sons of Liberty, an extralegal resistance organization that had adopted as its symbol the Liberty Tree. The date of 1768 coincided with the British enactment of the Townshend Acts, which ignited a new wave of colonial resistance to British rule.

Colonial Religion


 rickety bridges, carriage overturns, and runaway horses. A traveler venturesome enough to journey from Philadelphia to New York, for example, would not think it amiss to make a will and pray with the family before departing. Where man-made roads were wretched, heavy reliance was placed on God-grooved waterways. Population tended to cluster along the banks of navigable rivers. There was also much coastwise trafﬁc, and although it was slow and undependable, it was relatively cheap and pleasant, at least in fair weather. Taverns sprang up along the main routes of travel, as well as in the cities. Their attractions customarily included such amusements as bowling alleys, pool tables, bars, and gambling equipment. Before a cheerful, roaring log ﬁ re, all social classes would mingle, including the village loafers and drunks. The tavern was yet another cradle of democracy. Gossips also gathered at the taverns, which were clearinghouses of information, misinformation, and rumor—frequently stimulated by alcoholic refreshment and impassioned political talk. A successful politician, like the wire-pulling Samuel Adams, was often a man who had a large alehouse fraternity in places like Boston’s Green Dragon Tavern. Taverns were important in crystallizing public opinion and proved to be hotbeds of agitation as the revolutionary movement gathered momentum. An intercolonial postal system was established by the mid-1700s, although private couriers remained. Some mail was handled on credit. Service was slow and infrequent, and secrecy was problematic. Mail carriers, serving long routes, would sometimes pass the time by reading the letters entrusted to their care.

Dominant Denominations
 Two “established,” or tax-supported, churches were conspicuous in 1775 (see Table 5.1): the Anglican and the Congregational. A considerable segment of the population, surprisingly enough, did not worship in any church. And in those colonies that maintained an “established” religion, only a minority of the people belonged to it (see Table 5.2). The Church of Eng land, whose members were commonly called Anglicans, became the ofﬁcial faith in Georgia, North and South Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, and a part of New York. Established also in England, it served in America as a major prop of kingly



Table 5.1 Established (Tax-Supported) Churches
 in the Colonies, 1775* Colonies Massachusetts (incl. Maine) Connecticut New Hampshire New York

Maryland
Virginia
North Carolina
South Carolina
Georgia
Rhode Island
New Jersey
Delaware
Pennsylvania


Churches


}


}


}


Year
Disestablished


Congregational
Anglican
 (in New York City and three neighboring counties)

Anglican






None


*Note


 the persistence of the Congregational establishment in New Eng land.

Table 5.2 Estimated Religious Census, 1775
Name
Congregationalists
Anglicans
Presbyterians
 German churches (incl. Lutheran) Dutch Reformed Quakers Baptists Roman Catholics Methodists Jews EST. TOTAL MEMBERSHIP EST. TOTAL POPULATION PERCENTAGE CHURCH MEMBERS

Number


Chief Locale


575,000
500,000
410,000


 New Eng land N.Y., South Frontier

200,000
75,000
40,000
25,000


Pa.
N.Y., N.J.
Pa., N.J., Del.
R.I.,
Pa., N.J., Del.
Md., Pa.
Scattered
N.Y., R.I.


25,000
5,000
2,000
1,857,000
2,493,000
74%




Chapter 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 1700–1775


 authority. British ofﬁcials naturally made vigorous attempts to impose it on additional colonies, but they ran into a stone wall of opposition. In America the Anglican Church fell distressingly short of its promise. Secure and self-satisﬁed, like its parent in Eng land, it clung to a faith that was less ﬁerce and more worldly than the religion of Puritanical New Eng land. Sermons were shorter; hell was less scorching; and amusements, like Virginia fox hunting, were less scorned. So dismal was the reputation of the Anglican clergy in seventeenth-century Virginia that the College of William and Mary was founded in 1693 to train a better class of clerics. The inﬂuential Congregational Church, which had grown out of the Puritan Church, was formally established in all the New Eng land colonies, except independent-minded Rhode Island. At ﬁ rst Massachusetts taxed all residents to support Congregationalism but later relented and exempted members of other well-known denominations. Presbyterianism, though closely associated with Congregationalism, was never made ofﬁcial in any colonies. Ministers of the gospel, turning from the Bible to this sinful world, increasingly grappled with burning political issues. As the early rumblings of revolution against the British crown could be heard, sedition ﬂowed freely from pulpits. Presbyterianism, Congregationalism, and rebellion became a neo-trinity. Many leading Anglican clergymen, aware of which side their tax-provided bread was buttered on, naturally supported their king.

 Benjamin Franklin’s (1706–1790) Poor Richard’s Almanack contained such thoughts on religion as these:

“


 A good example is the best sermon.”

 “Many have quarreled about religion that never practiced it.” “Serving God is doing good to man, but praying is thought an easier service, and therefore more generally chosen.” “How many observe Christ’s birthday; how few his precepts! O! ’tis easier to keep holidays than commandments.

”


 Anglicans in the New World were seriously handicapped by not having a resident bishop, whose presence would be convenient for the ordination of young ministers. American students of Anglican theology had to travel to Eng land to be ordained. On the eve of the Revolution, there was serious talk of creating an American bishopric, but the scheme was violently opposed by many non-Anglicans, who feared a tightening of the royal reins. This controversy poured holy oil on the smoldering ﬁ res of rebellion. Religious toleration had indeed made enormous strides in America, at least when compared with its halting steps abroad. Roman Catholics were still generally discriminated against, as in Eng land, even in ofﬁceholding. But there were fewer Catholics in America, and hence the anti-papist laws were less severe and less strictly enforced. In general, people could worship—or not worship—as they pleased.

The Great Awakening
 In all the colonial churches, religion was less fervid in the early eighteenth century than it had been a century earlier, when the colonies were ﬁ rst planted. The Puritan churches in particular sagged under the weight of two burdens: their elaborate theological doctrines and their compromising efforts to liberalize membership requirements. Churchgoers increasingly complained about the “dead dogs” who droned out tedious, overerudite sermons from Puritan pulpits. Some ministers, on the other hand, worried that many of their parishioners had gone soft and that their souls were no longer kindled by the hellﬁ re of orthodox Calvinism. Liberal ideas began to challenge the old-time religion. Some worshipers now proclaimed that human beings were not necessarily predestined to damnation and might save themselves by leading a life of good works. Most threatening to the Calvinist doctrine of predestination was Arminianism, named after the Dutch theologian Jacobus Arminius, who preached that individual free will, not divine decree, determined a person’s eternal fate, and that all humans, not just the “elect,” could be saved if they freely accepted God’s grace. Pressured by these “heresies,” a few churches grudgingly conceded that spiritual conversion was not necessary for church membership. Together, these twin trends toward clerical intellectualism and lay liberalism were sapping the spiritual vitality from many denominations. The stage was thus set for a rousing religious revival. Known as the Great Awakening, it exploded in

Religious Revivals




 George Whiteﬁeld Preaching Americans of both genders and all races and regions were spellbound by Whiteﬁeld’s emotive oratory.

 the 1730s and 1740s and swept through the colonies like a ﬁ re through prairie grass. The Awakening was ﬁ rst ignited in Northampton, Massachusetts, by a tall, delicate, and intellectual pastor, Jonathan Edwards. Perhaps the deepest theological mind ever nurtured in America, Edwards proclaimed with burning righteousness the folly of believing in salvation through good works and afﬁ rmed the need for complete dependence on God’s grace. Warming to his subject, he painted in lurid detail the landscape of hell and the eternal torments of the damned. “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God” was the title of one of his most famous sermons. He believed that hell was “paved with the skulls of unbaptized children.” Edwards’s preaching style was learned and closely reasoned, but his stark doctrines sparked a warmly sympathetic reaction among his parishioners in 1734. Four years later the itinerant Eng lish parson George Whiteﬁeld loosed a different style of evangelical preaching on America and touched off a conﬂagration of religious ardor that revolutionized the spiritual life of the

 colonies. A former alehouse attendant, Whiteﬁeld was an orator of rare gifts. His magniﬁcent voice boomed sonorously over thousands of enthralled listeners in an open ﬁeld. One of Eng land’s greatest actors of the day commented enviously that Whiteﬁeld could make audiences weep merely by pronouncing the word Mesopotamia and that he would “give a hundred guineas if I could only say ‘O!’ like Mr. Whiteﬁeld.”

 Jonathan Edwards (1703–1758) preached hellﬁre, notably in one famous sermon:

“


 The God that holds you over the pit of hell, much as one holds a spider or some loathsome insect over the ﬁre, abhors you, and is dreadfully provoked. His wrath toward you burns like ﬁre; he looks upon you as worthy of nothing else but to be cast into the ﬁre.

”




Chapter 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 1700–1775


 Triumphally touring the colonies, Whiteﬁeld trumpeted his message of human helplessness and divine omnipotence. His eloquence reduced Jonathan Edwards to tears and even caused the skeptical and thrifty Benjamin Franklin to empty his pockets into the collection plate. During these roaring revival meetings, countless sinners professed conversion, and hundreds of the “saved” groaned, shrieked, or rolled in the snow from religious excitation. Whiteﬁeld soon inspired American imitators. Taking up his electrifying new style of preaching, they heaped abuse on sinners and shook enormous audiences with emotional appeals. One preacher cackled hideously in the face of hapless wrongdoers. Another, naked to the waist, leapt frantically about in the light of ﬂ ickering torches. Orthodox clergymen, known as old lights, were deeply skeptical of the emotionalism and the theatrical antics of the revivalists. New lights, on the other hand, defended the Awakening for its role in revitalizing American religion. Congregationalists and Presbyterians split over this issue, and many of the believers in religious conversion went over to the Baptists and other sects more prepared to make room for emotion in religion. The Awakening left many lasting effects. Its emphasis on direct, emotive spirituality seriously undermined the older clergy, whose authority had derived from their education and erudition. The schisms it set off in many denominations greatly increased the number and the competitiveness of American churches. It encouraged a fresh wave of missionary work among the Indians and even among black slaves, many of whom also attended the mass open-air revivals. It led to the founding of “new light” centers of higher learning such as Princeton, Brown, Rutgers, and Dartmouth. Perhaps most signiﬁcant, the Great Awakening was the ﬁ rst spontaneous mass movement of the American people. It tended to break down sectional boundaries as well as denominational lines and contributed to the growing sense that Americans had of themselves as a single people, united by a common history and shared experiences.

Schools and Colleges
 A time-honored Eng lish idea regarded education as a blessing reserved for the aristocratic few, not for the unwashed many. Education should be for leadership, not citizenship, and primarily for males. Only slowly and painfully did the colonists break the chains of these ancient restrictions.

 Puritan New Eng land, largely for religious reasons, was more zealously interested in education than any other section. Dominated by the Congregational Church, it stressed the need for Bible reading by the individual worshiper. The primary goal of the clergy was to make good Christians rather than good citizens. A more secular approach was evident late in the eighteenth century, when some children were warned in the following verse: He who ne’er learns his A.B.C. Forever will a blockhead be. But he who learns his letters fair Shall have a coach to take the air. Education, principally for boys, ﬂourished almost from the outset in New Eng land. This densely populated region boasted an impressive number of graduates from the Eng lish universities, especially Cambridge, the intellectual center of Eng land’s Puritanism. New Eng landers, at a relatively early date, established primary and secondary schools, which varied widely in the quality of instruction and in the length of time that their doors remained open each year. Back-straining farm labor drained much of a youth’s time and energy. Fairly adequate elementary schools were also hammering knowledge into the heads of reluctant “scholars” in the middle colonies and in the South. Some of these institutions were tax-supported; others were privately operated. The South, with its white and black population diffused over wide areas, was severely handicapped by geography in attempting to establish an effective school system. Wealthy families leaned heavily on private tutors.

 John Adams (ca. 1736–1826), the future second president, wrote to his wife,

“


 The education of our children is never out of my mind. . . . I must study politics and war that my sons may have the liberty to study mathematics and philosophy. My sons ought to study mathematics and philosophy, geography, natural history, naval architecture, navigation, commerce, and agriculture, in order to give their children a right to study painting, poetry, music, architecture, statuary, tapestry, and porcelain.

”


Education and Culture




Table 5.3 Colonial Colleges
Name
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.


Harvard
William and Mary
Yale
Princeton
Pennsylvania
Columbia
Brown
Rutgers
 Dartmouth (begun as an Indian missionary school)

Original Name
 (if Different)

College of New Jersey
The Academy
 King’s College Rhode Island College Queen’s College

Location
Cambridge, Mass.
Williamsburg, Va.
New Haven, Conn.
Princeton, N.J.
Philadelphia, Pa.
New York, N.Y.
Providence, R.I.
New Brunswick, N.J.
Hanover, N.H.


 The general at mosphere in the colonial schools and colleges continued grim and gloomy. Most of the emphasis was placed on religion and on the classical languages, Latin and Greek. The focus was not on experiment and reason, but on doctrine and dogma. The age was one of orthodoxy, and independence of thinking was discouraged. Discipline was quite severe, with many a mischievous child being sadistically “birched” with a switch cut from a birch tree. Sometimes punishment was inﬂ icted by indentured-servant teachers, who could themselves be whipped for their failures as workers and who therefore were not inclined to spare the rod.

Opened or
Founded


Denomination
Congregational
Anglican
Congregational
Presbyterian
Nonsectarian
Anglican
Baptist
Dutch Reformed
Congregational


 College education—at least at ﬁ rst in New England— was geared toward preparing men for the ministry. After all, churches would wither if a new crop of ministers was not adequately trained to lead the region’s spiritual ﬂocks. Annoyed by this exclusively religious emphasis, many well-to-do families, especially in the South, sent their boys abroad to acquire a “real”— meaning a reﬁ ned and philosophical—education in elite Eng lish institutions. For purposes of convenience and economy, nine local colleges were established during the colonial era (see Table 5.3). Student enrollments were small, numbering about two hundred boys at the most; and at one The College of New Jersey at Princeton, 1764 Later known as Princeton University, it was chartered in 1746 by the Presbyterian Synod, though open to students of all religious persuasions. The fourth college to be founded in British North America, it met in Elizabeth and Newark, New Jersey, until a gift of ten acres of land precipitated a move to Princeton in 1756. All classes were held in the large building, Nassau Hall. Here the Continental Congress met for three months during the summer of 1783, making Princeton for a short time the capital of the nation. This copper engraving, based on a drawing by one of Princeton’s earliest students, was part of a series of college views that reﬂected colonial Americans’ growing pride in institutions of higher learning.



Chapter 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 1700–1775


 time a few lads as young as eleven were admitted to Harvard. Instruction was poor by present-day standards. The curriculum was still heavily loaded with theology and the “dead” languages, although by 1750 there was a distinct trend toward “live” languages and other modern subjects. A signiﬁcant contribution was made by Benjamin Franklin. He had never attended college but played a major role in launching what became the University of Pennsylvania, the ﬁ rst American college free from denominational control.

A
Provincial Culture  When it came to art and culture, colonial Americans were still in thrall to European tastes, especially British. The simplicity of pioneering life had not yet bred many homespun patrons of the arts. One aspiring painter, John Trumbull (1756–1843) of Connecticut, was discouraged in his youth by his father’s chilling remark, “Connecticut is not Athens.” Like so many of his talented artistic contemporaries, Trumbull was forced to travel to London to pursue his ambitions. Charles Willson Peale (1741–1827), best known for his portraits of George Washington, ran a museum, stuffed birds, and practiced dentistry. Gifted Benjamin West (1738– 1820) and precocious John Singleton Copley (1738–1815) succeeded in their ambitions to become famous painters, but like Trumbull they had to go to Eng land to complete their training. Only abroad could they ﬁ nd subjects who had the leisure to sit for their portraits and the money to pay handsomely for them. Copley was regarded as a Loyalist during the Revolutionary War, and West, a close friend of George III and ofﬁcial court painter, was buried in London’s St. Paul’s Cathedral. Architecture was largely imported from the Old World and modiﬁed to meet the peculiar climatic and religious conditions of the New World. Even the lowly log cabin was apparently borrowed from Sweden. The red-bricked Georgian style, so common in the preRevolutionary decades, was introduced around 1720 and is best exempliﬁed by the beauty of now-restored Williamsburg, Virginia. Colonial literature, like art, was generally undistinguished, and for many of the same reasons. One noteworthy exception was the precocious poet Phillis Wheatley (ca. 1753–1784), an enslaved girl brought to Boston at age eight and never formally educated. Taken to Eng land when twenty years of age, she published a book of verse and subsequently wrote other polished poems that revealed the inﬂuence of Alexander Pope.

Colonial Craftsmanship In the “Pennsylvania Dutch”
 country, parents gave daughters painted wooden chests to hold their precious dowry linens at marriage. The horsemen, unicorns, and ﬂower patterns on this dower chest conﬁrm its origins in Berks County, Pennsylvania.

 Her verse compares favorably with the best of the poetry-poor colonial period, but the remarkable fact is that she could overcome her severely disadvantaged background and write any poetry at all. Versatile Benjamin Franklin, often called “the ﬁ rst civilized American,” also shone as a literary light. Although his autobiography is now a classic, he was best known to his contemporaries for Poor Richard’s Almanack, which he edited from 1732 to 1758. This famous publication, containing many pithy sayings culled from the thinkers of the ages, emphasized such homespun virtues as thrift, industry, morality, and common sense. Examples are “What maintains one vice would bring up two children”; “Plough deep while sluggards sleep”; “Honesty is the best policy”; and “Fish and visitors stink in three days.” Poor Richard’s was well known in Europe and was more widely read in America than anything except the Bible. Dispensing witty advice to old and young alike, Franklin had an incalculable inﬂuence in shaping the American character. Science, rising above the shackles of superstition, was making some progress, though lagging behind that of the Old World. A few botanists, mathematicians, and astronomers had won some repute, but Benjamin Franklin was perhaps the only ﬁ rst-rank scientist produced in the American colonies. Franklin’s spectacular but dangerous experiments, including the famous kiteﬂying episode proving that lightning was a form of

The Press and Politics




“The Magnetic Dispensary,”
 ca. 1790 This British painting made sport of the era’s faddish preoccupations with electricity. Following Franklin’s experiments, static electricity, generated here by the machine on the right, was employed for “medicinal” purposes as well as for tingling entertainments.

 electricity, won him numerous honors in Europe. But his mind also had a practical turn. Among his numerous inventions were bifocal spectacles and the highly efﬁcient Franklin stove. His lightning rod, perhaps not surprisingly, was condemned by some stodgy clergymen who felt it was “presuming on God” by attempting to control the “artillery of the heavens.”

Pioneer Presses
 Stump-grubbing Americans were generally too poor to buy quantities of books and too busy to read them. A South Carolina merchant in 1744 advertised the arrival of a shipment of “printed books, Pictures, Maps, and Pickles.” A few private libraries of fair size could be found, especially among the clergy. The Byrd family of Virginia enjoyed perhaps the largest collection in the colonies, consisting of about four thousand volumes. Bustling Benjamin Franklin established in Philadelphia the ﬁ rst privately supported circulating library in America, and by 1776 there were about ﬁ fty public libraries and collections supported by subscription. Hand-operated printing presses cranked out pamphlets, leaﬂets, and journals. On the eve of the Revolution, there were about forty colonial newspapers,

 chieﬂy weeklies that consisted of a single large sheet folded once. Columns ran heavily to somber essays, frequently signed with such pseudonyms as Cicero, Philosophicus, and Pro Bono Publico (“For the Public Good”). The “news” often lagged many weeks behind the event, especially in the case of overseas happenings, in which the colonists were deeply interested. Newspapers proved to be a powerful agency for airing colonial grievances and rallying opposition to British control. A celebrated legal case, in 1734–1735, involved John Peter Zenger, a newspaper printer. Signiﬁcantly, the Zenger trial arose in New York, reﬂecting the tumultuous give-and-take of politics in the middle colonies, where so many different ethnic groups jostled against one another. Zenger’s newspaper had assailed the corrupt royal governor. Charged with seditious libel, the accused was hauled into court, where he was defended by a former indentured servant, now a distinguished Philadelphia lawyer, Andrew Hamilton. Zenger argued that he had printed the truth, but the bewigged royal chief justice instructed the jury not to consider the truth or falsity of Zenger’s statements; the mere fact of printing, irrespective of the truth, was enough to convict. Hamilton countered that “the very liberty of both exposing and opposing arbitrary power” was at stake.



Chapter 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 1700–1775


 Andrew Hamilton (ca. 1676–1741) concluded his eloquent plea in the Zenger case with these words:

“


 The question before the court and you, gentlemen of the jury, is not of small nor private concern. It is not the cause of a poor printer, nor of New York alone, which you are now trying. No! It may, in its consequence, affect every freeman that lives under a British government on the main [land] of America. It is the best cause. It is the cause of liberty.

”


 Swayed by his eloquence, the jurors deﬁed the bewigged judges and daringly returned a verdict of not guilty. Cheers burst from the spectators. The Zenger decision was a banner achievement for freedom of the press and for the health of democracy. It pointed the way to the kind of open public discussion required by the diverse society that colonial New York already was and that all America was to become. Although contrary to existing law and not immediately accepted by other judges and juries, in time it helped establish the doctrine that true statements about public ofﬁcials could not be prosecuted as libel. Newspapers were thus eventually free to print responsible criticisms of powerful ofﬁcials, though full freedom of the press was unknown during the preRevolutionary era.

The Great Game of Politics
 American colonists may have been backward in natural or physical science, but they were making noteworthy contributions to political science. The thirteen colonial governments took a variety of forms. By 1775 eight of the colonies had royal governors, who were appointed by the king. Three— Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Delaware—were under proprietors who themselves chose the governors. And two—Connecticut and Rhode Island—elected their own governors under self-governing charters. Practically every colony utilized a two-house legislative body. The upper house, or council, was normally appointed by the crown in the royal colonies and by the proprietor in the proprietary colonies. It was chosen by the voters in the self-governing colonies. The lower house, as the popular branch, was elected by the

 people—or rather by those who owned enough property to qualify as voters. In several of the colonies, the backcountry elements were seriously underrepresented, and they hated the ruling colonial clique perhaps more than they did kingly authority. Legislatures, in which the people enjoyed direct representation, voted such taxes as they chose for the necessary expenses of colonial government. Self-taxation through representation was a precious privilege that Americans had come to cherish above most others. Governors appointed by the king were generally able men, sometimes outstanding ﬁgures. Some, unfortunately, were incompetent or corrupt—broken-down politicians badly in need of jobs. The worst of the group was probably impoverished Lord Cornbury, ﬁ rst cousin of Queen Anne, who was made governor of New York and New Jersey in 1702. He proved to be a drunkard, a spendthrift, a grafter, an embezzler, a religious bigot, and a vain fool, who was accused (probably inaccurately) of dressing like a woman. Even the best appointees had trouble with the colonial legislatures, basically because the royal governor embodied a bothersome transatlantic authority some three thousand miles away. The colonial assemblies found various ways to assert their authority and independence. Some of them employed the trick of withholding the governor’s salary unless he yielded to their wishes. He was normally in need of money—otherwise he would not have come to this godforsaken country—so the power of the purse usually forced him to terms. But one governor of North Carolina died with his salary eleven years in arrears. The London government, in leaving the colonial governor to the tender mercies of the legislature, was guilty of poor administration. In the interests of simple efﬁciency, the British authorities should have arranged to pay him from independent sources. As events turned out, control over the purse by the colonial legislatures led to prolonged bickering, which proved to be one of the persistent irritants that generated a spirit of revolt.* Administration at the local level was also varied. County government remained the rule in the plantation South; town-meeting government predominated in New Eng land; and a modiﬁcation of the two developed in the middle colonies. In the town meeting, with

*Parliament


 ﬁ nally arranged for separate payment of the governors through the Townshend taxes of 1767, but by then the colonists were in such an ugly mood over taxation that this innovation only added fresh fuel to the ﬂames.

Governance in the Colonies


 Junius, the pseudonym for a critic (or critics) of the British government from 1768 to 1772, published a pointed barb in criticizing one new appointee:

“


 It was not Virginia that wanted a governor but a court favorite that wanted a salary.

”


 its open discussion and open voting, direct democracy functioned at its best. In this unrivaled cradle of selfgovernment, Americans learned to cherish their privileges and exercise their duties as citizens of the New World commonwealths. Yet the ballot was by no means a birthright. Religious or property qualiﬁcations for voting, with even stiffer qualiﬁcations for ofﬁceholding, existed in all the colonies in 1775. The privileged upper classes, fearful of democratic excesses, were unwilling to grant the ballot to every “biped of the forest.” Perhaps half of the adult white males were thus disfranchised. But because of the ease of acquiring land and thus satisfying property requirements, the right to vote was not beyond the reach of most industrious and enterprising colonists. Yet somewhat surprisingly, eligible voters often did not exercise this precious privilege. They frequently acquiesced in the leadership of their “betters,” who ran colonial affairs—though always reserving the right to vote misbehaving rascals out of ofﬁce. By 1775 America was not yet a true democracy— socially, economically, or politically. But it was far more democratic than Eng land and the European continent. Colonial institutions were giving freer rein to the democratic ideals of tolerance, educational advantages, equality of economic opportunity, freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, and representative government. And these democratic seeds, planted in rich soil, were to bring forth a lush harvest in later years.

Colonial Folkways
 Everyday life in the colonies may now seem glamorous, especially as reﬂected in antique shops. But judged by modern standards, it was drab and tedious. For most people the labor was heavy and constant—from “can see” to “can’t see.” Food was plentiful, though the diet could be coarse and monotonous. Americans probably ate more boun-



 tifully, especially of meat, than any people in the Old World. Lazy or sickly was the person whose stomach was empty. Basic comforts now taken for granted were lacking. Churches were not heated at all, except for charcoal foot-warmers that the women carried. During the frigid New Eng land winters, the preaching of hellﬁ re may not have seemed altogether unattractive. Drafty homes were poorly heated, chieﬂy by inefﬁcient ﬁ replaces. There was no running water in the houses, no indoor plumbing, and probably not a single bathtub in all of colonial America. Candles and whale-oil lamps provided faint and ﬂ ickering illumination. Garbage disposal was primitive. Long-snouted hogs customarily ranged the streets to consume refuse, while buzzards, protected by law, ﬂapped greedily over tidbits of waste. Amusement was eagerly pursued where time and custom permitted. The militia assembled periodically for “musters,” which consisted of several days of drilling, liberally interspersed with merrymaking and ﬂ irting. On the frontier, plea sure was often combined with work at house-raisings, quilting bees, husking bees, and apple parings. Funerals and weddings every where afforded opportunities for social gatherings, which customarily involved the swilling of much strong liquor. Winter sports were common in the North, whereas in the South card playing, horse racing, cockﬁghting, and fox hunting were favorite pastimes. George Washington, not surprisingly, was a superb rider. In the nonpuritanical South, dancing was the rage—jigs, square dances, the Virginia reel—and the agile Washington could swing his fair partner with the best of them. Other diversions beckoned. Lotteries were universally approved, even by the clergy, and were used to raise money for churches and colleges, including Harvard. Stage plays became popular in the South but were frowned upon in Quaker and Puritan colonies and in some places forbidden by law. Many of the New England clergy saw playacting as time-consuming and immoral; they preferred religious lectures, from which their ﬂocks derived much spiritual satisfaction. Holidays were every where celebrated in the American colonies, but Christmas was frowned upon in New Eng land as an offensive reminder of “Popery.” “Yuletide is fooltide” was a common Puritan sneer. Thanksgiving Day came to be a truly American festival, for it combined thanks to God with an opportunity for jolliﬁcation, gorging, and guzzling. By the mid-eighteenth century, Britain’s several North American colonies, despite their differences,



Chapter 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 1700–1775


The Popular Game of Billiards
 Most likely brought over by Dutch and English settlers, billiards provided amusement in local taverns throughout the colonies. By the nineteenth century, Americans, like the British and French who had long dominated the sport, had become obsessed with these games of cues and balls. The most popular form of pool, eight ball, was not invented until 1900.

 revealed some striking similarities. All were basically Eng lish in language and customs, and Protestant in religion, while the widespread presence of other peoples and faiths compelled every colony to cede at least some degree of ethnic and religious toleration. Compared with contemporary Europe, they all afforded to enterprising individuals unusual opportunities for social mobility. They all possessed some mea sure of selfgovernment, though by no means complete democracy. Communication and transportation among the colo-

 nies were improving. British North America by 1775 looked like a patchwork quilt—each part slightly different, but stitched together by common origins, common ways of life, and common beliefs in toleration, economic development, and, above all, self-rule. Fatefully, all the colonies were also separated from the seat of imperial authority by a vast ocean moat some three thousand miles wide. These simple facts of shared history, culture, and geography set the stage for the colonists’ struggle to unite as an independent people.

 CHRONOLOGY

 College of William and Mary founded



 Princeton College founded



 Yale College founded





 Britain vetoes South Carolina anti–slave trade mea sures

 Smallpox inoculation introduced



 First edition of Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack

 Paxton Boys march on Philadelphia Brown College founded





 Rutgers College founded

 Jonathan Edwards begins Great Awakening

1734–


1768–


 Regulator protests

 Zenger free-press trial in New York





 Dartmouth College founded

 George Whiteﬁeld spreads Great Awakening

Varying Viewpoints


KEY TERMS



PEOPLE TO KNOW

Paxton Boys (90)
 Regulator movement (90) triangular trade (94) Molasses Act (96) Arminianism (98) Great Awakening (98) old lights (100)

 new lights (100) Poor Richard’s Almanack (102) Zenger trial (103) royal colonies (104) proprietary colonies (104)

Michel-Guillaume Jean
 de Crèvecoeur Jacobus Arminius Jonathan Edwards George Whiteﬁeld

John Trumbull
John Singleton Copley
Phillis Wheatley
John Peter Zenger


 Colonial America: Communities of Conﬂict or Consensus?

T


 he earliest historians of colonial society portrayed close-knit, homogeneous, and hierarchical communities. Richard Bushman’s From Puritan to Yankee (1967) challenged that traditional view when he described colonial New Eng land as an expanding, opening society. In this view the colonists gradually lost the religious discipline and social structure of the founding generations as they poured out onto the frontier or sailed the seas in search of fortune and adventure. Rhys Isaac viewed the Great Awakening in the South as similar evidence of the erosion of the social constraints and deference that once held colonial society together. Unbridled religious enthusiasm, directed by itinerant preachers both North and South, encouraged the sort of quest for personal autonomy that eventually led Americans to demand national independence. Other scholars have focused on the negative aspects of this alleged breakdown in the traditional order, particularly on the rise of new social inequalities. Social historians like Kenneth Lockridge have argued that the decline of cohesive communities, population pressure on the land, and continued dominance of church and parental authority gave rise to a landless class, forced to till tenant plots in the countryside or ﬁ nd work as manual laborers in the cities. Gary Nash, in The Urban Crucible (1979), likewise traced the rise of a competitive, individualistic social order in colonial cities, marking the end of the patronage and paternalism that had once bound communities together. Increasingly, Nash contended, class antagonisms split

 communities. The wealthy abandoned their traditional obligations toward the poor for more selﬁsh capitalistic social relations that favored their class peers. The consequent politicization of the laboring classes helped motivate their participation in the American Revolution. Some scholars have disputed that “declension” undermined colonial communities. Christine Heyrman, in particular, has argued in Commerce and Culture (1984) that the decline of traditional mores has been overstated; religious beliefs and commercial activities coexisted throughout the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. Similarly, Jack Greene has suggested that the obsession with the decline of deference has obscured the fact that colonies outside of New England, like Virginia and Maryland, actually experienced a consolidation of religious and social authority throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, becoming more hierarchical and paternalistic. Like Greene, many historians have focused on sectional differences between the colonies, and the peculiar nature of social equality and inequality in each. Much of the impetus for this inquiry stems from an issue that has long perplexed students of early America: the simultaneous evolution of a rigid racial caste system alongside democratic political institutions. Decades ago, when most historians came from Yankee stock, they resolved the apparent paradox by locating the seeds of democracy in New Eng land. The aggressive independence of the people, best expressed by the boisterous town meetings, spawned



Chapter 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 1700–1775


 the American obsession with freedom. On the other hand, this view holds, the slave societies of the South were hierarchical, aristocratic communities under the sway of a few powerful planters. More recently some historians have attacked this simple dichotomy, noting many undemocratic features in colonial New Eng land and arguing that while the South may have been the site of tremendous inequality, it also produced most of the Founding Fathers. Washington, Jefferson, and Madison—the architects of American government with its foundation in liberty—all hailed from slaveholding Virginia. In fact, nowhere were republican principles stronger than in Virginia. Some scholars, notably Edmund S. Morgan in American Slavery, American Freedom (1975), consider the willingness of wealthy planters to concede the equality and freedom of all white males a device to ensure racial solidarity and to mute class conﬂ ict. In this view the concurrent emergence of slavery and democracy was no paradox. White racial solidarity mufﬂed animosity between rich and poor and fostered the devotion to equality among whites that became a hallmark of American democracy. Histori-

 ans of Latin America point out that other New World societies, like Brazil and Mexico, had far sharper class divisions than the British colonies, with lasting consequences for their social integrity and political stability. Few historians still argue that the colonies offered boundless opportunities for inhabitants, white or black. But scholars disagree vigorously over what kinds of inequalities and social tensions most shaped eighteenth-century society and contributed to the revolutionary agitation that eventually consumed— and transformed—colonial America. Even so, whether one accepts Morgan’s argument that “Americans bought their independence with slave labor” or those interpretations that point to rising social conﬂ ict between whites as the salient characteristic of colonial society on the eve of the Revolution, the oncecommon assumption that America was a world of equality and consensus no longer reigns undisputed. Yet because one’s life chances were still unquestionably better in America than in Europe, immigrants continued to pour in, imbued with high expectations about America as a land of opportunity.

To Learn More
Bernard Bailyn, The Peopling of British North America
(1986)
Richard L. Bushman, From Puritan to Yankee: Character
 and Social Order in Connecticut, 1690–1765 (1967) ———, King and People in Provincial Massachusetts (1985) John Butler, Becoming America: The Revolution Before 1776 (2000) Benjamin Franklin, Autobiography (1868) James Henretta, The Evolution of American Society, 1700– 1815 (1973) Rhys Isaac, Landon Carter’s Uneasy Kingdom: Revolution and Rebellion on a Virginia Plantation (2004) Jill Lepore, New York Burning (2005)

William Moraley, The Infortunate: The Voyage and
 Adventures of William Moraley, edited by Susan Klepp (1992) Marcus Rediker, Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea: Merchant Seamen, Pirates, and the Anglo-American Maritime World, 1700–1750 (1987) Gordon Wood, The Americanization of Benjamin Franklin (2004) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Duel for
North America





1608–1763
 A torch lighted in the forests of America set all Europe in conﬂagration.

A


 s the seventeenth century neared its sunset, a titanic struggle was shaping up for mastery of the North American continent. The contest involved three Old World nations—Eng land,* France, and Spain—and it unavoidably swept up Native American peoples as well. From 1688 to 1763, four bitter wars convulsed Europe. All four of those conﬂ icts were world wars. They amounted to a death struggle for domination in Europe as well as in the New World, and they were fought on the waters and soil of two hemispheres. Counting these ﬁ rst four clashes, nine world wars have been waged since 1688. The American people, whether as British subjects or as American citizens, proved unable to stay out of a single one of them. And one of those wars—known as the Seven Years’ War in Europe and sometimes as the French and Indian War in America— set the stage for America’s independence.

 *After the union of Eng land and Scotland in 1707, the nation’s ofﬁcial name became “Great Britain.”

France Finds a Foothold
 in Canada Like Eng land and Holland, France was a latecomer in the scramble for New World real estate, and for basically the same reasons. It was convulsed during the 1500s by foreign wars and domestic strife, including the frightful clashes between Roman Catholics and Protestant Huguenots. On St. Bartholomew’s Day, 1572, over ten thousand Huguenots—men, women, and children— were butchered in cold blood. A new era dawned in 1598 when the Edict of Nantes, issued by the crown, granted limited toleration to French Protestants. Religious wars ceased, and in the new century France blossomed into the mightiest and most feared nation on the European continent, led by a series of brilliant ministers and by the vainglorious King Louis XIV. Enthroned as a ﬁve-year-old boy, he reigned for no less than seventy-two years (1643– 1715), surrounded by a glittering court and scheming

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 6 The Duel for North America, 1608–1763


 ministers and mistresses. Fatefully for North America, Louis XIV also took a deep interest in overseas colonies. After rocky beginnings, success ﬁ nally rewarded the exertions of France in the New World. In 1608, the year after the founding of Jamestown, the permanent beginnings of a vast empire (see Map 6.1) were established at Québec, a granite sentinel commanding the St. Lawrence River. The leading ﬁgure was Samuel de Champlain, an intrepid soldier and explorer whose energy and leadership fairly earned him the title “Father of New France.” Champlain entered into friendly relations—a fateful friendship—with the nearby Huron Indian tribes. At their request, he joined them in battle against their foes, the federated Iroquois tribes of the upper New York area. Two volleys from the “lightning sticks” of the whites routed the terriﬁed Iroquois, who left behind three dead and one wounded. France, to its sorrow,

180°


100°W


20°W


40°W
60°W
80°W


°N


140°W
120°W




160°W


 thus earned the lasting enmity of the Iroquois tribes. They thereafter hampered French penetration of the Ohio Valley, sometimes ravaging French settlements and frequently serving as allies of the British in the prolonged struggle for supremacy on the continent. The government of New France (Canada) ﬁnally fell under the direct control of the king after various commercial companies had faltered or failed. This royal regime was almost completely autocratic. The people elected no representative assemblies, nor did they enjoy the right to trial by jury, as in the Eng lish colonies. The population of Catholic New France grew at a listless pace. As late as 1750, only sixty thousand or so whites inhabited New France. Landowning French peasants, unlike the dispossessed Eng lish tenant farmers who embarked for the British colonies, had little economic motive to move. Protestant Huguenots, who might have had a religious motive to migrate, were denied a refuge in this raw colony. The French government, in any case, favored its Caribbean island colonies, rich in sugar and rum, over the snow-cloaked wilderness of Canada.

NEWFOUNDLAND
Hudson Bay 
N


 Québec Montréal

Missouri R


.


M


 ip iss iss

R.
 do ora

.


PACIFIC OCEAN

 pi R

C ol


Detroit
ILLINOIS COUNTRY

NOVA SCOTIA
Port 0°N Royal 4 
R.
 io Oh

La Salle
 murdered,

SAINTDOMINGUE G
ul f of M exi co 
Mexico City


 Territorial claims

ATLANTIC OCEAN

(Fr.)


N
20°


Car i bbe an
Sea


British
French
Spanish




500 1000 Km.


1000 Mi.


 Map 6.1 France’s American Empire at Its Greatest Extent, 1700 Interactive Map

 Québec Scene, by Jean-Baptiste-Louis Franquelin, ca. 1699 (detail) The metal cooking pot and the Indians’ clothing and blankets show the Native Americans’ growing reliance on European trade goods.

130°W


110°W


120°W


100°W


80°W


90°W


70°W


60°W


Hudson
Bay
N


 wr

 en

 e S upe rior La

L.


Eri


40°N


 e

 EAN

Lak e Mi c hi gan


.


 ario

 io

R.


 AN

R.


R.


N


Mis


R ed R.


A


 EA

 TL

 ip pi

 OC

 as

 siss

 ka

 ns

N


 TI

Oh


C


R.


 OC

R.


Ar


 IC

 do

 iR

 nt L. O

 ron

 PACIF ra

 tte

 ipp

Hu


 i

R.


Pla


C ol o


 ss

 k

 e

 s

 our

 eR .

Mi


Miss


Sn


 ak

 si

La


Lak


 lumbia R.

St.


Co


 ce

R.


50°


30°N


 o

Ri


Gr
 an

 de

 French trading post (1604–1760)

Gulf of
Mexico


 Hudson’s Bay Company (1670–1869) Montréal-based fur trade (1763–1784) North West Company (1784–1821) Spain and New Mexico (1598–1821)





400 Km.


400 Mi.


 Map 6.2 Fur-Trading Posts To serve the needs of European fashion, fur-traders pursued the beaver for more than two centuries over the entire continent of North America. They brought many Indians for the ﬁrst time into contact with white culture.

New France Fans Out
 New France did contain one valuable resource: the beaver. European fashion-setters valued beaver-pelt hats for their warmth and opulent appearance. To adorn the heads of Europeans, French fur-trappers ranged over the woods and waterways of North America in pursuit of beaver. These colorful coureurs de bois(“runners of the woods”) were also runners of risks—two-ﬁsted drinkers, free spenders, free livers and lovers. They littered the land with scores of place names, including Baton Rouge (red stick), Terre Haute (high land), Des Moines (some monks), and Grand Teton (big breast). Singing, paddle-swinging French voyageurs also recruited Indians into the fur business. The Indian fur

Interactive Map


 ﬂotilla arriving in Montréal in 1693 numbered four hundred canoes. But the fur trade had some disastrous drawbacks. Indians recruited into the fur business were decimated by the white man’s diseases and debauched by his alcohol. Slaughtering beaver by the boatload also violated many Indians’ religious beliefs and sadly demonstrated the shattering effect that contact with Europeans wreaked on traditional Indian ways of life. Pursuing the sharp-toothed beaver ever deeper into the heart of the continent, the French trappers and their Indian partners hiked, rode, snowshoed, sailed, and paddled across amazing distances. They trekked in a huge arc across the Great Lakes, into present-day Saskatchewan and Manitoba; along the valleys of the Platte, the Arkansas, and the Missouri; west to the Rockies; and south to the border of Spanish Texas (see Map 6.2).



Chapter 6 The Duel for North America, 1608–1763


 In the process they all but extinguished the beaver population in many areas, inﬂ icting incalculable ecological damage. French Catholic missionaries, notably the Jesuits, labored zealously to save the Indians for Christ and from the fur-trappers. Some of the Jesuit missionaries, their efforts scorned, suffered unspeakable tortures at the hands of the Indians. But though they made few permanent converts, the Jesuits played a vital role as explorers and geographers. Other explorers sought neither souls nor fur, but empire. To thwart Eng lish settlers pushing into the Ohio Valley, Antoine Cadillac founded Detroit, “the City of Straits,” in 1701. To check Spanish penetration into the region of the Gulf of Mexico, ambitious Robert de La Salle ﬂoated down the Mississippi in 1682 to the point where it mingles with the Gulf. He named the great interior basin “Louisiana,” in honor of his sovereign, Louis XIV. Dreaming of empire, he returned to the Gulf three years later with a colonizing expedition of four ships. But he failed to ﬁ nd the Mississippi delta, landed in Spanish Texas, and in 1687 was murdered by his mutinous men.

 Undismayed, French ofﬁcials persisted in their efforts to block Spain on the Gulf of Mexico. They planted several fortiﬁed posts in what is now Mississippi and Louisiana, the most important of which was New Orleans (1718). Commanding the mouth of the Mississippi River, this strategic semitropical outpost also tapped the fur trade of the huge interior valley. The fertile Illinois country—where the French established forts and trading posts at Kaskaskia, Cahokia, and Vincennes—became the garden of France’s North American empire. Surprising amounts of grain were ﬂoated down the Mississippi for transshipment to the West Indies and to Europe.

The Clash of Empires
 The earliest contests among the European powers for control of North America, known to the British colonists as King William’s War (1689–1697) and Queen Anne’s War (1702–1713) (see Table 6.1), mostly pitted British colonists against the French coureurs de bois, with both sides recruiting whatever Indian allies they

Chief of the Taensa Indians Receiving La Salle, March 20, 1682, by George Catlin,
 1847–1848 (detail) Driven by the dream of a vast North American empire for France, La Salle spent years exploring the Great Lakes region and the valleys of the Illinois and Mississippi Rivers. This scene of his encounter with an Indian chieftain was imaginatively re-created by the nineteenth-century artist George Catlin.



World Wars Rock America


Table 6.1 Later English Monarchs*
Name, Reign


Relation to America


 William III, 1689–1702 Anne, 1702–1714 George I, 1714–1727 George II, 1727–1760 George III, 1760–1820

 Collapse of Dominion of New Eng land; King William’s War Queen Anne’s War, 1702–1713 Navigation Laws laxly enforced (“salutary neglect”) Ga. founded; King George’s War; Seven Years’ War American Revolution, 1775–1783

 *See pp. 000 and 000 for earlier monarchs.

 could. Neither France nor Britain at this stage considered America worth the commitment of large detachments of regular troops, so the combatants waged a kind of primitive guerrilla warfare. Indian allies of the French ravaged with torch and tomahawk the British colonial frontiers, visiting especially bloody violence on the villages of Schenectady, New York, and Deerﬁeld, Massachusetts (see Map 6.3). Spain, eventually allied with France, probed from its Florida base at outlying South Carolina settlements. For their part the British colonists failed miserably in sallies against Québec and Montréal but scored a signal victory when they temporarily seized the stronghold of Port Royal in Acadia (present-day Nova Scotia). Peace terms, signed at Utrecht in 1713, revealed how badly France and its Spanish ally had been beaten (see Map 6.4). Britain was rewarded with French-populated

Map 6.3 Scenes of the French Wars
 The arrows indicate French-Indian attacks. Schenectady was burned to the ground in the raid of 1690. At Deerﬁeld, site of one of the New England frontier’s bloodiest confrontations, invaders killed ﬁfty inhabitants and sent more than a hundred others ﬂeeing for their lives into the winter wilderness. The Indian attackers also took over one hundred Deerﬁeld residents captive, including the child Titus King. He later wrote, “Captivity is an awful school for children, when we see how quick they will fall in with the Indian ways. Nothing seems to be more taking [appealing]. In six months’ time they forsake father and mother, forget their own land, refuse to speak their own tongue, and seemingly be wholly swallowed up with the Indians.” Interactive Map

75°W


70°W


65°W


60°W


Gulf of
St. Lawrence


Cape Breton
Island


 Québec

.


 ce

R.


NOVA SCOTIA

 Montréal Port Royal

 ut R .

St


La


 en wr

N


Hudson R.


Schenectady
Albany


ATLANTIC OCEAN

Conne


 ctic

L.
Ontario 

Deerfield


45°N
Louisbourg
 captured

Boston


 French-Indian attacks Town destroyed French claims, ca. 1700

New York




40°N




75 150 Km.


150 Mi.


 British claims, ca. 1700 British gains, 1713

Chapter 6 The Duel for North America, 1608–1763


180°
160°W
140°W
120°W
100°W


20°W


40°W
60°W
80°W


NEWFOUNDLAND
Hudson Bay 
N


NOVA SCOTIA
Port 0°N Royal 4 
 Québec Montréal

Missouri R


.


M


 ip iss iss pi R

.


 Acadia (which the British renamed Nova Scotia, or New Scotland) and the wintry wastes of Newfoundland and Hudson Bay. These immense tracts pinched the St. Lawrence settlements of France, foreshadowing their ultimate doom. A generation of peace ensued, during which Britain provided its American colonies with decades of “salutary neglect”—fertile soil for the roots of independence. By the treaty of 1713, the British also won limited trading rights in Spanish America, but these later involved much friction over smuggling. Ill feeling ﬂared up when the British captain Robert Jenkins, encountering Spanish revenue authorities, had one ear sliced off by a sword. The Spanish commander reportedly sneered, “Carry this home to the King, your master, whom, if he were present, I would serve in like fashion.” The victim, with a tale of woe on his tongue and a shriveled ear in his hand, aroused furious resentment when he returned home to Britain. The War of Jenkins’s Ear, curiously but aptly named, broke out in 1739 between the British and the Spaniards. It was conﬁ ned to the Caribbean Sea and to the much-buffeted buffer colony of Georgia, where philanthropist-soldier James Oglethorpe fought his Spanish foe to a standstill. This small-scale scufﬂe with Spain in America soon merged with the large-scale War of Austrian Succession in Europe (see Table 6.2), and came to be called King George’s War in America. Once again, France allied itself with Spain. And once again, a rustic force of New Eng landers invaded New France. With help from a British ﬂeet and with a great deal of good luck, the raw and sometimes drunken recruits captured the reputedly impregnable French fortress of Louisbourg, which was on Cape Breton Island and commanded the approaches to the St. Lawrence River (see Map 6.3 on p. 113). When the peace treaty of 1748 handed Louisbourg back to their French foe, the victorious New Eng landers

°N




R.
 io Oh

ATLANTIC OCEAN

PACIFIC OCEAN G
ul f of Me x i co 
N


20°


Jamaica


 Territorial claims

(Gr. Br.)


C a rib b e a n
Sea


British
French
Spanish




500 1000 Km.


1000 Mi.


Map 6.4 North America After Two Wars, 1713
Interactive Map


 were outraged. The glory of their arms—never terribly lustrous in any event—seemed tarnished by the wiles of Old World diplomats. Worse, Louisbourg was still a cocked pistol pointed at the heart of the American continent. France, powerful and unappeased, still clung to its vast holdings in North America.

Table 6.2 The Nine World Wars
Dates


In Europe


In America


1688–1697
1701–1713
1740–1748
1756–1763
1778–1783
1793–1802
1803–1815
1914–1918
1939–1945


War of the League of Augsburg
War of Spanish Succession
War of Austrian Succession
Seven Years’ War
War of the American Revolution
Wars of the French Revolution
Napoleonic Wars
World War I
World War II


 King William’s War, 1689–1697 Queen Anne’s War, 1702–1713 King George’s War, 1744–1748 French and Indian War, 1754–1763 American Revolution, 1775–1783 Undeclared French War, 1798–1800 War of 1812, 1812–1814 World War I, 1917–1918 World War II, 1941–1945

The French-Indian Showdown




 New Englanders Capture Louisbourg, 1745 When the ﬁnal peace settlement of 1748 returned this fortress to France, the American colonists felt betrayed by their British masters.

George Washington
Inaugurates War
 with France As the dogﬁght intensiﬁed in the New World, the Ohio Valley became the chief bone of contention between the French and British. The Ohio Country was the critical area into which the westward-pushing British colonists would inevitably penetrate. For France it was also the key to the continent that the French had to retain, particularly if they were going to link their Canadian holdings with those of the lower Mississippi Valley. By the mid-1700s, the British colonists, painfully aware of these basic truths, were no longer so reluctant to bear the burdens of empire. Alarmed by French landgrabbing and cutthroat fur-trade competition in the Ohio Valley, they were determined to ﬁght for their economic security and for the supremacy of their way of life in North America. Rivalry for the lush lands of the upper Ohio Valley brought tensions to the snapping point. In 1749 a group

 of British colonial speculators, chieﬂy inﬂuential Virginians, including the Washington family, had secured shaky legal “rights” to some 500,000 acres in this region. In the same disputed wilderness, the French were in the process of erecting a chain of forts commanding the strategic Ohio River. Especially formidable was Fort Duquesne at the pivotal point where the Monongahela and Allegheny Rivers join to form the Ohio—the later site of Pittsburgh. In 1754 the governor of Virginia ushered George Washington, a twenty-one-year-old surveyor and fellow Virginian, onto the stage of history. To secure the Virginians’ claims, Washington was sent to the Ohio Country as a lieutenant colonel in command of about 150 Virginia militiamen. Encountering a small detachment of French troops in the forest about forty miles from Fort Duquesne (see Map 6.5), the Virginians ﬁred the ﬁ rst shots of the globe-girdling new war. The French leader was killed, and his men retreated. An exultant Washington wrote, “I heard the bullets whistle, and believe me, there is something charming in the sound.” It soon lost its charm.



Chapter 6 The Duel for North America, 1608–1763


 The French promptly returned with reinforcements, who surrounded Washington in his hastily constructed breastworks, Fort Necessity. After a ten-hour siege, he was forced to surrender his entire command in July 1754—ironically the fourth of July. But he was permitted to march his men away with the full honors of war. With the shooting already started and in danger of spreading, the British authorities in Nova Scotia took vigorous action. Understandably fearing a stab in the back from the French Acadians, whom Britain had conquered in 1713, the British brutally uprooted some four thousand of them in 1755. These unhappy French deportees were scattered as far south as Louisiana, where the descendants of the French-speaking Aca-

 dians are now called “Cajuns” and number nearly a million.

Global War and
Colonial Disunity
 The ﬁ rst three Anglo-French colonial wars had all started in Europe, but the tables were now reversed. The fourth struggle, sometimes known as the French and Indian War, began in America. Touched off by George Washington in the wilds of the Ohio Valley in 1754, it rocked along on an undeclared basis for two years and then widened into the most far-ﬂung conﬂ ict the world had yet seen—the Seven Years’ War. It was fought not

Map 6.5 The French and Indian War in North America, 1754–1760
Interactive Map


80°W


70°W










N


200 Mi.


E


N


W


F


R


 New France’s boundary with Maine, New Hampshire, and New York was uncertain.

A


N


C


 Québec

E


Gulf of
St. Lawrence


 AC

 AD

 IA

 MAINE

 ke

 an ge rs

La


 Montréal (MASS.)

Fort Niagara


Fort Ticonderoga
Fort Oswego


L


 IROQUOIS

Fort Presque Isle
Fort Le Boeuf


 CONN.

Fort Machault


Boston


R.I.


Allegheny R.


 British territory

 PENNSYLVANIA

N.J.


New York


 Braddock defeated

 British forces French forces

MD.
Washington 1753–1754 
Fort Necessity
 Washington defeated July 1754

Monongahela R.
 VIRGINIA

 French territory Disputed territory

Philadelphia


Oh


 io

R.


Fort Duquesne


 MASS.

Hudso


NEW YORK

Erie
 ake

Fort Beausejour
IA OT SC
Halifax British deport A V 6,000 Acadians, O summer of 1755. N 
Fort Crown Point
Fort William Henry
N.H.
Lake George


 n R.

 on

Mo
 nt ca lm

Rogers


’R


Hur


Lake Ontario


Louisbourg


Fort Gaspereau


 St. François

St. Lawrence R.


40°N


60°W


200 Km.


 DEL.

AT L A N T I C O C E A N

 British fort French fort British victory French victory

The French and Indian War


 only in America but in Europe, in the West Indies, in the Philippines, in Africa, and on the ocean. The Seven Years’ War was a seven-seas war (see Map 6.6). In Europe the principal adversaries were Britain and Prussia on one side, arrayed against France, Spain, Austria, and Russia on the other. The bloodiest theater was in Germany, where Frederick the Great deservedly won the title of “Great” by repelling French, Austrian, and Russian armies, often with the opposing forces outnumbering his own three to one. The London government, unable to send him effective troop reinforcements, liberally subsidized him with gold. Luckily for the British colonists, the French wasted so much strength in this European bloodbath that they were unable to throw an adequate force into the New World. “America was conquered in Germany,” declared Britain’s great statesman William Pitt. In previous colonial clashes, the Americans had revealed an astonishing lack of unity. Colonists who were nearest the shooting had responded much more generously with volunteers and money than those enjoying the safety of remoteness. Even the Indians had laughed at the inability of the colonists to pull together. Now, with musketballs already splitting the air in Ohio, the crisis demanded concerted action. In 1754 the British government summoned an intercolonial congress to Albany, New York, near the Iroquois Indian country. Travel-weary delegates from only seven of the thirteen colonies showed up. The immediate purpose was to keep the scalping knives of the Iroquois tribes loyal to the British in the spreading war. The chiefs were harangued at length and then presented with thirty wagonloads of gifts, including guns. The longer-range purpose at Albany was to achieve greater colonial unity and thus bolster the common defense against France. A month before the congress assembled, ingenious Benjamin Franklin published in his Pennsylvania Gazette the most famous cartoon of the colonial era. Showing the separate colonies as parts of a disjointed snake, it broadcast the slogan “Join, or Die.” Franklin himself, a wise and witty counselor, was the leading spirit of the Albany Congress. His outstanding contribution was a well-devised but premature scheme for colonial home rule. The Albany delegates unanimously adopted the plan, but the individual colonies spurned it, as did the London regime. To the colonists, it did not seem to give enough independence; to the British ofﬁcials, it seemed to give too much. The disappointing result conﬁ rmed one of Franklin’s sage observations: all people agreed on the need for union,



Famous Cartoon by Benjamin Franklin Delaware
 and Georgia were omitted.

 but their “weak noddles” were “perfectly distracted” when they attempted to agree on details.

 Braddock’s Blundering and Its Aftermath The opening clashes of the French and Indian War went badly for the British colonists. Haughty and bullheaded General Edward Braddock, a sixty-year-old ofﬁcer experienced in European warfare, was sent to Virginia with a strong detachment of British regulars. After foraging scanty supplies from the reluctant colonists, he set out in 1755 with some two thousand men to capture Fort Duquesne. A considerable part of his force consisted of ill-disciplined colonial militiamen (“buckskins”), whose behind-the-tree methods of ﬁghting Indians won “Bulldog” Braddock’s professional contempt. Braddock’s expedition, dragging heavy artillery, moved slowly. Axmen laboriously hacked a path through the dense forest, thus opening a road that was later to be an important artery to the West. A few miles from Fort Duquesne, Braddock encountered a much smaller French and Indian army. At ﬁ rst the enemy force was repulsed, but it quickly melted into the thickets and poured a murderous ﬁ re into the ranks of the redcoats. In the ensuing battle, George Washington, an energetic and fearless aide to Braddock, had two horses shot from under him, and four bullets pierced his coat. Braddock himself was mortally wounded. The entire British force was routed after appalling losses. Inﬂamed by this easy victory, the Indians took to a wider warpath. The whole frontier from Pennsylvania

Events of the Seven Years’ War


120°E


PHILIPPINE IS.

 Territorial claims, ca. 1750

19.


British


1. Virginia-Pennsylvania-Ohio, 1753–1764
2. Nova Scotia, 1754
3. Hudson River-Lake Champlain, 1755–1760
4. Minorca, 1756
5. Central Europe, 1756–1762
6. Bengal, 1757
7. Louisbourg, 1758
8. West Africa, 1758
9. Madras, 1758–1759
 10. Québec and Upper St. Lawrence, 1759–1760 11. Eastern Caribbean, 1759–1762 12. Iberian Coast, 1759 13. French Coast, 1759–1761 14. Upper Great Lakes, 1759–1764 15. Pondicherry, 1760–1762 16. Spain, 1762 17. Newfoundland, 1762 18. Havana, 1762 19. Manila, 1762 20. Pontiac’s Rebellion, 1763–1764

French
Netherlands
 CHINA

Portuguese
Spanish
150°E


90°E


6.


INDIAN OCEAN

A S I A


 INDIA

9.


ARCTIC OCEAN

PACIFIC OCEAN

15.


Arabian
Sea


60°E


120°W


NORTH AMERICA

 ARABIA

RUPERT’S LAND

 FRANCE

°N




L O U IS I AN A


3.10.


20.
14.
1.
Gulf of
 M exic o

NEW FRANCE

13.


4.


 PORTUGAL

7.


2.


 ea Me

 rr

 a

16.


12.


 FLORIDA

 te di

 SPAIN

17.


THIRTEEN COLONIES

 n

NETHERLANDS GREAT BRITAIN E U R O P E

60°N


 n

NEW S P A IN

Se


 a

5.


 AFRICA

ATLANTIC OCEAN

18.


30°E


 CUBA

Ca


90°W


 rib

 be

 an

8.


Se


 a

 SENEGAMBIA

11.
60°W


30°W


 Map 6.6 Global Scale of the Seven Years’ War Among the ﬁrst of the truly “world wars” of the modern era, the Seven Years’ War sucked in several nations who did battle around the globe.



0°


Interactive Map


A
World at War 

 to North Carolina, left virtually naked by Braddock’s bloody defeat, felt their fury. Scalping forays occurred within eighty miles of Philadelphia, and in desperation the local authorities offered bounties for Indian scalps: $50 for a woman’s and $130 for a warrior’s. George Washington, with only three hundred men, tried desperately to defend the scorched frontier. The British launched a full-scale invasion of Canada in 1756, now that the undeclared war in America had at last merged into a world conﬂ ict. But they unwisely tried to attack a number of exposed wilderness posts simultaneously, instead of throwing all their strength at Québec and Montréal. If these strongholds had fallen, all the smaller outposts to the west would have withered for lack of riverborne supplies. But the British ignored such sound strategy, and defeat after defeat tarnished their arms, both in America and in Europe.

 Pitt’s Palms of Victory In the hour of crisis, Britain brought forth, as it repeatedly has, a superlative leader—William Pitt. A tall and



 imposing ﬁgure, whose ﬂashing eyes were set in a hawklike face, he was popularly known as the “Great Commoner.” Pitt drew much of his strength from the common people, who admired him so greatly that on occasion they kissed his horses. A splendid orator endowed with a majestic voice, he believed passionately in his cause, in his country, and in himself. In 1757 Pitt became a foremost leader in the London government. Throwing himself headlong into his task, he soon earned the title “Organizer of Victory.” He wisely decided to soft-pedal assaults on the French West Indies, which had been bleeding away much British strength, and to concentrate on the vitals of Canada— the Québec-Montréal area. He also picked young and energetic leaders, thus bypassing incompetent and cautious old generals. Pitt ﬁ rst dispatched a powerful expedition in 1758 against Louisbourg. The frowning fortress, though it had been greatly strengthened, fell after a blistering siege. Wild rejoicing swept Britain, for this was the ﬁ rst signiﬁcant British victory of the entire war. Québec was next on Pitt’s list. For this crucial expedition, he chose the thirty-two-year-old James Wolfe, who had been an ofﬁcer since the age of fourteen.

 View of the Taking of Québec, 1759 On the night of September 13, British forces scaled the rocky cliffs of Québec and defeated the French army defending the city. The following year, Montréal, France’s last bastion in North America, surrendered. Fighting continued in the Caribbean, Europe, and the Philippines for two more years, until the Treaty of Paris was signed in 1763, eliminating France as a colonial power in North America.

Chapter 6 The Duel for North America, 1608–1763


 Though slight and sickly, Wolfe combined a mixture of dash with painstaking attention to detail. The British attackers were making woeful progress when Wolfe, in a daring night move, sent a detachment up a poorly guarded part of the rocky eminence protecting Québec. This vanguard scaled the cliff, pulling itself upward by the bushes and showing the way for the others. In the morning the two armies faced each other on the Plains of Abraham on the outskirts of Québec, the British under Wolfe and the French under the Marquis de Montcalm. Both commanders fell, fatally wounded, but the French were defeated and the city surrendered. The Battle of Québec in 1759 ranks as one of the most signiﬁcant engagements in British and American history. When Montréal fell in 1760, the French ﬂag had ﬂuttered in Canada for the last time. By the peace settlement at Paris (1763), French power was thrown completely off the continent of North America, leaving behind a fertile French population that is to this day a strong minority in Canada. This bitter pill was sweet-

 ened somewhat when the French were allowed to retain several small but valuable sugar islands in the West Indies and two never-to-be-fortiﬁed islets in the Gulf of St. Lawrence for ﬁshing stations. A ﬁ nal blow came when the French, to compensate their luckless Spanish ally for its losses, ceded to Spain all transMississippi Louisiana, plus the outlet of New Orleans. Spain, for its part, turned Florida over to Britain in return for Cuba, where Havana had fallen to British arms (see Map 6.7). Great Britain thus emerged as the dominant power in North America, while taking its place as the leading naval power of the world.

Restless Colonists
 Britain’s colonists, baptized by ﬁ re, emerged with increased conﬁdence in their military strength. They had borne the brunt of battle at ﬁ rst; they had fought bravely

180°
20°W


160°W
140°W
120°W


°N


140°W
120°W
100°W


40°W
60°W
80°W




160°W


100°W


20°W


40°W
60°W
80°W


°N


180°






Hudson
Bay


Hudson
Bay


N
R.


N


M
 pi R

 do o ra Col

.
R.
 io Oh

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 Territorial claims

N


20°


New York
Philadelphia
Richmond


 Territorial claims

AT L A N T I C OCEAN
Savannah 
San
New Orleans
Antonio
G ul f of
Me x i co


SAINTDOMINGUE N 20°

Car i bbe an
Sea


French


Mexico City


BR. C
a rib b e a n HONDURAS Sea 
Spanish


French
Russian


 io Oh

R.




British
BR. HONDURAS

British


St. Louis
Santa Fé


 e nd

 nd e

Gul f of
Mexi co


Spanish


PAC I F IC OCEAN

R.


Rio Gra


 ra Ri o G

PACIFIC OCEAN

R.


°N


Boston


.
 pi R

 ip iss iss

C ol


 do ora

 Québec Montréal

Missouri R
.


°N




 ip iss is s M

 a

Missouri R


.


Columbi




500 1000 Km.


1000 Mi.


Map 6.7 North America Before 1754


Russian




Proclamation
Line of 1763




500 1000 Km.


1000 Mi.


 North America After 1763 (after French losses) Interactive Map

Impact of the Global Struggle


 alongside the crack British regulars; and they had gained valuable experience, ofﬁcers and men alike. In the closing days of the conﬂ ict, some twenty thousand American recruits were under arms. The French and Indian War, while bolstering colonial self-esteem, simultaneously shattered the myth of British invincibility. On Braddock’s bloody ﬁeld, the “buckskin” militia had seen the demoralized regulars huddling helplessly together or ﬂeeing their unseen enemy. Ominously, friction had developed during the war between arrogant British ofﬁcers and the raw colonial “boors.” Displaying the contempt of the professional soldier for amateurs, the British refused to recognize any American militia commission above the rank of captain—a demotion humiliating to “Colonel” George Washington. They also showed the usual condescension of snobs from the civilized Old Country toward the “scum” who had confessed failure by ﬂeeing to the “outhouses of civilization.” General Wolfe referred to the colonial militia, with exaggeration, as “in general the dirtiest, most contemptible, cowardly dogs that you can conceive.” Energetic and hard-working American settlers, in contrast, believed themselves to be the cutting edge of British civilization. They felt that they deserved credit rather than contempt for risking their lives to secure a New World empire. British ofﬁcials were further distressed by the reluctance of the colonists to support the common cause wholeheartedly. American shippers, using fraudulent papers, developed a golden trafﬁc with the enemy ports of the Spanish and French West Indies. This treason-

 The Reverend Andrew Burnaby, an observant Church of England clergyman who visited the colonies in the closing months of the Seven Years’ War, scoffed at any possibility of uniﬁcation (1760):

“


 . . . for ﬁre and water are not more heterogeneous than the different colonies in North America. Nothing can exceed the jealousy and emulation which they possess in regard to each other. . . . In short . . . were they left to themselves there would soon be a civil war from one end of the continent to the other, while the Indians and Negros would . . . impatiently watch the opportunity of exterminating them all together.

”




 able trade in foodstuffs actually kept some of the hostile islands from starving at the very time when the British navy was trying to subdue them. In the ﬁ nal year of the war, the British authorities, forced to resort to drastic mea sures, forbade the export of all supplies from New Eng land and the middle colonies. Other colonists, self-centered and alienated by distance from the war, refused to provide troops and money for the conﬂ ict. They demanded the rights and privileges of Eng lishmen, without the duties and responsibilities of Eng lishmen. Not until Pitt had offered to reimburse the colonies for a substantial part of their expenditures—some £900,000—did they move with some enthusiasm. If the Americans had to be bribed to defend themselves against a relentless and savage foe, would they ever unite to strike the mother country? The curse of intercolonial disunity, present from early days, had continued throughout the recent hostilities. It had been caused mainly by enormous distances; by geographical barriers like rivers; by conﬂ icting religions, from Catholic to Quaker; by varied nationalities, from German to Irish; by differing types of colonial governments; by many boundary disputes; and by the resentment of the crude backcountry settlers against the aristocratic bigwigs. Yet unity received some encouragement during the French and Indian War. When soldiers and statesmen from widely separated colonies met around common campﬁ res and council tables, they were often agreeably surprised by what they found. Despite deep-seated jealousy and suspicion, they discovered that they were all fellow Americans who generally spoke the same language and shared common ideals. Barriers of disunity began to melt, although a long and rugged road lay ahead before a coherent nation would emerge.

 War’s Fateful Aftermath The removal of the French menace in Canada profoundly affected American attitudes. While the French hawk had been hovering in the North and West, the colonial chicks had been forced to cling close to the wings of their British mother hen. Now that the hawk was killed, they could range far aﬁeld with a new spirit of independence. The French, humiliated by the British and saddened by the fate of Canada, consoled themselves with one wishful thought. Perhaps the loss of their American empire would one day result in Britain’s loss of its American empire. In a sense the history of the United



Chapter 6 The Duel for North America, 1608–1763


 States began with the fall of Québec and Montréal; the infant Republic was cradled on the Plains of Abraham. The Spanish and Indian menaces were also now substantially reduced. Spain was (temporarily) eliminated from Florida, although entrenched in Louisiana and New Orleans, and was still securely in possession of much of western North America, including the vast territory from present-day Texas to Cal i fornia. As for the Indians, the Treaty of Paris that ended the Seven Years’ War dealt a harsh blow to the Iroquois, Creeks, and other interior tribes. The Spanish removal from Florida and the French removal from Canada deprived the Indians of their most powerful diplomatic weapon— the ability to play off the rival European powers against one another. In the future the Indians would have to negotiate exclusively with the British. Sensing the newly precarious position of the Indian peoples, the Ottawa chief Pontiac in 1763 led several tribes, aided by a handful of French traders who remained in the region, in a violent campaign to drive the British out of the Ohio Country. Pontiac’s uprising laid siege to Detroit in the spring of 1763 and eventually overran all but three British posts west of the Appalachians, kill ing some two thousand soldiers and settlers.

 The British retaliated swiftly and cruelly. Waging a primitive version of biological warfare, one British commander ordered blankets infected with smallpox to be distributed among the Indians. Such tactics crushed the uprising and brought an uneasy truce to the frontier. His bold plan frustrated, Pontiac himself perished in 1769 at the hands of a rival chieftain. As for the British, the bloody episode convinced them of the need to stabilize relations with the western Indians and to keep regular troops stationed along the restless frontier, a mea sure for which they soon asked the colonists to foot the bill. Land-hungry American colonists were now free to burst over the dam of the Appalachian Mountains and ﬂood out over the verdant western lands. A tiny rivulet of pioneers had already trickled into Tennessee and Kentucky; other courageous settlers made their preparations for the long, dangerous trek over the mountains. Then, out of a clear sky, the London government issued its Proclamation of 1763. It ﬂatly prohibited settlement in the area beyond the Appalachians, pending further adjustments (see Map 6.8). The truth is that this hastily drawn document was not designed to oppress the colonists at all, but to work out the Indian problem

 Detroit, 1794 A key French outpost from 1701 to 1760, Detroit fell to Britain during the Seven Years’ War. The British remained at Detroit even after the American War of Independence, exciting bitter resentment in the infant American Republic (see pp. 183–184).

 Québec

 European settlement before 1700

 MAINE

 European settlement 1700–1763

 (MASS.)

Frontier, 1763


Lake
Superior


Proclamation Line of 1763


 Montréal

 Pontiac’s uprising, 1763

.


R


Fort Michilimackinac


200 Mi.


Lake
Huron


 ie Susqueh a

Lake Michiga


 a nn

R.


Portsmouth
Boston


Hartford
Newport
 New Haven RHODE ISLAND

 CONN.

40°N


N.J.
New York 

 PENN.

Perth Amboy
Burlington


Philadelphia
New Castle


Fort Pitt


70°W


Po Baltimore
 DELAWARE to m Annapolis ac R.

 io R.

R.


Oh


 a

.


Illi
 no is R

Er


Hudson R.


.
 iR pp

 ab

 e

N.H.


 MASS.

N.Y.


 are R. law

 ssi

W


 sh

 k La

Albany


De


Missi


Fort Detroit


 ce en

 rio Onta ke L a Fort Niagara

 n



 wr

Connecticut R.


200 Km.


La




St.




 MARYLAND

 St. Mary’s

 VIRGINIA

James


R.


Jamestown
.
Ohio R


R


Roano
 ke

 a

A T L AN TIC
O CE AN


New Bern


 siss Mis

Tenness
 ee R .

Sa
 va n a Alt

 na h

SOUTH CAROLINA R.

N


Charleston


 GEORGIA

 ha ma

R.


 Territory claimed by Spain and Britain

Wilmington


R.
 tee San

 ippi

R.


 erl Cumb

R.


NORTH CAROLINA

 nd

SPANISH LOUISIANA

.


Williamsburg


Savannah


30°N


St. Augustine


New Orleans


Gulf of Mexico
90°W


80°W


 Map 6.8 British Colonies at End of the Seven Years’ War, 1763 This map, showing the colonies thirteen years before the Declaration of Independence, helps to explain why the British would be unable to conquer their offspring. The colonists were spreading rapidly into the backcountry, where the powerful British navy could not ﬂush them out. During the Revolutionary War, the British at one time or another captured the leading colonial cities—Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Charleston—but the more remote interior remained a sanctuary for rebels. Interactive Map





Chapter 6 The Duel for North America, 1608–1763


 fairly and prevent another bloody eruption like Pontiac’s uprising. But countless Americans, especially land speculators, were dismayed and angered. Was not the land beyond the mountains their birthright? Had they not, in addition, purchased it with their blood in the recent war? In complete deﬁance of the proclamation, they clogged the westward trails. In 1765 an estimated one thousand wagons rolled through the town of Salisbury, North Carolina, on their way “up west.” This wholesale ﬂouting of royal authority boded ill for the longevity of British rule in America.

 The Seven Years’ War also caused the colonists to develop a new vision of their destiny. With the path cleared for the conquest of a continent, with their birthrate high and their energy boundless, they sensed that they were a potent people on the march. And they were in no mood to be restrained. Lordly Britons, whose suddenly swollen empire had tended to produce swollen heads, were in no mood for back talk. Puffed up over their recent victories, they were already annoyed with their unruly colonial subjects. The stage was set for a violent family quarrel.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Edict of Nantes (repealed in 1685)



 Champlain colonizes Québec for France



 Louis XIV becomes king of France



1744–


 King George’s War (War of Austrian Succession)



 Washington battles French on frontier Albany Congress

 La Salle explores Mississippi River to the Gulf of Mexico

1756–


Seven Years’ War (French and Indian War)


1689–


 King William’s War (War of the League of Augsburg)



 Braddock’s defeat

1702–




 Pitt emerges as leader of British government

 Queen Anne’s War (War of Spanish Succession)

 Battle of Québec



 French found New Orleans





 War of Jenkins’s Ear

Peace of Paris
 Pontiac’s uprising Proclamation of 1763

KEY TERMS
Huguenots (109) Edict of Nantes (109) coureurs de bois (111) voyageurs (111) King William’s War (112) Queen Anne’s War (112) War of Jenkins’s Ear (114) King George’s War (114) Acadians (116) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
French and Indian War (Seven Years’ War) (116) Albany Congress (117) regulars (117) Québec, Battle of (120) Pontiac’s uprising (122) Proclamation of 1763 (122) 
Louis XIV
Samuel de Champlain
Edward Braddock


William Pitt
James Wolfe
Pontiac


To Learn More




To Learn More
Fred Anderson, Crucible of War: The Seven Years’ War and
 the Fate of Empire in British North America, 1754–1766 (2001) David Armitage, ed., The British Atlantic World, 1500–1800 (2002) Colin G. Calloway, The Scratch of a Pen: 1763 and the Transformation of America (2006) David Dixon, Never Come to Peace Again: Pontiac’s Uprising and the Fate of the British Empire in North America (2005) Francis Jennings, Empire of Fortune: Crowns, Colonies and Tribes in the Seven Years War in America (1988) Elizabeth Mancke and Carole Shammas, eds., The Creation of the British Atlantic World (2005)

Paul David Nelson, William Tryon and the Course of
Empire: A Life in British Imperial Service (1990)
Carolyn Podruchny, Making the Voyageur World: Travelers
 and Traders in the North American Fur Trade (2006) James Pritchard, In Search of Empire: The French in the Americas, 1670–1730 (2004) Armstrong Starkey, European and Native American Warfare, 1615–1815 (1998) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Road to
Revolution





1763–1775
 The Revolution was effected before the war commenced. The Revolution was in the minds and hearts of the people. JOHN ADAMS, 1818

V


 ictory in the Seven Years’ War made Britain the master of a vastly enlarged imperial domain in North America. But victory—including the subsequent need to garrison ten thousand troops along the sprawling American frontier—was painfully costly. The London government therefore struggled after 1763 to compel the American colonists to shoulder some of the ﬁ nancial costs of empire. This change in British colonial policy reinforced an emerging sense of American political identity and helped to precipitate the American Revolution. The eventual conﬂ ict was by no means inevitable. Indeed, given the tightening commercial, military, and cultural bonds between colonies and mother country since the ﬁ rst crude settlements a century and a half earlier, it might be considered remarkable that the Revolution happened at all. The truth is that Americans were reluctant revolutionaries. Until late in the day, they sought only to claim the “rights of Eng lishmen,” not to separate from the mother country. But what began as a squabble about economic policies soon exposed irreconcilable differences between Americans

 and Britons over cherished political principles. The ensuing clash gave birth to a new nation.

The Deep Roots of Revolution
 In a broad sense, America was a revolutionary force from the day of its discovery by Europeans. The New World nurtured new ideas about the nature of society, citizen, and government. In the Old World, many humble folk had long lived in the shadow of graveyards that contained the bones of their ancestors for a thousand years past. Few people born into such changeless surroundings dared to question their social status. But European immigrants in the New World were not so easily subdued by the scowl of their superiors. In the American wilderness, they encountered a world that was theirs to make afresh. Two ideas in particular had taken root in the minds of the American colonists by the mid-eighteenth century: one was what historians call republicanism. Looking to the models of the ancient Greek and Roman

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



New Ideas in the New World


 republics, exponents of republicanism deﬁ ned a just society as one in which all citizens willingly subordinated their private, selﬁsh interests to the common good. Both the stability of society and the authority of government thus depended on the virtue of the citizenry—its capacity for selﬂessness, self-sufﬁciency, and courage, and especially its appetite for civic involvement. By its very nature, republicanism was opposed to hierarchical and authoritarian institutions such as aristocracy and monarchy. A second idea that fundamentally shaped American political thought derived from a group of British political commentators known as radical Whigs. Widely read by the colonists, the Whigs feared the threat to liberty posed by the arbitrary power of the monarch and his ministers relative to elected representatives in Parliament. The Whigs mounted withering attacks on the use of patronage and bribes by the king’s ministers—symptoms of a wider moral failure in society that they called “corruption,” in the sense of rot or decay. The Whigs warned citizens to be on guard against corruption and to be eternally vigilant against possible conspiracies to denude them of their hardwon liberties. Together, republican and Whig ideas predisposed the American colonists to be on hairtrigger alert against any threat to their rights. The circumstances of colonial life had done much to bolster those attitudes. Dukes and princes, barons and bishops were unknown in the colonies, while property ownership and political participation were relatively accessible. The Americans had also grown accustomed to running their own affairs, largely unmolested by remote ofﬁcials in London. Distance weakens authority; great distance weakens authority greatly. So it came as an especially jolting shock when Britain after 1763 tried to enclose its American colonists more snugly in its grip.

Mercantilism and Colonial
Grievances
 Britain’s empire was acquired in a “ﬁt of absentmindedness,” an old saying goes, and there is much truth in the jest. Not one of the original thirteen colonies except Georgia was formally planted by the British government. All the others were haphazardly founded by trading companies, religious groups, or land speculators. The British authorities nevertheless embraced a theory, called mercantilism, that justiﬁed their control over the colonies. Mercantilists believed that wealth



 The Female Combatants, 1776 Britain is symbolized as a lady of fashion; her rebellious daughter, America, as an Indian princess. Their shields of Obedience and Liberty seem mutually exclusive standards. Compare this cartoon with the one on p. 168.

 was power and that a country’s economic wealth (and hence its military and political power) could be mea sured by the amount of gold or silver in its treasury. To amass gold or silver, a country needed to export more than it imported. Possessing colonies thus conferred distinct advantages, since the colonies could both supply raw materials to the mother country (thereby reducing the need for foreign imports) and provide a guaranteed market for exports. The London government looked on the American colonists more or less as tenants. They were expected to furnish products needed in the mother country, such as tobacco, sugar, and ships’ masts; to refrain from making for export certain products, such as woolen cloth or beaver hats; to buy imported manufactured goods exclusively from Britain; and not to indulge in bothersome dreams of economic self-sufﬁciency or, worse, self-government. From time to time, Parliament passed laws to regulate the mercantilist system. The ﬁ rst of these, the Navigation Law of 1650, was aimed at rival Dutch shippers



Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


 trying to elbow their way into the American carrying trade. Thereafter all commerce ﬂowing to and from the colonies could be transported only in British (including colonial) vessels. Subsequent laws required that European goods destined for America ﬁ rst had to be landed in Britain, where tariff duties could be collected and British middlemen could take a slice of the proﬁts. Other laws stipulated that American merchants must ship certain “enumerated” products, notably tobacco, exclusively to Britain, even though prices might be better elsewhere. British policy also inﬂ icted a currency shortage on the colonies. Since the colonists regularly bought more from Britain than they sold there, the difference had to be made up in hard cash. Every year gold and silver coins, mostly earned in illicit trade with the Spanish and French West Indies, drained out of the colonies, creating an acute money shortage. To facilitate everyday purchases, the colonists resorted to butter, nails, pitch, and feathers for purposes of exchange. Currency issues came to a boil when dire ﬁ nancial need forced many of the colonies to issue paper money, which swiftly depreciated. British merchants and creditors squawked so loudly that Parliament prohibited the colonial legislatures from printing paper currency and from passing indulgent bankruptcy laws—practices that might harm British merchants. The Americans grumbled that their welfare was being sacriﬁced for the well-being of British commercial interests. The British crown also reserved the right to nullify any legislation passed by the colonial assemblies if such laws worked mischief with the mercantilist system. This royal veto was used rather sparingly—just 469 times in connection with 8,563 laws. But the colonists ﬁercely resented its very existence—another example of how principle could weigh more heavily than practice in fueling colonial grievances.

The Merits and Menace
 of Mercantilism In theory the British mercantile system seemed thoroughly selﬁsh and deliberately oppressive. But the truth is that until 1763, the various Navigation Laws imposed no intolerable burden, mainly because they were only loosely enforced. Enterprising colonial merchants learned early to disregard or evade troublesome restrictions. Some of the ﬁ rst American fortunes, like that of John Hancock, were amassed by wholesale smuggling.

Paul Revere, by John Singleton Copley, ca. 1768
 This painting of the famed silversmith-horseman challenged convention—but reﬂected the new democratic spirit of the age—by portraying an artisan in working clothes. Note how Copley depicted the serene conﬁdence of the master craftsman and Revere’s quiet pride in his work.

 Americans also reaped direct beneﬁts from the mercantile system. If the colonies existed for the beneﬁt of the mother country, it was hardly less true that Britain existed for the beneﬁt of the colonies. London paid liberal bounties to colonial producers of ship parts, over the protests of British competitors. Virginia tobacco planters enjoyed a monopoly in the British market, snufﬁ ng out the tiny British tobacco industry. The colonists also beneﬁted from the protection of the world’s mightiest navy and a strong, seasoned army of redcoats—all without a penny of cost. But even when painted in its rosiest colors, the mercantile system burdened the colonists with annoying liabilities. Mercantilism stiﬂed economic initiative and imposed a rankling dependency on British agents and creditors. Most grievously, many Americans simply found the mercantilist system debasing. They felt used, kept in a state of perpetual economic adolescence, and

The Stamp Act


Adam Smith (1723–1790), the Scottish “Father of
 Modern Economics,” frontally attacked mercantilism in 1776:

“


 To prohibit a great people, however, from making all that they can of every part of their own produce, or from employing their stock and industry in the way that they judge most advantageous to themselves, is a manifest violation of the most sacred rights of mankind.

”


 never allowed to come of age. As Benjamin Franklin wrote in 1775, We have an old mother that peevish is grown; She snubs us like children that scarce walk alone; She forgets we’re grown up and have sense of our own. Revolution broke out, as Theodore Roosevelt later remarked, because Britain failed to recognize an emerging nation when it saw one.

The Stamp Tax Uproar
 Victory-ﬂushed Britain emerged from the Seven Years’ War holding one of the biggest empires in the world— and also, less happily, the biggest debt, some £140 million, about half of which had been incurred defending the American colonies. To justify and ser vice that debt, British ofﬁcials now moved to redeﬁ ne their relationship with their North American colonies. Prime Minister George Grenville ﬁ rst aroused the resentment of the colonists in 1763 by ordering the British navy to begin strictly enforcing the Navigation Laws. He also secured from Parliament the so-called Sugar Act of 1764, the ﬁ rst law ever passed by that body for raising tax revenue in the colonies for the crown. Among various provisions, it increased the duty on foreign sugar imported from the West Indies. After bitter protests from the colonists, the duties were lowered substantially, and the agitation died down. But resentment was kept burning by the Quartering Act of 1765. This mea sure required certain colonies to provide food and quarters for British troops.



 Then in the same year, 1765, Grenville imposed the most odious mea sure of all: a stamp tax, to raise revenues to support the new military force. The Stamp Act mandated the use of stamped paper or the afﬁ xing of stamps, certifying payment of tax. Stamps were required on bills of sale for about ﬁfty trade items as well as on certain types of commercial and legal documents, including playing cards, pamphlets, newspapers, diplomas, bills of lading, and marriage licenses. Grenville regarded all of these mea sures as reasonable and just. He was simply asking the Americans to pay a fair share of the costs for their own defense, through taxes that were already familiar in Britain. In fact, the British people for two generations had endured a stamp tax far heavier than that passed for the colonies. Yet the Americans were angrily aroused at what they regarded as Grenville’s ﬁscal aggression. The new laws did not merely pinch their pocketbooks. Far more ominously, Grenville also seemed to be striking at the local liberties they had come to assume as a matter of right. Thus some colonial assemblies deﬁantly refused to comply with the Quartering Act, or voted only a fraction of the supplies that it called for. Worst of all, Grenville’s noxious legislation seemed to jeopardize the basic rights of the colonists as Englishmen. Both the Sugar Act and the Stamp Act provided for trying offenders in the hated admiralty courts, where juries were not allowed. The burden of proof was on the defendants, who were assumed to be guilty unless they could prove themselves innocent. Trial by jury and the precept of “innocent until proved guilty” were ancient privileges that British people every where, including the American colonists, held most dear. And why was a British army needed at all in the colonies, now that the French were expelled from the continent and Pontiac’s warriors crushed? Could its real purpose be to whip rebellious colonists into line?

 The Boston Gazette declared in 1765,

“


 A colonist cannot make a button, a horseshoe, nor a hobnail, but some snooty ironmonger or respectable buttonmaker of Britain shall bawl and squall that his honor’s worship is most egregiously maltreated, injured, cheated, and robbed by the rascally American republicans.

”




Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


A
Royal Stamp The hated Stamp Act of 1765 required stamps, certifying payment of tax, on all sorts of legal and commercial documents. This stamp was to be afﬁxed to insurance policies and probated wills. 
 Many Americans, weaned on radical Whig suspicion of all authority, began to sniff the strong scent of a conspiracy to strip them of their historic liberties. They lashed back violently, and the Stamp Act became the target that drew their most ferocious ﬁ re. Angry throats raised the cry, “No taxation without representation.” There was some irony in the slogan, because the seaports and tidewater towns that were most wrathful against the Stamp Act had long denied full representation to their own backcountry pioneers. But now the aggravated colonists took the high ground of principle. The Americans made a distinction between “legislation” and “taxation.” They conceded the right of

 English statesman Edmund Burke (1729–1797) warned in 1775,

“


 Young man, there is America—which at this day serves for little more than to amuse you with stories of savage men and uncouth manners; yet shall, before you taste of death, show itself equal to the whole of that commerce which now attracts the envy of the world.

”


 Parliament to legislate about matters that affected the entire empire, including the regulation of trade. But they steadfastly denied the right of Parliament, in which no Americans were seated, to impose taxes on Americans. Only their own elected colonial legislatures, the Americans insisted, could legally tax them. Taxes levied by the distant British Parliament amounted to robbery, a piratical assault on the sacred rights of property. Grenville dismissed these American protests as hairsplitting absurdities. The power of Parliament was supreme and undivided, he asserted, and in any case the Americans were represented in Parliament. Elaborating the theory of “virtual representation,” Grenville claimed that every member of Parliament represented all British subjects, even those Americans in Boston or Charleston who had never voted for a member of Parliament. The Americans scoffed at the notion of virtual representation. And truthfully, they did not really want direct representation in Parliament, which might have seemed like a sensible compromise. If they had obtained it, any gouty member of the House of Commons could have proposed an oppressive tax bill for the colonies, and the outvoted American representatives, few in number, would have stood bereft of a principle with which to resist. Thus the principle of no taxation without representation was supremely important, and the colonists clung to it with tenacious consistency. When the British replied that the sovereign power of government could not be divided between “legislative” authority in London and “taxing” authority in the colonies, they forced the Americans to deny the authority of Parliament altogether and to begin to consider their own political independence. This chain of logic eventually led, link by link, to revolutionary consequences.

Forced Repeal of
 the Stamp Act Colonial outcries against the hated stamp tax took various forms. The most conspicuous assemblage was the Stamp Act Congress of 1765, which brought together in New York City twenty-seven distinguished delegates from nine colonies. After digniﬁed debate the members drew up a statement of their rights and grievances and beseeched the king and Parliament to repeal the repugnant legislation.

 Conﬂict over Taxes

 The Stamp Act Congress, which was largely ignored in Eng land, made little splash at the time in America. Its ripples, however, began to erode sectional suspicions, for it brought together around the same table leaders from the different and rival colonies. It was one more halting but signiﬁcant step toward intercolonial unity. More effective than the congress was the widespread adoption of nonimportation agreements against British goods. Woolen garments of homespun became fashionable, and the eating of lamb chops was discouraged so that the wool-bearing sheep would be allowed to mature. Nonimportation agreements were in fact a promising stride toward union; they spontaneously united the American people for the ﬁ rst time in common action. Mobilizing in support of nonimportation gave ordinary American men and women new opportunities to participate in colonial protests. Many people who had previously stood on the sidelines now signed petitions swearing to uphold the terms of the consumer boycotts. Groups of women assembled in public to hold spinning bees and make homespun cloth as a replacement for shunned British textiles. Such public deﬁance helped spread angry resistance throughout American colonial society. Sometimes violence accompanied colonial protests. Groups of ardent spirits, known as Sons of Liberty and Daughters of Liberty, took the law into their own hands. Crying “Liberty, Property, and No Stamps,” they enforced the nonimportation agreements against

 John Dickinson (1732–1808), a lawyer and popular essayist, advocated a middle-of-the-road response to the new British revenue acts of the 1760s that appealed to most colonists at the time:

“


 The constitutional modes of obtaining relief are those which I wish to see pursued on the present occasion. . . . We have an excellent prince, in whose good disposition we may conﬁde. . . . Let us behave like dutiful children who have received unmerited blows from a beloved parent. Let us complain to our parent; but let our complaint speak at the same time the language of afﬂiction and veneration.

”




 Protesting the Stamp Act Even common household wares in the 1760s testiﬁed to the colonists’ mounting rage against the Stamp Act. Many people in Britain sympathized with the Americans—and sought to proﬁt from their anger, as this English-made teapot demonstrates.

 violators, often with a generous coat of tar and feathers. Patriotic mobs ransacked the houses of unpopular ofﬁcials, conﬁscated their money, and hanged efﬁgies of stamp agents on liberty poles. Shaken by colonial commotion, the machinery for collecting the tax broke down. On that dismal day in 1765 when the new act was to go into effect, the stamp agents had all been forced to resign, and there was no one to sell the stamps. While ﬂags ﬂapped at half-mast, the law was openly and ﬂagrantly deﬁed—or, rather, nulliﬁed. Eng land was hard hit. America then bought about one-quarter of all British exports, and about one-half of British shipping was devoted to the American trade. Merchants, manufacturers, and shippers suffered from the colonial nonimportation agreements, and hundreds of laborers were thrown out of work. Loud demands converged on Parliament for repeal of the Stamp Act. But many of the members could not understand why 7.5 million Britons had to pay heavy taxes to protect the colonies, whereas some 2 million colonists refused to pay for only one-third of the cost of their own defense. After a stormy debate, Parliament in 1766 grudgingly repealed the Stamp Act. Grateful residents of New York erected a leaden statue to King George III. But American rejoicing was premature. Having withdrawn



Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


The Townshend Tea Tax and
 the Boston “Massacre”

Public Punishment for the Excise Man, 1774
 This popular rendering of the punishment of Commissioner of Customs John Malcomb shows him tarred and feathered and forcibly “paid” with great quantities of tea. From the Liberty Tree in the background dangles the threat of hanging, all for attempting to collect duties in Boston.

 the Stamp Act, Parliament in virtually the same breath provocatively passed the Declaratory Act, reafﬁ rming Parliament’s right “to bind” the colonies “in all cases whatsoever.” The British government thereby drew its line in the sand. It deﬁ ned the constitutional principle it would not yield: absolute and unqualiﬁed sovereignty over its North American colonies. The colonists had already drawn their own battle line by making it clear that they wanted a mea sure of sovereignty of their own and would undertake drastic action to secure it. The stage was set for a continuing confrontation. Within a few years, that statue of King George would be melted into thousands of bullets to be ﬁred at his troops.

 Control of the British ministry was now seized by the gifted but erratic Charles (“Champagne Charley”) Townshend, a man who could deliver brilliant speeches in Parliament even while drunk. Rashly promising to pluck feathers from the colonial goose with a minimum of squawking, he persuaded Parliament in 1767 to pass the Townshend Acts. The most important of these new regulations was a light import duty on glass, white lead, paper, paint, and tea. Townshend, seizing on a dubious distinction between internal and external taxes, made this tax, unlike the stamp tax, an indirect customs duty payable at American ports. But to the increasingly restless colonists, this was a phantom distinction. For them the real difﬁculty remained taxes—in any form— without representation. Flushed with their recent victory over the stamp tax, the colonists were in a rebellious mood. The impost on tea was especially irksome, for an estimated 1 million people drank the refreshing brew twice a day. The new Townshend revenues, worse yet, were to be earmarked to pay the salaries of the royal governors and judges in America. From the standpoint of efﬁcient administration by London, this was a reform long overdue. But the ultrasuspicious Americans, who had beaten the royal governors into line by controlling the purse, regarded Townshend’s tax as another attempt to enchain them. Their worst fears took on greater reality when the London government, after passing the Townshend taxes, suspended the legislature of New York in 1767 for failure to comply with the Quartering Act. Nonimportation agreements, previously potent, were quickly revived against the Townshend Acts. But they proved less effective than those devised against

 Giving new meaning to the proverbial tempest in a teapot, a group of 126 Boston women signed an agreement, or “subscription list,” that announced,

“


 We the Daughters of those Patriots who have and now do appear for the public interest . . . do with Pleasure engage with them in denying ourselves the drinking of Foreign Tea, in hopes to frustrate a Plan that tends to deprive the whole Community of . . . all that is valuable in Life.

”


The Boston Massacre




 Two Views of the Boston Massacre, 1770 and 1856 Both of these prints of the Boston Massacre were art as well as propaganda. Paul Revere’s engraving (left) began circulating within three weeks of the event in March 1770, depicting not a clash of brawlers but armed soldiers taking aim at peaceful citizens. Absent also was any evidence of the mulatto ringleader, Crispus Attucks. Revere wanted his print to convince viewers of the indisputable justice of the colonists’ cause. By the mid-1850s, when the chromolithograph (right) circulated, it served a new political purpose. In the era of the abolitionist movement, freedman Crispus Attucks held center place in the print, which portrayed his death as an American martyr in the revolutionary struggle for freedom.

 the Stamp Act. The colonists, again enjoying prosperity, took the new tax less seriously than might have been expected, largely because it was light and indirect. They found, moreover, that they could secure smuggled tea at a cheap price, and consequently smugglers increased their activities, especially in Massachusetts. British ofﬁcials, faced with a breakdown of law and order, landed two regiments of troops in Boston in 1768. Many of the soldiers were drunken and profane characters. Liberty-loving colonists, resenting the presence of the red-coated “rufﬁans,” taunted the “bloody backs” unmercifully. A clash was inevitable. On the evening of March 5, 1770, a crowd of some sixty townspeople began taunting and throwing snowballs at a squad of ten redcoats. The Bostonians were still angry over the death of an eleven-year-old boy, shot ten days earlier during a protest against a merchant who had deﬁed the colonial boycott of British goods. Acting apparently without orders, but ner vous and provoked by the jeering crowd, the troops opened ﬁ re and killed or wounded eleven

 citizens, an event that became known as—the Boston Massacre. One of the ﬁrst to die was Crispus Attucks, described by contemporaries as a powerfully built runaway “mulatto” and a leader of the mob. Both sides were in some degree to blame, and in the subsequent trial (in which future president John Adams served as defense attorney for the soldiers), only two of the redcoats were found guilty of manslaughter. The soldiers were released after being branded on the hand.

The Seditious Committees
 of Correspondence By 1770 King George III, then only thirty-two years old, was strenuously attempting to assert the power of the British monarchy. He was a good man in his private morals, but he proved to be a bad ruler. Earnest, industrious, stubborn, and lustful for power, he surrounded himself with cooperative “yes men,” notably his corpulent prime minister, Lord North.



Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


 Samuel Adams (1722–1803) A second cousin of John Adams, he contributed a potent pen and tongue to the American Revolution as a political agitator and organizer of rebellion. He was the leading spirit in hosting the Boston Tea Party. A failure in the brewing business, he was sent by Massachusetts to the First Continental Congress of 1774. He signed the Declaration of Independence and served in Congress until 1781.

 The ill-timed Townshend Acts had failed to produce revenue, though they did produce near-rebellion. Net proceeds from the tax in one year were a paltry £295, while in that same year Britain’s military costs in the colonies had mounted to £170,000. Nonimportation agreements, though feebly enforced, were pinching British manufacturers. The government of Lord North, bowing to various pressures, ﬁ nally persuaded Parliament to repeal the Townshend revenue duties. But the three-pence toll on tea, the tax the colonists found most offensive, was retained to keep alive the principle of Parliament’s right to tax the colonies. Flames of discontent in America continued to be fanned by numerous incidents, including the redoubled efforts of the British ofﬁcials to enforce the Nav igation Laws. Resistance was further kindled by a master propagandist and engineer of rebellion, Samuel

Portrait Traditionally Said to Be That of Abigail Adams
 (1744–1818) The wife of Revolutionary War leader and future president John Adams, she was a prominent Patriot in her own right. She was also among the ﬁrst Americans to see, however faintly, the implications of revolutionary ideas for changing the status of women.

 Adams of Boston, a cousin of John Adams. Unimpressive in appearance (his hands trembled), he lived and breathed only for politics. His friends had to buy him a presentable suit of clothes when he left Massachusetts on intercolonial business. Zealous, tenacious, and courageous, he was ultrasensitive to infractions of colonial rights. Cherishing a deep faith in the common people, he appealed effectively to what was called his “trained mob.” Samuel Adams’s signal contribution was to organize in Massachusetts the local committees of correspondence. After he had formed the ﬁrst one in Boston during 1772, some eighty towns in the colony speedily set up similar orga ni zations. Their chief function was to spread the spirit of resistance by exchanging letters and thus keep alive opposition to British policy. One critic referred to the committees as “the foulest, subtlest, and most venomous serpent ever issued from the egg of sedition.”

Uniting for Rebellion


 Intercolonial committees of correspondence were the next logical step. Virginia led the way in 1773 by creating such a body as a standing committee of the House of Burgesses. Within a short time, every colony had established a central committee through which it could exchange ideas and information with other colonies. These intercolonial groups were supremely signiﬁcant in stimulating and disseminating sentiment in favor of united action. They evolved directly into the ﬁ rst American congresses.

Tea Brewing in Boston
 Thus far—that is, by 1773—nothing had happened to make rebellion inevitable. Nonimportation was weakening. Increasing numbers of colonists were reluctantly paying the tea tax, because the legal tea was now cheaper than the smuggled tea, even cheaper than tea in Eng land. A new ogre entered the picture in 1773. The powerful British East India Company, overburdened with 17 million pounds of unsold tea, was facing bankruptcy. If it collapsed, the London government would lose heavily in tax revenue. The ministry therefore decided to assist the company by awarding it a complete monopoly of the American tea business. The giant corporation would now be able to sell the coveted leaves more cheaply than ever before, even with the three-pence tax tacked on. But many American tea drinkers, rather than rejoicing at the lower prices, cried foul. They saw this British move as a shabby attempt to trick the Americans, with the bait of cheaper tea, into swallowing the principle of the detested tax. For the determined Americans, principle remained far more important than price. If the British ofﬁcials insisted on the letter of the law, violence would certainly result. Fatefully, the British colonial authorities decided to enforce the law. Once more, the colonists rose up in wrath to defy it. Not a single one of the several thousand chests of tea shipped by the East India Company ever reached the hands of the consignees. In Philadelphia and New York, mass demonstrations forced the tea-bearing ships to return to Eng land with their cargo holds still full. At Annapolis, Marylanders burned both cargo and vessel, while proclaiming “Liberty and Independence or death in pursuit of it.” In Charleston, South Carolina, ofﬁcials seized the tea for nonpayment of duties after intimidated local merchants refused to accept delivery. (Ironically, the conﬁscated Charleston tea was later auctioned to raise money for the Revolutionary army.)



 Only in Boston did a British ofﬁcial stubbornly refuse to be cowed. Massachusetts governor Thomas Hutchinson had already felt the fury of the mob, when Stamp Act protesters had destroyed his home in 1765. This time he was determined not to budge. Ironically, Hutchinson agreed that the tea tax was unjust, but he believed even more strongly that the colonists had no right to ﬂout the law. Hutchinson infuriated Boston’s radicals when he ordered the tea ships not to clear Boston harbor until they had unloaded their cargoes. Sentiment against him was further inﬂamed when Hutchinson’s enemies published one of his private letters in which he declared that “an abridgement of what are called Eng lish liberties” was necessary for the preservation of law and order in the colonies—apparently conﬁ rming the darkest conspiracy theories of the American radicals. On December 16, 1773, roughly a hundred Bostonians, loosely disguised as Indians, boarded the docked ships, smashed open 342 chests of tea, and dumped their contents into the Atlantic, an action that came to be known as the Boston Tea Party. A crowd of several hundred watched approvingly from the shore as Boston harbor became a vast teapot. Donning Indian disguise provided protesters with a threatening image—and a convenient way of avoiding detection. Tea was the perfect symbol to rally around as almost every colonist, rich or poor, consumed this imported, caffeinated beverage.

 Ann Hulton (d. 1779?), a Loyalist, described colonial political divisions and her hopes and fears for her own future in a letter she sent to a friend in England in 1774:

“


 Those who are well disposed towards Government are termed Tories. They daily increase & have made some efforts to take the power out of the hands of the Patriots, but they are intimidated & overpowered by Numbers. . . . However I don’t despair of seeing Peace & tranquility in America, tho’ they talk very high & furious at present. They are all preparing their Arms & Ammunition & say if any of the Leaders are seized, they will make reprisals on the friends of Government.

”




Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


The Boston Tea Party,
December 16, 1773
 Crying “Boston harbor a teapot this night,” Sons of Liberty disguised as Indians hurled chests of tea into the sea to protest the tax on tea and to make sure that its cheap price did not prove an “invincible temptation” to the people.

 Reactions varied. All up and down the eastern seaboard, sympathetic colonists applauded. Referring to tea as “a badge of slavery,” they burned the hated leaves in solidarity with Boston. But conser vatives complained that the destruction of private property violated the law and threatened anarchy and the breakdown of civil decorum. Hutchinson, chastened and disgusted with the colonies, retreated to Britain, never to return. The British authorities, meanwhile, saw little alternative to whipping the upstart colonists into shape. The granting of some mea sure of home rule to the Americans might at this stage still have prevented rebellion, but few British politicians were willing to swallow their pride and take the high road. The perilous path they chose instead led only to reprisals, bitterness, and escalating conﬂ ict.

Parliament Passes the
“Intolerable Acts”
 An irate Parliament responded speedily to the Boston Tea Party with mea sures that brewed a revolution. By huge majorities in 1774, it passed a series of acts designed to chastise Boston in particular, Massachusetts in general. They were branded in America as “the massacre of American Liberty.” Most drastic of all was the Boston Port Act. It closed the tea-stained harbor until damages were paid and order could be ensured. By other “Intolerable Acts”—as they were called in America—many of the chartered rights of colonial Massachusetts were swept away. Re-

 strictions were likewise placed on the precious town meetings. Contrary to previous practice, enforcing ofﬁcials who killed colonists in the line of duty could now be sent to Britain for trial. There, suspicious Americans assumed, they would be likely to get off scotfree. Particularly intolerable to Bostonians was a new Quartering Act, which gave local authorities the power to lodge British soldiers anywhere, even in private homes. By a fateful coincidence, the “Intolerable Acts” were accompanied in 1774 by the Quebec Act. Passed at the same time, it was erroneously regarded in Eng lishspeaking America as part of the British reaction to the turbulence in Boston. Actually, the Quebec Act was a good law in bad company. For many years the British government had debated how it should administer the sixty thousand or so conquered French subjects in Canada, and it had ﬁ nally framed this farsighted and statesmanlike mea sure. The French were guaranteed their Catholic religion. They were also permitted to retain many of their old customs and institutions, which did not include a representative assembly or trial by jury in civil cases. In addition, the old boundaries of the province of Québec were now extended southward all the way to the Ohio River. The Quebec Act, from the viewpoint of the French Canadians, was a shrewd and conciliatory mea sure. If Britain had only shown as much foresight in dealing with its Eng lish-speaking colonies, it might not have lost them. But from the viewpoint of the American colonists as a whole, the Quebec Act was especially noxious. All



The Eve of Rebellion


100°W


90°W


80°W


70°W


60°W


60°N


50°W


Hu d s o n
Bay


N


°N




HUDSON’S BAY COMPANY NOVA SCOTIA

 Québec

ME. (MASS.)

 Montréal M iss

N.Y.


 ip iss

 pi

M


PENN. N.J.

R.


 ouri iss R.

 VA.

R


.


 Map 7.1 Québec Before and After 1774 Young Alexander Hamilton voiced the fears of many colonists when he warned that the Quebec Act of 1774 would introduce “priestly tyranny” into Canada, making that country another Spain or Portugal. “Does not your blood run cold,” he asked, “to think that an English Parliament should pass an act for the establishment of arbitrary power and Popery in such a country?”

 LOUISIANA

N.H.
 MASS.

 io Oh

R.I.
 CONN.

°N




ATLANTIC OCEAN

DEL. MD.





400 Km.


400 Mi.


 Québec before 1774 N.C.

 Québec after 1774, as envisioned by the Quebec Act

S.C.
GA. WEST FLORIDA

Proclamation Line of 1763
30°N


 Britain’s Thirteen Colonies Indian Reserve

Gu l f o f M e x i c o


EAST FLORIDA

 Other British territory Spanish territory

Interactive Map


 the other “Intolerable Acts” slapped directly at Massachusetts, but this one had a much wider range. By sustaining unrepresentative assemblies and denials of jury trials, it seemed to set a dangerous precedent in America. It alarmed land speculators, who were distressed to see the huge trans-Allegheny area snatched from their grasp (see Map 7.1). It aroused anti-Catholics, who were shocked by the extension of Roman Catholic jurisdiction southward into a huge region that had once been earmarked for Protestantism—a region about as large as the thirteen original colonies. One angry Protestant cried that there ought to be a “jubilee in hell” over this enormous gain for “Popery.”

Bloodshed
 American dissenters responded sympathetically to the plight of Massachusetts. It had put itself in the wrong by the violent destruction of the tea cargoes; now Britain had put itself in the wrong by brutal punishment

 that seemed far too cruel for the crime. Flags were ﬂown at half-mast throughout the colonies on the day that the Boston Port Act went into effect, and sister colonies rallied to send food to the stricken city. Rice was shipped even from faraway South Carolina. Most memorable of the responses to the “Intolerable Acts” was the summoning of the First Continental Congress in 1774. It was to meet in Philadelphia to consider ways of redressing colonial grievances. Twelve of the thirteen colonies, with Georgia alone missing, sent ﬁ fty-ﬁve well-respected men, among them Samuel Adams, John Adams, George Washington, and Patrick Henry. Intercolonial frictions were partially melted away by social activity after working hours; in ﬁ fty-four days George Washington dined at his own lodgings only nine times. The First Continental Congress deliberated for seven weeks, from September 5 to October 26, 1774. It was not a legislative but a consultative body—a convention rather than a congress. John Adams played a stellar role. Eloquently swaying his colleagues to a



Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


A
View of the Town of Concord, ca. 1775 Redcoats here drill on the Concord Green, near where colonial militiamen would soon repel their advance on stores of rebel gunpowder. 
 revolutionary course, he helped defeat by the narrowest of margins a proposal by the moderates for a species of American home rule under British direction. After prolonged argument the Congress drew up several digniﬁed papers. These included a ringing Declaration of Rights, as well as solemn appeals to other British American colonies, to the king, and to the British people. The most signiﬁcant action of the Congress was the creation of The Association. Unlike previous nonimportation agreements, The Association called for a complete boycott of British goods: nonimportation, nonexportation, and nonconsumption. Yet it is important to note that the delegates were not yet calling for independence. They sought merely to repeal the offensive legislation and return to the happy days before parliamentary taxation. If colonial grievances were redressed, well and good; if not, the Congress was to meet again in May 1775. Resistance had not yet ripened into open rebellion. But the fatal drift toward war continued. Parliament rejected the Congress’s petitions. In America chickens squawked and tar kettles bubbled as violators of The Association were tarred and feathered. Muskets

 were gathered, men began to drill openly, and a clash seemed imminent. In April 1775 the British commander in Boston sent a detachment of troops to nearby Lexington and Concord. They were to seize stores of colonial gunpowder and also to bag the “rebel” ringleaders, Samuel Adams and John Hancock. At Lexington the colonial “Minute Men” refused to disperse rapidly enough, and shots were ﬁ red that killed eight Americans and wounded several more. The affair was more the “Lexington Massacre” than a battle. The redcoats pushed on to Concord, whence they were forced to retreat by the rough and ready Americans, whom Emerson immortalized: By the rude bridge that arched the ﬂood, Their ﬂag to April’s breeze unfurled, Here once the embattled farmers stood, And ﬁred the shot heard round the world.* The bewildered British, ﬁghting off murderous ﬁ re from militiamen crouched behind thick stone walls, ﬁ-

*Ralph Waldo Emerson, “Concord Hymn.”


 Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

The Military Balance Sheet


 nally regained the sanctuary of Boston. Licking their wounds, they could count about three hundred casualties, including some seventy killed. Britain now had a war on its hands.

Imperial Strength
 and Weakness Aroused Americans had brashly rebelled against a mighty empire (see “Thinking Globally: Imperial Rivalry and Colonial Revolt,” pp. 141–142). The population odds were about three to one against the rebels—some 7.5 million Britons to 2.5 million colonists. The odds in monetary wealth and naval power overwhelmingly favored the mother country. Britain then boasted a professional army of some ﬁ fty thousand men, as compared with the numerous but wretchedly trained American militia. George III, in addition, had the treasury to hire foreign soldiers, and some thirty thousand Germans—so-called Hessians— were ultimately employed. The British enrolled about ﬁ fty thousand American Loyalists and enlisted the services of many Indians, who though unreliable fairweather ﬁghters, inﬂamed long stretches of the frontier. One British ofﬁcer boasted that the war would offer no problems that could not be solved by an “experienced sheep herder.” The great conservative political theorist and champion of the American cause Edmund Burke made a stirring speech in Britain’s House of Commons in 1775, pleading in vain for reconciliation with the colonies:

“


 As long as you have the wisdom to keep the sovereign authority of this country as the sanctuary of liberty . . . they will turn their faces towards you. . . . Slavery they can have anywhere; freedom they can have from none but you. This is the commodity of price, of which you have the monopoly. This is the true Act of Navigation, which binds to you the commerce of the colonies, and through them secures to you the wealth of the world. Deny them this participation of freedom, and you break that sole bond which originally made, and must still preserve, the unity of the empire.

”




 Yet Britain was weaker than it seemed at ﬁ rst glance. Oppressed Ireland was a smoking volcano, and British troops had to be detached to watch it. France, bitter from its recent defeat, was awaiting an opportunity to stab Britain in the back. The London government was confused and inept. There was no William Pitt, “Organizer of Victory,” only the stubborn George III and his pliant Tory prime minister, Lord North. Many earnest and God-fearing Britons had no desire whatever to kill their American cousins. William Pitt withdrew a son from the army rather than see him thrust his sword into fellow Anglo-Saxons struggling for liberty. The Eng lish Whig factions, opposed to Lord North’s Tory wing, openly cheered American victories—at least at the outset. Aside from trying to embarrass the Tories politically, many Whigs believed that the battle for British freedom was being fought in America. If George III triumphed, his rule at home might become tyrannical. This outspoken sympathy in Britain, though plainly a minority voice, greatly encouraged the Americans. If they continued their resistance long enough, the Whigs might come into power and deal generously with them. Britain’s army in America had to operate under endless difﬁculties. The generals were second-rate; the soldiers, though on the whole capable, were brutally treated. There was one extreme case of eight hundred lashes on the bare back for striking an ofﬁcer. Provisions were often scarce, rancid, and wormy. On one occasion a supply of biscuits, captured some ﬁ fteen years earlier from the French, was softened by dropping cannonballs on them. Other handicaps loomed. The redcoats had to conquer the Americans; restoring the pre-1763 status quo would be a victory for the colonists. Britain was operating some 3,000 miles from its home base, and distance added greatly to the delays and uncertainties arising from storms and other mishaps. Military orders were issued in London that, when received months later, would not ﬁt the changing situation. America’s geographical expanse was enormous: roughly 1,000 by 600 miles. The united colonies had no urban nerve center, like France’s Paris, whose capture would cripple the country as a whole. British armies took every city of any size, yet like a boxer punching a feather pillow, they made little more than a dent in the entire country. The Americans wisely traded space for time. Benjamin Franklin calculated that during the prolonged campaign in which the redcoats captured Bunker Hill and killed some 150 Patriots, about 60,000 American babies were born.

THINKING GLOBALLY

Imperial Rivalry and Colonial Revolt


I


 n 1765 tax revolts exploded almost simultaneously in both Britain’s and Spain’s New World empires. In Boston the hated Stamp Act sparked riots and inspired a campaign to boycott British goods. At virtually the same moment in Quito (in present-day Ecuador), a two-mile-high Spanish colonial city nearly twice the size of Boston, surging crowds ransacked the local tax collector’s ofﬁce. Among other demands, they insisted that “pure” Spaniards leave Quito unless they had married into the native Creole (New World– born white) or indigenous Indian communities. Spanish ofﬁcials restored order by force of arms, but antitax agitation continued to smolder every where in Spanish America. “There is no American,” a Quito lawyer remarked, “who does not reject any novelty whatsoever in the management of taxation”—a sentiment that resonated as strongly in Philadelphia as in Mexico City. Things soon got worse. Madrid’s New World imperial authority was shaken to the core in 1781 when another tax revolt erupted in New Granada (present-day Colombia). By that time, the British colonials’ War of Independence in North America was in its ﬁfth year. Intensifying imperial rivalry fueled events on both the American continents. Until the mid-seventeenth century, the three great Old World powers—England, France, and

 Spain—had largely conﬁned their competition to struggles over boundaries and religious afﬁliation on the European continent. But after the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648 brought a truce to the wars of religion that had racked Europe for decades (the Thirty Years’ War), great-power competition began to shift overseas. The faraway New World imperial outposts of Britain, Spain, and France now became pawns in a global struggle for mastery in Europe. The Seven Years’ War (1756–1763) ushered in a still more ferocious cycle of imperial conﬂict. Britain succeeded in expelling France from North America, but victory brought the burdens of managing vast new territories as well as the prospect of fresh confrontations with Native Americans threatened by westward expansion. Spain, France’s erstwhile ally, grew increasingly wary of the newly invigorated and ambitious British Empire, which threatened Spanish interests at sea and along the sketchy borderlands that separated the two powers’ imperial domains. As the risks and costs of imperial competition soared, London and Madrid adopted the same strategy: pressure the colonies to pay their share. New taxes and customs duties followed, along with more energetic efforts to collect them. To imperial ofﬁcials like Britain’s Prime Minister George Grenville or Madrid’s “visitor general” to New Spain, José Gálvez, such

 Tupac Amaru II A Peruvian national hero, Tupac Amaru II is memorialized to this day with his portrait on the nation’s currency.



 Couple with Child by Miguel Cabera This eighteenthcentury portrait of a Mexican family illustrates the common intermarriage of Europeans and Indians in the Spanish New World. The ethnic complexity of Spanish America kept colonists there from uniting against imperial authorities as successfully as their northern neighbors.

 reforms seemed not only reasonable but in tune with Enlightenment ideas about efﬁcient administration. To colonial subjects these new policies were an anathema, a ﬂagrant offense to their fundamental rights as colonial subjects. But why did revolts against these new imperial policies kindle a full-ﬂedged war for independence in the British colonies but not in Spanish America—at least not until Na-

 poleon’s invasion of Spain in 1808 hurled the Spanish Empire into tumult? The role of rich and powerful allies provides part of the answer. The North American rebels could count on Britain’s French and Spanish enemies to tender ﬁnancial as well as military support. Spanish American anticolonial rebels had no such allies in London or Paris, which saw little prospect of unraveling the Spanish Empire and were already fully engaged on opposite sides of the American War of Independence. The demographic composition of the two empires furnishes another part of the answer. Spanish America was badly riven by sharp ethnic and racial divisions. The Spanish court had long encouraged the relatively few Spaniards who settled in the New World to intermarry with the local inhabitants. By the eighteenth century, the Spanish colonies had become a complex, tension-ridden mosaic of European, Creole, mestizo, and Indian peoples and cultures. When in 1780 the self-proclaimed Incan royal descendant Tupac Amaru II rebelled against Spanish rule, he at ﬁrst attracted Creoles, but they bolted as the movement radicalized, and his rebellion was soon cruelly crushed. To be sure, the British North American colonists had their ethnic differences, too, but many fewer. They had nurtured a culture of exclusion, rejecting intermarriage with Indians and blacks and banishing Indians to the wilderness. And they faced no Indian threat on the scale of Tupac Amaru II’s uprising. Inherited political traditions also played different roles. British settlers enjoyed long-standing institutions of political representation. They had brought with them from the mother country devotion to individual rights and the privilege of legal assembly that, when revolution came, gave their cause the kind of legitimacy that comes from timehonored habits. It was precisely the violation of those rights and privileges that “taxation without representation” seemed to threaten. Spanish colonists had representative institutions, too, but in Spain’s much more autocratic imperial scheme, local assemblies lacked the authority, autonomy, and legitimacy they had come to enjoy in the British domains. North American colonists asserted their right to self-government on the basis of their historic rights as British subjects, a claim that was much more difﬁcult to make in the absolutist monarchy of the Spanish Empire.





Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


American Pluses and Minuses
 The revolutionaries were blessed with outstanding leadership. George Washington was a giant among men; Benjamin Franklin was a master among diplomats. Open foreign aid, theoretically possible from the start, eventually came from France. Numerous European ofﬁcers, many of them unemployed and impoverished, volunteered their swords for pay. In a class by himself was a wealthy young French nobleman, the Marquis de Lafayette. Fleeing from boredom, loving glory and ultimately liberty, the “French gamecock” was made a major general in the colonial army at age nineteen. His commission was largely a recognition of his family inﬂuence and political connections, but the ser vices of this teenage general in securing further aid from France were invaluable. Other conditions aided the Americans. They were ﬁghting defensively, with the odds, all things considered, favoring the defender. In agriculture, the colonies were mainly self-sustaining, like a kind of Robinson Crusoe’s island. The Americans also enjoyed the moral advantage that came from belief in a just cause. The historical odds were not impossible. Other peoples had triumphed in the face of greater obstacles: Greeks against Persians, Swiss against Austrians, Dutch against Spaniards. Yet the American rebels were badly orga nized for war. From the earliest days, they had been almost fatally lacking in unity, and the new nation lurched forward uncertainly like an uncoordinated centipede. Even the Continental Congress, which directed the conﬂ ict, was hardly more than a debating society, and it grew feebler as the struggle dragged on. “Their Congress now is quite disjoint’d,” gibed an Eng lish satirist, “Since Gibbits (gallows) [are] for them appointed.” The disorga nized colonists fought almost the entire war before adopting a written constitution—the Articles of Confederation—in 1781.

 General Washington’s (1732–1799) disgust with his countrymen is reﬂected in a diary entry for 1776:

“


 Chimney corner patriots abound; venality, corruption, prostitution of ofﬁce for selﬁsh ends, abuse of trust, perversion of funds from a national to a private use, and speculations upon the necessities of the times pervade all interests.

”


Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette (1757–1834),
 by Joseph Boze, 1790 This youthful French ofﬁcer gave to America not only military service but some $200,000 of his private funds. He returned to France after the American Revolution to play a conspicuous role in the French Revolution.

 Jealousy every where raised its hideous head. Individual states, proudly regarding themselves as sovereign, resented the attempts of Congress to exercise its ﬂ imsy powers. Sectional jealousy boiled up over the appointment of military leaders; some distrustful New Eng landers almost preferred British ofﬁcers to Americans from other sections. Economic difﬁculties were nearly insuperable. Metallic money had already been heavily drained away. A cautious Continental Congress, unwilling to raise anew the explosive issue of taxation, was forced to print “Continental” paper money in great amounts. As this currency poured from the presses, it depreciated until the expression “not worth a Continental” became current. One barber contemptuously papered his shop with the near-worthless dollars. The confusion proliferated when the individual states were compelled to issue depreciated paper money of their own.

The Rebel Army




 Inﬂation of the currency inevitably skyrocketed prices. Families of the soldiers at the ﬁghting front were hard hit, and hundreds of anxious husbands and fathers deserted. Debtors easily acquired handfuls of the quasi-worthless money and gleefully paid their debts “without mercy”—sometimes with the bayonets of the authorities to back them up.

A
Thin Line of Heroes  Basic military supplies in the colonies were dangerously scanty. While many families and towns did own ﬁ rearms—widespread militia ser vice meant men needed weapons for training—the colonists had long relied heavily on Britain for troops, armaments, and military subsidies during expensive wars against Indians, France, and Spain. The rebels were caught in an unavoidable trap: at the very moment that the supply of British funds and war materiel evaporated, the cost of home defense mounted. Sufﬁcient stores of gunpowder, cannon, and other armaments (let alone ships to transport them) could not be found. Among the reasons for the eventual alliance with France was the need for a reliable source of essential military supplies. Other shortages bedeviled the rebels. At Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, shivering American soldiers went without bread for three successive days in the cruel winter of 1777–1778. In one southern campaign, some men fainted for lack of food. Manufactured goods also were generally in short supply in agricultural America, and clothing and shoes were appallingly scarce. The path of the Patriot ﬁghting men was often marked by bloody snow. At frigid Valley Forge, during one anxious period, twenty-eight hundred men were barefooted or nearly naked. Woolens were desperately needed against the wintry blasts, and in general the only real uniform of the colonial army was uniform raggedness. During a grand parade at Valley Forge, some of the ofﬁcers appeared wrapped in woolen bedcovers. One Rhode Island unit was known as the “Ragged, Lousy, Naked Regiment.” American militiamen were numerous but also highly unreliable. Able-bodied American males—perhaps several hundred thousand of them—had received rudimentary training, and many of these recruits served for short terms in the rebel armies. But poorly trained plowboys could not stand up in the open ﬁeld against professional British troops advancing with bare bayonets. Many of these undisciplined warriors would, in the words of Washington, “ﬂy from their own shadows.”

 The Flutist, by Brazilla Lew This portrait is believed to be that of an African American ﬁfer in the Revolutionary War. Lew was a veteran of the Seven Years’ War who had marched to Ticonderoga and served in the army a full seven years as frontline soldier, ﬁfer, and drummer. In 1775, at the age of thirtytwo, he fought at Bunker Hill as an enlistee in the 27th Massachusetts Regiment. A resident of Chelmsford, Massachusetts, he was said to have taught all twelve of his children to play musical instruments.

 A few thousand regulars—perhaps seven or eight thousand at the war’s end—were ﬁ nally whipped into shape by stern drillmasters. Notable among them was an orga ni zational genius, the salty German Baron von Steuben. He spoke no Eng lish when he reached America, but he soon taught his men that bayonets were not for broiling beefsteaks over open ﬁ res. As they gained experience, these soldiers of the Continental line more than held their own against crack British troops. Blacks also fought and died for the American cause. Although many states initially barred them from militia ser vice, by war’s end more than ﬁve thousand blacks



Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution, 1763–1775


 Enslaved blacks hoped that the Revolutionary crisis would make it possible for them to secure their own liberty. On the eve of the war in South Carolina, merchant Josiah Smith, Jr., noted such a rumor among the slaves:

“


 [Freedom] is their common Talk throughout the Province, and has occasioned impertinent behavior in many of them, insomuch that our Provincial Congress now sitting hath voted the immediate raising of Two Thousand Men Horse and food, to keep those mistaken creatures in awe.

”


 Despite such repressive measures, slave uprisings continued to plague the southern colonies through 1775 and 1776.

 had enlisted in the American armed forces. The largest contingents came from the northern states with substantial numbers of free blacks. Blacks fought at Trenton, Brandywine, Saratoga, and other important battles. Some, including Prince Whipple—later immortalized in Emanuel Leutze’s famous painting “Washington Crossing the Delaware” (see p. 158)—became military heroes. Others served as cooks, guides, spies, drivers, and road builders. African Americans also served on the British side. In November 1775 Lord Dunmore, royal governor of Virginia, issued a proclamation promising freedom for

 any enslaved black in Virginia who joined the British army. News of Dunmore’s decree traveled swiftly. Virginia and Maryland tightened slave patrols, but within one month, three hundred slaves had joined what came to be called “Lord Dunmore’s Ethiopian Regiment.” In time thousands of blacks ﬂed plantations for British promises of emancipation. When one of James Madison’s slaves was caught trying to escape to the British lines, Madison refused to punish him for “coveting that liberty” that white Americans proclaimed the “right & worthy pursuit of every human being.” At war’s end the British kept their word, to some at least, and evacuated as many as fourteen thousand “Black Loyalists” to Nova Scotia, Jamaica, and Eng land. Morale in the Revolutionary army was badly undermined by American proﬁteers. Putting proﬁts before patriotism, they sold to the British because the invader could pay in gold. Speculators forced prices sky-high, and some Bostonians made proﬁts of 50 to 200 percent on army garb while the American army was freezing at Valley Forge. Washington never had as many as twenty thousand effective troops in one place at one time, despite bounties of land and other inducements. Yet if the rebels had thrown themselves into the struggle with zeal, they could easily have raised many times that number. The brutal truth is that only a select minority of the American colonists attached themselves to the cause of independence with a spirit of selﬂess devotion. These were the dedicated souls who bore the burden of battle and the risks of defeat. Seldom have so few done so much for so many.

 CHRONOLOGY

 First Navigation Laws to control colonial commerce



 Board of Trade assumes governance of colonies





 British troops occupy Boston



Boston Massacre
 All Townshend Acts except tea tax repealed

 Seven Years’ War (French and Indian War) ends



 Committees of correspondence formed



Sugar Act






Quartering Act
Stamp Act
Stamp Act Congress


 British East India Company granted tea monopoly Governor Hutchinson’s actions provoke Boston Tea Party



“Intolerable Acts”
Quebec Act
First Continental Congress
 The Association boycotts British goods



Battles of Lexington and Concord




Declaratory Act




Townshend Acts
 New York legislature suspended by Parliament

To Learn More


KEY TERMS
republicanism (126) radical Whigs (127) mercantilism (127) Sugar Act (129) Quartering Act (129) stamp tax (129) admiralty courts (129) Stamp Act Congress (130) nonimportation agreements (131) Sons of Liberty (131) Daughters of Liberty (131) Declaratory Act (132) 


PEOPLE TO KNOW
Townshend Acts (132) Boston Massacre (133) committees of correspondence (134) Boston Tea Party (135) “Intolerable Acts” (136) Quebec Act (136) First Continental Congress (137) The Association (138) Lexington and Concord, Battles of (138) Valley Forge (140) 
John Hancock
George Grenville
Charles (“Champagne
Charley”) Townshend
Crispus Attucks
George III


Lord North
Samuel Adams
Thomas Hutchinson
Marquis de Lafayette
Baron von Steuben
Lord Dunmore


To Learn More
R. B.
Bernstein, Thomas Jefferson (2003) Timothy H. Breen, The Marketplace of Revolution: How
Consumer Politics Shaped American Independence (2004)
 David Hackett Fischer, Paul Revere’s Ride (1994) Sylvia R. Frey, Water from the Rock: Black Resistance in a Revolutionary Age (1991) Pauline Maier, From Resistance to Revolution: Colonial Radicals and the Development of American Opposition to Britain, 1765–1776 (1972) David McCullough, John Adams (2001) Robert Middlekauff, The Glorious Cause: The American Revolution, 1763–1789 (1982) Edmund S. Morgan and Helen M. Morgan, The Stamp Act Crisis (1953)

Joseph C. Morton, The American Revolution (2003)
 Ray Raphael, A People’s History of the American Revolution (2001) Richard Ryerson, The Revolution Is Now Begun: The Radical Committees of Philadelphia, 1765–1776 (1978) Walter Stahr, John Jay: Founding Father (2005) Alfred F. Young, The Shoemaker and the Tea Party (1999)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

America Secedes
 from the Empire




1775–1783
 These are the times that try men’s souls. The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the ser vice of their country; but he that stands it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and woman. THOMAS PAINE, DECEMBER 1776

B


 loodshed at Lexington and Concord in April of 1775 was a clarion call to arms. About twenty thousand musket-bearing “Minute Men” swarmed around Boston, there to coop up the outnumbered British. The Second Continental Congress met in Philadelphia the next month, on May 10, 1775, and this time the full slate of thirteen colonies was represented. The conser vative element in Congress was still strong, despite the shooting in Massachusetts. There was still no welldeﬁ ned sentiment for independence—merely a desire to continue ﬁghting in the hope that the king and Parliament would consent to a redress of grievances. Congress hopefully drafted new appeals to the British people and king—appeals that were spurned. Anticipating a possible rebuff, the delegates also adopted mea sures to raise money and to create an army and a navy. The British and the Americans now teetered on the brink of all-out warfare.

Congress Drafts
George Washington
 Perhaps the most important single action of the Congress was to select George Washington, one of its members already in an ofﬁcer’s uniform, to head the hastily improvised army besieging Boston. This choice was made with considerable misgivings. The tall, powerfully built, digniﬁed Virginia planter, then forty-three, had never risen above the rank of a colonel in the militia. His largest command had numbered only twelve hundred men, and that had been some twenty years earlier. Falling short of true military genius, Washington would actually lose more pitched battles than he won. But the distinguished Virginian was gifted with outstanding powers of leadership and immense strength of character. He radiated patience, courage, self-discipline,

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Early Battles




 and a sense of justice. He was a great moral force rather than a great military mind—a symbol and a rallying point. People instinctively trusted him; they sensed that when he put himself at the head of a cause, he was prepared, if necessary, to go down with the ship. He insisted on serving without pay, though he kept a careful expense account amounting to more than $100,000. Later he sternly reprimanded his steward at Mount Vernon for providing the enemy, under duress, with supplies. He would have preferred instead to see the enemy put the torch to his mansion. The Continental Congress, though dimly perceiving Washington’s qualities of leadership, chose more wisely than it knew. His selection, in truth, was largely political. Americans in other sections, already jealous, were beginning to distrust the large New Eng land army being collected around Boston. Prudence suggested a commander from Virginia, the largest and most populous of the colonies. As a man of wealth, both by inheritance and by marriage, Washington could not be accused of being a fortune-seeker. As an aristocrat, he could be counted on by his peers to check “the excesses of the masses.”

Bunker Hill and
Hessian Hirelings
 The clash of arms continued on a strangely contradictory basis. On the one hand, the Americans were emphatically afﬁ rming their loyalty to the king and earnestly voicing their desire to patch up difﬁculties. On the other hand, they were raising armies and shooting down His Majesty’s soldiers. This curious war of inconsistency was fought for fourteen long months— from April 1775 to July 1776—before the fateful plunge into independence was taken. Gradually the tempo of warfare increased. In May 1775 a tiny American force under Ethan Allen and Benedict Arnold surprised and captured the British garrisons at Ticonderoga and Crown Point, on the scenic lakes of upper New York. A priceless store of gunpowder and artillery for the siege of Boston was thus secured. In June 1775 the colonists seized a hill, now known as Bunker Hill (actually Breed’s Hill), from which they menaced the enemy in Boston. The British, instead of cutting off the retreat of their foes by ﬂanking them, blundered bloodily when they launched a frontal attack with three thousand men. Sharpshooting Americans, numbering ﬁ fteen hundred and strongly entrenched, mowed down the advancing redcoats with frightful

 Washington at Verplanck’s Point, New York, 1782, Reviewing the French Troops After the Victory at Yorktown, by John Trumbull, 1790 This noted American artist accentuated Washington’s already imposing height (six feet two inches) by showing him towering over his horse. Washington so appreciated this portrait of himself that he hung it in the dining room of his home at Mount Vernon, Virginia.

 slaughter. But the colonists’ scanty store of gunpowder ﬁnally gave out, and they were forced to abandon the hill in disorder. With two more such victories, remarked the French foreign minister, the British would have no army left in America. Even at this late date, in July 1775, the Continental Congress adopted the Olive Branch Petition, professing American loyalty to the crown and begging the king to prevent further hostilities. But following Bunker Hill, King George III slammed the door on all hope of reconciliation. In August 1775 he formally proclaimed the colonies in rebellion; the skirmishes were now outand-out treason, a hanging crime. The next month he widened the chasm when he sealed arrangements for



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

Battle of Bunker Hill,
June 17, 1775 This British
 engraving conveys the vulnerability of the British regulars to attacks by the American militiamen. Although a defeat for the colonists, the battle quickly proved a moral victory for the Patriots. Outnumbered and outgunned, they held their own against the British and suffered many fewer casualties.

 hiring thousands of German troops to help crush his rebellious subjects. Six German princes involved in the transaction needed the money (one reputedly had seventy-four children); George III needed the men. Because most of these soldiers-for-hire came from the German principality of Hesse, the Americans called all the European mercenaries Hessians. News of the Hessian deal shocked the colonists. The quarrel, they felt, was within the family. Why bring in outside mercenaries, especially foreigners who had an exaggerated reputation for butchery? Hessian hirelings proved to be good soldiers in a mechanical sense, but many of them were more interested in booty than in duty. For good reason they were dubbed “Hessian ﬂ ies.” Seduced by American promises of land, hundreds of them ﬁ nally deserted and remained in America to become respected citizens.

The Abortive Conquest
 of Canada The unsheathed sword continued to take its toll. In October 1775, on the eve of a cruel winter, the British burned Falmouth (Portland), Maine. In that same autumn, the rebels daringly undertook a two-pronged invasion of Canada. American leaders believed, erroneously, that the conquered French were explosively

 restive under the British yoke. A successful assault on Canada would add a fourteenth colony, while depriving Britain of a valuable base for striking at the colonies in revolt. But this large-scale attack, involving some two thousand American troops, contradicted the claim of the colonists that they were merely ﬁghting defensively for a redress of grievances. Invasion northward was undisguised offensive warfare. This bold stroke for Canada narrowly missed success (see Map 8.1). One invading column under the Irish-born General Richard Montgomery, formerly of the British army, pushed up the Lake Champlain route and captured Montréal. He was joined at Québec by the bedraggled army of General Benedict Arnold, whose men had been reduced to eating dogs and shoe leather during their grueling march through the Maine woods. An assault on Québec, launched on the last day of 1775, was beaten off. The able Montgomery was killed; the dashing Arnold was wounded in one leg. Scattered remnants under his command retreated up the St. Lawrence River, reversing the way Montgomery had come. French Canadian leaders, who had been generously treated by the British in the Quebec Act of 1774, showed no real desire to welcome the plundering anti-Catholic invaders. Bitter ﬁghting persisted in the colonies, though most Americans continued to disclaim a desire for independence. In January 1776 the British set ﬁ re to the



Toward Independence


200 Km.
200 Mi.


 British victory

St


.L


.L


 e

 r ge



Fort Oswego


Bu
Mo


L.
Champlain  Arnold’s naval battle Oct. 11, 1776



N.H.


Manchester


Albany


MASS.
Lexington April 19, 1775 
Hudson R.


 PENNSYLVANIA

Falmouth


Saratoga
 Burgoyne surrenders Oct. 17, 1777.

Concord
April 19, 1775


NEW YORK

 CONN.

Fort Washington Nov. 16, 1776
Washington Dec. 1776
Cornwallis Dec. 1776
Princeton Jan. 3, 1777
Trenton Dec. 26, 1776
Germantown Oct. 4, 1777


Newburyport
Bunker Hill
June 17, 1775


Boston
 siege 1775–1776

R.I.


 Washington’s retreat 1776 Long Island Aug. 27, 1776

40°N


Valley Forge
Brandywine Sept. 11, 1777


Monmouth Court House
June 28, 1778


Philadelphia
Wilmington


 MD.

 ph

 ia

)


N.J.
 l ad

 el

 VIRGINIA

AT L A N T I C O C E A N N

 we





 (to

Phi


 DEL.

70°W


Ho


Map 8.1 Revolution in
 the North, 1775–1776 Benedict Arnold’s troops were described as “pretty young men” when they sailed from Massachusetts. They were considerably less pretty on their arrival in Québec, after eight weeks of struggling through wet and frigid forests, often without food. “No one can imagine,” one of them wrote, “the sweetness of a roasted shot-pouch [ammunition bag] to the famished appetite.”

MAINE (MASS.)

.
 eR

Oriskany
Aug. 6, 1777


Fort Stanwix
Aug. 23, 1777




 Montréal

Crown Point
Fort Ticonderoga
L.
George 

Lake Ontario




R.


 aw

 y1

 nn

St


 American victory

 nc

 er

Co


Fort


 re

 g

 om



 British forces

 nt

 e



BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 yn

 ld

 American forces

 go

 no

 r



 Québec Dec. 1776



Ar






 icut



 ect



Chesapeake
Bay


Interactive Map


 Virginia town of Norfolk. In March they were ﬁ nally forced to evacuate Boston, taking with them the leading friends of the king. (Evacuation Day is still celebrated annually in Boston.) In the South the rebellious colonists won two victories in 1776—one in February against some ﬁ fteen hundred Loyalists at Moore’s Creek Bridge in North Carolina, and the other in June against an invading British ﬂeet at Charleston harbor.

Thomas Paine Preaches
Common Sense
 Why did Americans continue to deny any intention of independence? Loyalty to the empire was deeply ingrained; many Americans continued to consider themselves part of a transatlantic community in which the



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

 mother country of Britain played a leading role; colonial unity was poor; and open rebellion was dangerous, especially against a formidable Britain. Irish rebels of that day were customarily hanged, drawn, and quartered. American rebels might have fared no better. As late as January 1776—ﬁve months before independence was declared—the king’s health was being toasted by the ofﬁcers of Washington’s mess near Boston. “God save the king” had not yet been replaced by “God save the Congress.” Gradually the Americans were shocked into recognizing the necessity of separating from the crown. Their eyes were jolted open by harsh British acts like the burning of Falmouth and Norfolk, and especially by the hiring of the Hessians. Then in 1776 came the publication of Common Sense, one of the most inﬂuential pamphlets ever written. Its author was the radical Thomas Paine, once an impoverished corset-maker’s apprentice, who had come over from Britain a year earlier. He began his incendiary tract with a treatise on the nature of government and eloquently anticipated Thomas Jefferson’s declaration that the only lawful states were those that derive “their just powers from the consent of the governed.” As for the king, whom the Americans professed to revere, he was nothing but “the Royal Brute of Great Britain.” Common Sense became a whirlwind best seller. Within a few months the astonishing total of 120,000 copies were sold.

In Common Sense Thomas Paine (1737–1809)
 argued for the superiority of a republic over a monarchy:

“


 The nearer any government approaches to a republic the less business there is for a king. It is somewhat difﬁcult to ﬁnd a proper name for the government of England. Sir William Meredith calls it a republic; but in its present state it is unworthy of the name, because the corrupt inﬂuence of the crown, by having all the places in its disposal, hath so effectively swallowed up the power, and eaten out the virtue of the house of commons (the republican part of the constitution) that the government of England is nearly as monarchical as that of France or Spain.

”


 Thomas Paine, by Auguste Millière

 Paine ﬂatly branded the shilly-shallying of the colonists as contrary to “common sense.” Nowhere in the physical universe did the smaller heavenly body control the larger one. So why should the tiny island of Britain control the vast continent of America? Paine’s pen went a long way toward convincing the American colonists that their true cause was independence rather than reconciliation with Britain—not least because without independence, they could not hope for foreign assistance. Paine could thus be said to have drafted the foundational document not only of American independence, but of American foreign policy as well.

Paine and the Idea
 of “Republicanism” Paine’s passionate protest was as compelling as it was eloquent and radical—even doubly radical. It called not simply for independence, but for the creation of a new kind of political society, a republic, where power ﬂowed from the people themselves, not from a corrupt and

 Jefferson's Declaration

 despotic monarch. In language laced with biblical imagery familiar to common folk, he argued that all government ofﬁcials—governors, senators, and judges— not just representatives in a house of commons, should derive their authority from popular consent. Paine was hardly the ﬁrst person to champion a republican form of government. Political philosophers had advanced the idea since the days of classical Greece and Rome. Revived in the Renaissance and in seventeenth-century Eng land, republican ideals had uneasily survived within the British “mixed government,” with its delicate balance of king, nobility, and commons. Republicanism particularly appealed to British politicians critical of excessive power in the hands of the king and his advisers. Their writings found a responsive audience among the American colonists, who interpreted the vengeful royal acts of the previous decade as part of a monarchical conspiracy to strip them of their liberties as British subjects. Paine’s radical prescription for the colonies—to reject monarchy and empire and embrace an independent republic—fell on receptive ears. The colonists’ experience with governance had prepared them well for Paine’s summons to create a republic. Many settlers, particularly New Eng landers, had practiced a kind of republicanism in their democratic town meetings and annual elections, while the popularly elected committees of correspondence during 1774 and 1775 had demonstrated the feasibility of republican government. The absence of a hereditary aristocracy and the relative equality of condition enjoyed by landowning farmers meshed well with the republican repudiation of a ﬁ xed hierarchy of power. Most Americans considered citizen “virtue” fundamental to any successful republican government. Because political power no longer rested with the central, all-powerful authority of the king, individuals in a republic needed to sacriﬁce their personal self-interest to the public good. The collective good of “the people”

 The French philosophe Abbé Raynal (1713–1796) wrote in 1770,

“


 If any fortunate revolution should take place in the world, it will begin in America. . . . It will become the asylum of our people who have been oppressed by political establishments, or driven away by war.

”




 mattered more than the private rights and interests of individuals. Paine inspired his contemporaries to view America as fertile ground for the cultivation of such civic virtue. Yet not all Patriots agreed with Paine’s ultrademocratic approach to republicanism. Some favored a republic ruled by a “natural aristocracy” of talent. Republicanism for them meant an end to hereditary aristocracy, but not an end to all social hierarchy. These more conser vative republicans feared that the fervor for liberty would overwhelm the stability of the social order. They watched with trepidation as the “lower orders” of society—poorer farmers, tenants, and laboring classes in towns and cities—seemed to embrace a kind of runaway republicanism that amounted to radical “leveling.” The contest to deﬁ ne the nature of American republicanism would noisily continue for at least the next hundred years.

 Jefferson’s “Explanation” of Independence Members of the Philadelphia Congress, instructed by their respective colonies, gradually edged toward a clean break. On June 7, 1776, ﬁery Richard Henry Lee of Virginia moved that “these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent states.” After considerable debate, the motion was adopted nearly a month later, on July 2, 1776. The passing of Lee’s resolution was the formal “declaration” of independence by the American colonies, and technically this was all that was needed to cut the British tie. John Adams wrote conﬁdently that ever thereafter, July 2 would be celebrated annually with ﬁ reworks. But something more was required. An epochal rupture of this kind called for some formal explanation. An inspirational appeal was also needed to enlist other British colonies in the Americas, to invite assistance from foreign nations, and to rally resistance at home. Shortly after Lee made his memorable motion on June 7, Congress appointed a committee to prepare a more formal statement of separation. The task of drafting it fell to Thomas Jefferson, a tall, freckled, sandyhaired Virginia lawyer of thirty-three. Despite his youth, he was already recognized as a brilliant writer, and he measured up splendidly to the awesome assignment. After some debate and amendment, the Declaration of Independence was formally approved by the Congress on July 4, 1776. It might better have been



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

 The American signers of the Declaration of Independence had reason to fear for their necks. In 1802, twenty-six years later, George III (1738–1820) approved this death sentence for seven Irish rebels:

“


 . . . [You] are to be hanged by the neck, but not until you are dead; for while you are still living your bodies are to be taken down, your bowels torn out and burned before your faces, your heads then cut off, and your bodies divided each into four quarters, and your heads and quarters to be then at the King’s disposal; and may the Almighty God have mercy on your souls.

”


George III (1738–1820), Studio of Alan Ramsay,
 ca. 1767 America’s last king, he was a good man, unlike some of his scandal-tainted brothers and sons, but a bad king. Doggedly determined to regain arbitrary power for the crown, he antagonized and then lost the thirteen American colonies. During much of his sixty-year reign, he seemed to be insane, but recently medical science has found that he was suffering from a rare metabolic and hereditary disease called porphyria.

 called “the Explanation of Independence” or, as one contemporary described it, “Mr. Jefferson’s advertisement of Mr. Lee’s resolution.” Jefferson’s pronouncement, couched in a lofty style, was magniﬁcent. He gave his appeal universality by invoking the “natural rights” of humankind—not just British rights. He argued persuasively that because the king had ﬂouted these rights, the colonists were justiﬁed in cutting their connection. He then set forth a long list of the presumably tyrannous misdeeds of George III. The overdrawn bill of indictment included imposing taxes without consent, dispensing with trial by jury, abolishing valued laws, establishing a military dictatorship, maintaining standing armies in peacetime,

 cutting off trade, burning towns, hiring mercenaries, and inciting hostility among the Indians.* Jefferson’s withering blast was admittedly onesided. He acted, in effect, as a prosecuting attorney, and he took certain liberties with historical truth. He was not writing history; he was making it through what has been called “the world’s greatest editorial.” He owned many slaves, and his afﬁ rmation that “all men are created equal” was to haunt him and his fellow citizens for generations. The formal Declaration of Independence cleared the air as a thundershower does on a muggy day. As Paine had predicted, and as events were to prove, foreign assistance could now be solicited with greater hope of success. Those Patriots who deﬁed the king were now rebels, not loving subjects shooting their way into reconciliation. They must all hang together, Franklin is said to have grimly remarked, or they would all hang separately. Or, in the eloquent language of the great declaration, “We mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes and our sacred honor.” Jefferson’s deﬁant Declaration of Independence had a universal impact unmatched by any other American document. This “shout heard round the world” has been a source of inspiration to countless revolutionary movements against arbitrary authority. Lafayette hung a copy on a wall in his home, leaving beside it room for a future French Declaration of the Rights of Man—a declaration that was ofﬁcially born thirteen years later. *For an annotated text of the Declaration of Independence, see the Appendix.

A
Revolution for Women? Abigail Adams Chides Her Husband, 1776
 n the midst of the revolutionary fervor of 1776, at least one woman—Abigail Adams, wife of noted Massachusetts Patriot (and future president) John Adams—raised her voice on behalf of women. Yet she apparently raised it only in private—in this personal letter to her husband. Private documents like the correspondence and diaries of individuals both prominent and ordinary offer invaluable sources for the historian seeking to discover sentiments, opinions, and perspectives that are often difﬁcult to discern in the ofﬁcial public record. What might it suggest about the historical circumstances of the 1770s that Abigail Adams conﬁ ned her claim for women’s equality to this conﬁdential exchange with her spouse? What might have inspired the arguments she employed? Despite her privileged position and persuasive power, and despite her threat to “foment a rebellion,” Abigail Adams’s plea went largely unheeded in the Revolutionary era—as did comparable pleadings to extend the revolutionary principle of equality to blacks. What might have accounted for this limited application of the ideas of liberty and equality in the midst of a supposedly democratic revolution?

I




MAKERS OF

AMERICA
The Loyalists The Great AfricanAmerican Migration 
I


 n late 1776 Catherine Van Cortlandt wrote to her husband, a New Jersey merchant ﬁghting in a Loyalist brigade, about the Patriot troops who had quartered themselves in her house. “They were the most disorderly of species,” she complained, “and their ofﬁcers were from the dregs of the people.” Like the Van Cortlandts, many Loyalists thought of themselves as the “better sort of people.” They viewed their adversaries as “lawless mobs” and “brutes.” Conservative, wealthy, and well educated, Loyalists of this breed thought a break with Britain would invite anarchy. Loyalism made sense to them, too, for practical

 Tough Times for Loyalists Under the shadow of the tar bucket and bag of feathers shown in the upper right background, these Virginia Loyalists were roughly handled by a club-wielding crowd of Patriots.



 reasons. Viewing colonial militias as no match for His Majesty’s army, Loyalist pamphleteer Daniel Leonard warned his Patriot enemies in 1775 that “nothing short of a miracle could gain you one battle.” But Loyalism was hardly conﬁ ned to the well-todo. It also appealed to many people of modest means who identiﬁed strongly with Britain or who had reason to fear a Patriot victory. Thousands of British veterans of the Seven Years’ War, for example, had settled in the colonies after 1763. Many of them took up farming on two-hundred-acre land grants in New York. They were loath to turn their backs on the crown. So, too, were recent immigrants from non-Eng lish regions of the British Isles, especially from Scotland and Ireland, who had settled in Georgia or the backcountry of North and South Carolina. Many of these newcomers, resenting the plantation elite who ran these colonies, ﬁ lled the ranks of Tory brigades such as the Volunteers of Ireland and the North Carolina Highlanders, orga nized by the British army to galvanize Loyalist support. Other ethnic minorities found their own reasons to support the British. Some members of Dutch, German, and French religious sects believed that religious tolerance would be greater under the British than under the Americans, whose prejudices they had already encountered. Above all, thousands of African Americans joined Loyalist ranks in the hope that ser vice to the British might offer an escape from bondage. British ofﬁcials encouraged that belief. Throughout the war and in every colony, some African Americans ﬂed to British lines, where they served as soldiers, servants, laborers, and spies. Many of them joined black regiments that specialized in making small sorties against Patriot militias. In Monmouth, New Jersey, the black Loyalist Colonel Tye and his band of raiders became legendary for capturing Patriots and their supplies. As the war drew to an end in 1783, the fate of black Loyalists varied enormously. Many thousands who came to Loyalism as fugitive slaves managed to ﬁ nd a way to freedom, most notably the large group who won British passage from the port of New York to Nova Scotia. Other African American Loyalists suffered betrayal. British general Lord Charles Cornwallis abandoned over four thousand former slaves in Virginia, and many black Loyalists who boarded ships from

 Loyalists Through British Eyes This British cartoon depicts the Loyalists as doubly victimized—by Americans caricatured as “savage” Indians and by the British prime minister, the Earl of Shelburne, for offering little protection to Britain’s defenders.

 British-controlled ports expecting to embark for freedom instead found themselves sold back into slavery in the West Indies. White Loyalists faced no threat of enslavement, but they did suffer travails beyond mere disgrace: arrest, exile, conﬁscation of property, and loss of legal rights. Faced with such retribution, some eighty thousand Loyalists ﬂed abroad, mostly to Britain and the maritime provinces of Canada, where they became known as the United Empire Loyalists. Some settled contentedly as exiles, but many, especially those who went to Britain, where they had difﬁculty becoming accepted, lived diminished and lonely lives—“cut off,” as Loyalist Thomas Danforth put it, “from every hope of importance in life . . . [and] in a station much inferior to that of a menial servant.”

 But most Loyalists remained in America, where they faced the special burdens of reestablishing themselves in a society that viewed them as traitors. Some succeeded remarkably despite the odds, such as Hugh Gaine, a printer in New York City who eventually reopened a business and even won contracts from the new government. Ironically, this former Loyalist soldier published the new national army regulations authored by the Revolutionary hero Baron von Steuben. Like many former Loyalists, Gaine reintegrated himself into public life by siding with the Federalist call for a strong central government and powerful executive. When New York ratiﬁed the Constitution in 1788, Gaine rode the ﬂoat at the head of the city’s celebration parade. He had, like many other former Loyalists, become an American.





 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

Patriots and Loyalists
 The War of Independence, strictly speaking, was a war within a war. Colonials loyal to the king (Loyalists) fought the American rebels (Patriots), while the rebels also fought the British redcoats (see “Makers of America: The Loyalists,” pp. 154–155). Loyalists were derisively called “Tories,” after the dominant political factions in Britain, whereas Patriots were called “Whigs,” after the opposition factions in Britain. A popular deﬁ nition of a Tory among the Patriots betrayed bitterness: “A Tory is a thing whose head is in Eng land, and its body in America, and its neck ought to be stretched.” Like many revolutions, the American Revolution was a minority movement. Many colonists were apathetic or neutral, including the Byrds of Virginia, who sat on the fence. The opposing forces contended not only against each other but also for the allegiance and support of the civilian population. In this struggle for the hearts and minds of the people, the British proved fatally inept, and the Patriot militias played a crucial role. The British military proved able to control only those areas where it could maintain a massive military presence. Elsewhere, as soon as the redcoats had marched on, the rebel militiamen appeared and took up the task of “political education”—sometimes by coercive means. Often lacking bayonets but always loaded with political zeal, the ragtag militia units served as remarkably effective agents of Revolutionary ideas. They convinced many colonists, even those indifferent to independence, that the British army was an unreliable friend and that they had better throw in their lot with the Patriot cause. They also mercilessly harassed small British detachments and occupation forces. One British ofﬁcer ruefully observed that “the Americans would be less dangerous if they had a regular army.” Loyalists, numbering perhaps 16 percent of the American people, remained true to their king. Families often split over the issue of independence: Benjamin Franklin supported the Patriot side, whereas his handsome illegitimate son, William Franklin (the last royal governor of New Jersey), upheld the Loyalist cause. The Loyalists were tragic ﬁgures. For generations the British in the New World had been taught ﬁdelity to the crown. Loyalty is ordinarily regarded as a major virtue—loyalty to one’s family, one’s friends, one’s country. If the king had triumphed, as he seemed likely to do, the Loyalists would have been acclaimed patriots, and defeated rebels like Washington would have been disgraced, severely punished, and probably forgotten.

 Many people of education and wealth, of culture and caution, remained loyal. These wary souls were satisﬁed with their lot and believed that any violent change would only be for the worse. Loyalists were also more numerous among the older generation. Young people make revolutions, and from the outset energetic, purposeful, and militant young people surged forward—ﬁgures like the sleeplessly scheming Samuel Adams and the impassioned Patrick Henry. His ﬂaming outcry before the Virginia Assembly—“Give me liberty or give me death!”—still quickens patriotic pulses. Loyalists also included the king’s ofﬁcers and other beneﬁciaries of the crown—people who knew which side their daily bread came from. The same was generally true of the Anglican clergy and a large portion of their congregations, all of whom had long been taught submission to the king. Usually the Loyalists were most numerous where the Anglican Church was strongest. A notable exception was Virginia, where the debt-burdened Anglican aristocrats ﬂocked into the rebel camp. The king’s followers were well entrenched in aristocratic New York City and Charleston, and also in Quaker Pennsylvania and New Jersey, where General Washington felt that he was ﬁghting in “the enemy’s country.” While his men were starving at Valley Forge, nearby Pennsylvania farmers were selling their produce to the British for the king’s gold. Loyalists were least numerous in New Eng land, where self-government was especially strong and mercantilism was especially weak. Rebels were the most numerous where Presbyterianism and Congregationalism ﬂourished, notably in New Eng land. Invading British armies vented their contempt and anger by using Yankee churches for pigsties.

The Loyalist Exodus
 Before the Declaration of Independence in 1776, persecution of the Loyalists was relatively mild. Yet they were subjected to some brutality, including tarring and feathering and riding astride fence rails. After the Declaration of Independence, which sharply separated Loyalists from Patriots, harsher methods prevailed. The rebels naturally desired a united front. Putting loyalty to the colonies ﬁ rst, they regarded their opponents, not themselves, as traitors. Loyalists were roughly handled, hundreds were imprisoned, and a few noncombatants were hanged. But there was no wholesale reign of terror comparable to

Washington in Retreat




New York Patriots Pull Down
 the Statue of King George III Erected after the repeal of the Stamp Act in 1766, this statue was melted down by the revolutionaries into bullets to be used against the king’s troops.

 that which later bloodied both France and Russia during their revolutions. For one thing, the colonists reﬂected Anglo-Saxon regard for order; for another, the leading Loyalists were prudent enough to ﬂee to the British lines. About eighty thousand loyal supporters of George III were driven out or ﬂed, but several hundred thousand or so of the mild Loyalists were permitted to stay. The estates of many of the fugitives were conﬁscated and sold—a relatively painless way to help ﬁ nance the war. Conﬁscation often worked great hardship, as, for example, when two aristocratic women were forced to live in their former chicken house for leaning Toryward. Some ﬁ fty thousand Loyalist volunteers at one time or another bore arms for the British. They also helped the king’s cause by serving as spies, by inciting the Indians, and by keeping Patriot soldiers at home to protect their families. Ardent Loyalists had their hearts in their cause, and a major blunder of the haughty British was not to make full use of them in the ﬁghting.

General Washington at Bay
 With Boston evacuated in March 1776, the British concentrated on New York as a base of operations. Here was a splendid seaport, centrally located, where the king could count on cooperation from the numerous Loyalists. An awe-inspiring British ﬂeet appeared off

 New York in July 1776. It consisted of some ﬁve hundred ships and thirty-ﬁve thousand men—the largest armed force to be seen in America until the Civil War. General Washington, dangerously outnumbered, could muster only eighteen thousand ill-trained troops with which to meet the crack army of the invader. Disaster befell the Americans in the summer and fall of 1776. Outgeneraled and outmaneuvered, they were routed at the Battle of Long Island, where panic seized the raw recruits. By the narrowest of margins, and thanks to a favoring wind and fog, Washington escaped to Manhattan Island. Retreating northward, he crossed the Hudson River to New Jersey and ﬁ nally reached the Delaware River with the British close at his heels. Tauntingly, enemy buglers sounded the foxhunting call, so familiar to Virginians of Washington’s day. The Patriot cause was at low ebb when the rebel remnants ﬂed across the river after collecting all available boats to forestall pursuit. The wonder is that Washington’s adversary, General William Howe, did not speedily crush the demoralized American forces. But he was no military genius, and he well remembered the horrible slaughter at Bunker Hill, where he had commanded. The country was rough, supplies were slow in coming, and as a professional soldier, Howe did not relish the rigors of winter campaigning. He evidently found more agreeable the bedtime company of his mistress, the wife of one of his subordinates—a scandal with which American satirists had a good deal of ribald fun.



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

Washington Crossing the Delaware, by Emanuel Gottlieb Leutze, 1851 On Christmas Day, 1776, George
 Washington set out from Pennsylvania with twenty-four hundred men to surprise the British forces, chieﬂy Hessians, in their quarters across the river in New Jersey. The subsequent British defeat proved to be a turning point in the Revolution, as it checked the British advance toward Philadelphia and restored American morale. Seventy-ﬁve years later, Leutze, a German American immigrant who had returned to Germany, mythologized the heroic campaign in this painting. Imbued with the liberal democratic principles of the American Revolution, Leutze intended his painting to inspire Europeans in their revolutions of 1848. To that end, he ignored the fact that the Stars and Stripes held by Lieutenant James Monroe was not adopted until 1777; that Washington could not possibly have stood so long on one leg; that the colonists crossed the Delaware at night, not during the day; and that no African American would have been present. What Leutze did capture was the importance of ordinary men in the Revolutionary struggle and the tremendous urgency they felt at this particular moment in 1776, when victory seemed so elusive.

 Washington, who was now almost counted out, stealthily recrossed the ice-clogged Delaware River. At Trenton, on December 26, 1776, he surprised and captured a thousand Hessians who were sleeping off the effects of their Christmas celebration. A week later, leaving his campﬁ res burning as a ruse, he slipped away and inﬂicted a sharp defeat on a smaller British detachment at Princeton. This brilliant New Jersey campaign, crowned by these two lifesaving victories, revealed “Old Fox” Washington at his military best.

 Burgoyne’s Blundering Invasion London ofﬁcials adopted an intricate scheme for capturing the vital Hudson River valley in 1777. If successful, the British would sever New Eng land from the rest of the states and paralyze the American cause. The main invading force, under an actor-playwright-soldier, General John (“Gentleman Johnny”) Burgoyne, would

Bagging Burgoyne




 In this sermon, published in the Pennsylvania Gazette on April 18, 1778, a minister decried the brutality of the British army:

“


 The waste and ravage produced by this unhappy war are every where felt. Whereever our foes pervade, ruin and devastation follow after them; or rather, they march in their front, and on their right, and on their left, and in their rear they rage without controul. No house is sacred; no person secure. Age or sex, from blooming youth to decrepit age, they regard or spare not. And in the ﬁeld, how many of our countrymen and friends have fallen?

”


 push down the Lake Champlain route from Canada. General Howe’s troops in New York, if needed, could advance up the Hudson River to meet Burgoyne near Albany. A third and much smaller British force, commanded by Colonel Barry St. Leger, would come in from the west by way of Lake Ontario and the Mohawk Valley. British planners did not reckon with General Benedict Arnold. After his repulse at Québec in 1775, he had retreated slowly along the St. Lawrence River back to the Lake Champlain area, by heroic efforts keeping an army in the ﬁeld. The British had pursued his tattered force to Lake Champlain in 1776. But they could not move farther south until they had won control of the lake, which, in the absence of roads, was indispensable for carrying their supplies. While the British stopped to construct a sizable ﬂeet, the tireless Arnold assembled and ﬁtted out every ﬂoatable vessel. His tiny ﬂotilla was ﬁ nally destroyed after desperate ﬁghting, but time, if not the battle, had been won. Winter was descending, and the British were forced to retire to Canada. General Burgoyne had to start anew from this base the following year. If Arnold had not contributed his daring and skill, the British invaders of 1776 almost certainly would have recaptured Fort Ticonderoga. If Burgoyne had started from this springboard in 1777, instead of from Montréal, he almost certainly would have succeeded in his venture. (At last the apparently futile American invasion of Canada in 1775 was beginning to pay rich dividends.)

Revolutionary Standard of the Light-Horse of the City
 of Philadelphia, by John Folwell and James Claypoole, 1775 Silk ﬂags like this were used to identify military units. In an exercise known as “trooping the colors,” such ﬂags were regularly paraded before the troops so that soldiers could recognize their own units in the confusion of battle.

 General Burgoyne began his fateful invasion with seven thousand regular troops. He was encumbered by a heavy baggage train and a considerable number of women, many of whom were wives of his ofﬁcers. Progress was painfully slow, for sweaty axmen had to chop a path through the forest, while American militiamen began to gather like hornets on Burgoyne’s ﬂanks. General Howe, meanwhile, was causing astonished eyebrows to rise. At a time when it seemed obvious that he should be starting up the Hudson River from New York to join his slowly advancing colleague, he deliberately embarked with the main British army for an attack on Philadelphia, the rebel capital. As scholars now know, he wanted to force a general engagement with Washington’s army, destroy it, and leave the path wideopen for Burgoyne’s thrust. Howe apparently assumed that he had ample time to assist Burgoyne directly, should he be needed. General Washington, keeping a wary eye on the British in New York, hastily transferred his army to the vicinity of Philadelphia. There, late in 1777, he was defeated in two pitched battles, at Brandywine Creek and



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

 Germantown. Pleasure-loving General Howe then settled down comfortably in the lively capital, leaving Burgoyne to ﬂounder through the wilds of upper New York. Benjamin Franklin, recently sent to Paris as an envoy, truthfully jested that Howe had not captured Philadelphia but that Philadelphia had captured Howe. Washington ﬁ nally retired to winter quarters at Valley Forge, a strong, hilly position some twenty miles northwest of Philadelphia. There his frostbitten and hungry men were short of about every thing except misery. This rabble was nevertheless whipped into a professional army by the recently arrived Prussian drillmaster, the profane but patient Baron von Steuben. Burgoyne meanwhile had begun to bog down north of Albany, while a host of American militiamen, scenting the kill, swarmed about him. In a series of sharp engagements, in which General Arnold was again shot in the leg at Québec, the British army was trapped. Meanwhile, the Americans had driven back St. Leger’s force at Oriskany. Unable to advance or retreat, Burgoyne was forced to surrender his entire command at Saratoga on October 17, 1777, to the American general Horatio Gates. Saratoga ranks high among the decisive battles of both American and world history. The victory immensely revived the faltering colonial cause. Even more important, it made possible the urgently needed foreign aid from France, which in turn helped ensure American independence.

Revolution in Diplomacy?
 France, thirsting for revenge against Britain, was eager to inﬂame the quarrel that had broken out in America. Stripped of its North American colonies, Britain would presumably cease to be a front-rank power. France might then regain its former position and prestige, the loss of which in the recent Seven Years’ War rankled deeply. For their part, the American revolutionaries badly needed help in the struggle to throw off the British yoke. The stage seemed set for the embattled new nation to make its diplomatic debut by sealing an alliance with France against the common British foe. Yet just as they stood for revolutionary political ideas at home, the rebellious Americans also harbored revolutionary ideas about international affairs. They wanted an end to colonialism and mercantilism. They strongly supported free trade and freedom of the seas. They hoped to substitute the rule of law for the ancient

 After concluding the alliance, France sent a minister to America, to the delight of one Patriot journalist:

“


 Who would have thought that the American colonies, imperfectly known in Europe a few years ago and claimed by every pettifogging lawyer in the House of Commons, every cobbler in the beer-houses of London, as a part of their property, should to-day receive an ambassador from the most powerful monarchy in Europe.

”


 reliance on raw power to arbitrate the affairs of nations. (When the new Republic’s great seal proclaimed “a new order for the ages”—novus ordo seculorum in Latin— the sentiment was meant to apply to international as well as domestic affairs.) The Continental Congress in the summer of 1776 had accordingly drafted a Model Treaty to guide the American commissioners it was about to dispatch to the French court. One of the treaty’s chief authors, John Adams, described its basic principles: “1. No political connection. . . . 2. No military connection. . . . 3. Only a commercial connection.” For a nascent nation struggling to secure its very existence, these were remarkably self-denying restrictions. Yet they represented an emerging school of thought, popular among enlightened ﬁgures in both Europe and America, that deemed history to have reached a momentous turning point when military conﬂ ict would be abandoned and the bonds of mutual commercial interest would guarantee peaceful relations among states. Many critics then and later have derided this dream of an imminent golden age as hopelessly naive and impractically utopian; yet it infused an element of idealism into American attitudes toward international affairs that has proved stubbornly persistent. When wily old Benjamin Franklin arrived in Paris to negotiate the treaty with France, he was determined that his very appearance should herald the diplomatic revolution the Americans hoped to achieve. In his clothing and demeanor, he affected a persona that deliberately violated every norm of diplomatic behavior. Instead of the customary ceremonial sword, he toted only a plain white walking stick. Forsaking ermined robes and fancy wigs, he sported homespun garments and a simple cap of marten fur. “Figure me,” he wrote

The French Alliance


 Benjamin Franklin in His Fabled Cap He left school at age ten and became a wealthy businessman, a journalist, an inventor, a scientist, a legislator, and preeminently a statesman-diplomat. He was sent to France in 1776 as the American envoy at age seventy, and he remained there until 1785, negotiating the alliance with the French and helping to negotiate the treaty of peace. His fame had preceded him, and when he discarded his wig for the fur cap of a simple “American agriculturist,” he took French society by storm. French aristocratic women, with whom he was a great favorite, honored him by adopting the high coiffure à la Franklin in imitation of his cap.

 to a friend, “very plainly dress’d, wearing my thin grey strait Hair, that peeps out under my only Coiffure, a ﬁ ne Fur Cap, which comes down my Forehead almost to my Spectacles. Think how this must appear among the Powder’d Heads of Paris.” He shocked the royal court, besotted as it was with pomp and protocol. But ordinary Parisians adored him as a specimen of a new democratic social order, devoid of pretense and ornament. When Franklin embraced and kissed the famed French philosopher Voltaire in a Paris theater, the spectators applauded wildly. Meanwhile, the diplomatic game intensiﬁed. After the humiliation at Saratoga in 1777, the British Parliament belatedly passed a mea sure that in ef-



 fect offered the Americans home rule within the empire. This was essentially all that the colonials had ever asked for—except independence. If the French were going to break up the British Empire, they would have to bestir themselves. Franklin now played skillfully on French fears of Anglo-American reconciliation. On February 6, 1778, France offered the Americans a treaty of alliance. It did not conform exactly to the terms of the Model Treaty Franklin had brought with him—an early example of practical self-interest trumping abstract idealism in America’s conduct of foreign affairs. Against its better judgment, the young Republic concluded its ﬁ rst entangling military alliance and would soon regret it. But the treaty with France also constituted an ofﬁcial recognition of America’s independence and lent powerful military heft to the Patriot cause. Both allies bound themselves to wage war until the United States had fully secured its freedom and until both agreed to terms with the common enemy. With those pledges, the American Revolutionary War now became a world war.

The Colonial War Becomes
 a Wider War Eng land and France thus came to blows in 1778, and the shot ﬁ red at Lexington rapidly widened into a global conﬂagration. Spain entered the fray against Britain in 1779, as did Holland. Combined Spanish and French ﬂeets outnumbered those of Britain, and on two occasions the British Isles seemed to be at the mercy of hostile warships. The weak maritime neutrals of Europe, who had suffered from Britain’s dominance over the seas, now began to demand more respect for their rights (see Table 8.1). In 1780 the imperious Catherine the Great of Russia took the lead in organizing the Armed Neutrality, which she later sneeringly called the “Armed Nullity.” It lined up almost all the remaining European neutrals in an attitude of passive hostility toward Britain. The war was now being fought not only in Europe and North America, but also in South America, the Caribbean, and Asia. To say that America, with some French aid, defeated Britain is like saying “Daddy and I killed the bear.” To Britain, struggling for its very life, the scufﬂe in the New World became secondary. The Americans deserve credit for having kept the war going until 1778, with secret French aid. But they did not achieve their



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

Table 8.1 Britain Against the World
Britain and Allies


Enemy or Unfriendly Powers


Great Britain
Some Loyalists and Indians
 30,000 hired Hessians (Total population on Britain’s side: ca. 8 million)

Belligerents
 (Total population: ca. 39.5 million)

{


United States, 1775–1783
France, 1778–1783
Spain, 1779–1783
Holland, 1779–1783
 Ireland (restive)

Members of the
Armed Neutrality
 (with dates of joining)

{


Russia, 1780
Denmark-Norway, 1780
Sweden, 1780
Holy Roman Empire, 1781
Prussia, 1782
Portugal, 1782
 Two Sicilies, 1783 (after peace signed)

 independence until the conﬂ ict erupted into a multipower world war that was too big for Britain to handle. From 1778 to 1783, France provided the rebels with guns, money, immense amounts of equipment, about one-half of America’s regular armed forces, and practically all of the new nation’s naval strength. France’s entrance into the conﬂ ict forced the British to change their basic strategy in America. Hitherto they could count on blockading the colonial coast and commanding the seas. Now the French had powerful ﬂeets in American waters, chieﬂy to protect their own valuable West Indies islands, but in a position to jeopardize Britain’s blockade and lines of supply. The British, therefore, decided to evacuate Philadelphia and concentrate their strength in New York City. In June 1778 the withdrawing redcoats were attacked by General Washington at Monmouth, New Jersey, on a blisteringly hot day. Scores of men collapsed or died from sunstroke. But the battle was indecisive, and the British escaped to New York, although about one-third of their Hessians deserted. Henceforth, except for the Yorktown interlude of 1781, Washington remained in the New York area hemming in the British.

Blow and Counterblow
 In the summer of 1780, a powerful French army of six thousand regular troops, commanded by the Comte de Rochambeau, arrived in Newport, Rhode Island. The

 Americans were somewhat suspicious of their former enemies; in fact, several ugly ﬂare-ups, involving minor bloodshed, had already occurred between the new allies. But French gold and goodwill melted hard hearts. Dancing parties were arranged with the prim Puritan maidens; one French ofﬁcer related, doubtless with exaggeration, “The simple innocence of the Garden of Eden prevailed.” No real military advantage came immediately from this French reinforcement, although preparations were made for a Franco-American attack on New York. Improving American morale was staggered later in 1780, when General Benedict Arnold turned traitor. A leader of undoubted dash and brilliance, he was ambitious, greedy, unscrupulous, and suffering from a wellgrounded but petulant feeling that his valuable ser vices were not fully appreciated. He plotted with the British to sell out the key stronghold of West Point, which commanded the Hudson River, for £6,300 and an ofﬁcer’s commission. By the sheerest accident, the plot was detected in the nick of time, and Arnold ﬂed to the British. “Whom can we trust now?” cried General Washington in anguish. The British meanwhile had devised a plan to roll up the colonies, beginning with the South, where the Loyalists were numerous (see Map 8.2). The colony of Georgia was ruthlessly overrun in 1778–1779; Charleston, South Carolina, fell in 1780. The surrender of the city to the British involved the capture of ﬁve thousand men and four hundred cannon and was a heavier loss



War on the Frontier


 g. 1

NEW YORK
New York 
Washing


 American movements British movements American victory

 b

40°N


Philadelphia


NEW JERSEY

 DELAWARE

 VIRGINIA

 British victory

Charlottesville


La


 fa

Elk Hill
Richmond
Petersburg


Norfolk
Portsmouth


 e een

Hillsboro


Cornwallis,


Salisbury


May


Salem


 tte

Charlotte


Yorktown
Aug. 30–Oct. 19, 1781
Surrender of Cornwallis


NORTH CAROLINA 35°N

 lis

,1






Cheraw
Elizabethtown


 al

Fort
Charlotte


Co


 rn

Orangeburg


Wilmington nw
 r

 SOUTH wa CAROLINA llis

Cl


Georgetown


 in

 to

 n

 an

 d

Co


Charleston
May 12, 1780


GEORGIA
Savannah Oct. 9, 1779 
Battle
 of the Capes Sept. 5, 1781



Gr


Kings Mountain
Oct. 7, 1780


 ye

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Fort
Moultrie


Beaufort




100 Km.


Fort Sunbury
80°W






100 Mi.


De Grasse (Fr.
 ) from Wes t Indies, 1

Fort


Cowpens
Jan. 17, 1781


R


 am

 t on

 MARYLAND

 h oc

 an

 d

 ea

 u,

Au


 PENNSYLVANIA

N


75°W


Map 8.2 War in the South, 1780–1781
Interactive Map


 to the Americans, in relation to existing strength, than that of Burgoyne was to the British. Warfare now intensiﬁed in the Carolinas, where Patriots bitterly fought their Loyalist neighbors. It was not uncommon for prisoners on both sides to be butch-

 ered in cold blood after they had thrown down their arms. The tide turned later in 1780 and early in 1781, when American riﬂemen wiped out a British detachment at King’s Mountain and then defeated a smaller force at Cowpens. In the Carolina campaign of 1781,



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

 General Nathanael Greene, a Quaker-reared tactician, distinguished himself by his strategy of delay. Standing and then retreating, he exhausted his foe, General Charles Cornwallis, in vain pursuit. By losing battles but winning campaigns, the “Fighting Quaker” ﬁ nally succeeded in clearing most of Georgia and South Carolina of British troops.

The Land Frontier and
 the Sea Frontier

La k e M i c h i g a


 n

 The West was ablaze during much of the war. Indian allies of George III, hoping to protect their land, were busy with torch and tomahawk; they were egged on by British agents branded as “hair buyers” because they

 allegedly paid bounties for American scalps. Fateful 1777 was known as “the bloody year” on the frontier. Although two nations of the Iroquois Confederacy, the Oneidas and the Tuscaroras, sided with the Americans, the Senecas, Mohawks, Cayugas, and Onondagas joined the British. They were urged on by Mohawk chief Joseph Brant, a convert to Anglicanism who believed, not without reason, that a victorious Britain would restrain American expansion into the West. Brant and the British ravaged large areas of backcountry Pennsylvania and New York until checked by an American force in 1779. In 1784 the pro-British Iroquois were forced to sign the Treaty of Fort Stanwix, the ﬁ rst treaty between the United States and an Indian nation. Under its terms the Indians ceded most of their land. Yet even in wartime, the human tide of westwardmoving pioneers did not halt its ﬂow. Eloquent testimony is provided by place names in Kentucky, such as Lexington (named after the battle) and Louisville (named after America’s new ally, Louis XVI). In the wild Illinois country, the British were especially vulnerable to attack, for they held only scattered posts that they had captured from the French. An audacious frontiersman, George Rogers Clark, conceived the idea of seizing these forts by surprise. In 1778–1779 he ﬂoated down the Ohio River with about 175 men and captured in quick succession the forts Kaskaskia, Cahokia, and Vincennes (see Map 8.3). Clark’s admirers have argued, without positive proof,





80°W


200 Km.


200 Mi.


Detroit


La


 ke

Eri


 e

Fort
Pitt
M


 is

90°W
 so

N


 Joseph Brant, by Gilbert Stuart, 1786 Siding with the British, this Mohawk chief led Indian frontier raids so ferocious that he was dubbed “monster Brant.” When he later met King George III, he declined to kiss the king’s hand but asked instead to kiss the hand of the queen.

 uri R.

Cahokia


Kaskaskia


Vincennes


Oh


40°N


 io R.

 Clark’s route, 1778–1779

 Map 8.3 George Rogers Clark’s Campaign, 1778–1779 Interactive Map

Setting the Stage for Victory


 Baron von Steuben (1730–1794), a Prussian general who helped train the Continental Army, found the Americans to be very different from other soldiers he had known. As von Steuben explained to a fellow European,

“


 The genius of this nation is not in the least to be compared with that of the Prussians, Austrians, or French. You say to your soldier, ‘Do this’ and he doeth it; but I am obliged to say, ‘This is the reason why you ought to do that,’ and then he does it.

”


 that his success forced the British to cede the region north of the Ohio River to the United States at the peace table in Paris. America’s infant navy had meanwhile been laying the foundations of a brilliant tradition. The naval establishment consisted of only a handful of nondescript ships, commanded by daring ofﬁcers, the most famous of whom was a hard-ﬁghting young Scotsman, John Paul Jones. As events turned out, this tiny naval force never made a real dent in Britain’s thunderous ﬂeets. Its chief contribution was in destroying British merchant shipping and thus carrying the war into the waters around the British Isles. More numerous and damaging than ships of the regular American navy were swift privateers. These craft were privately owned armed ships—legalized pirates in a sense—speciﬁcally authorized by Congress to prey on enemy shipping. Altogether over a thousand American privateers, responding to the call of patriotism and proﬁt, sallied forth with about seventy thousand men (“sailors of fortune”). They captured some six hundred British prizes, while British warships captured about as many American merchantmen and privateers. Privateering was not an unalloyed asset. It had the unfortunate effect of diverting manpower from the main war effort and involving Americans, including Benedict Arnold, in speculation and graft. But the privateers brought in urgently needed gold, harassed the enemy, and raised American morale by providing victories at a time when victories were few. British shipping was so badly riddled by privateers and by the regular American navy that insurance rates skyrocketed. Merchant ships were compelled to sail in convoy,



 and British shippers and manufacturers brought increasing pressure on Parliament to end the war on honorable terms.

Yorktown and the
Final Curtain
 One of the darkest periods of the war was 1780–1781, before the last decisive victory. Inﬂation of the currency continued at full gallop. The government, virtually bankrupt, declared that it would repay many of its debts at the rate of only 2.5 cents on the dollar. Despair prevailed, the sense of unity withered, and mutinous sentiments infected the army. Meanwhile, the British general Cornwallis was blundering into a trap. After futile operations in Virginia, he had fallen back to Chesapeake Bay at Yorktown to await seaborne supplies and reinforcements. He assumed Britain would continue to control the sea. But these few fateful weeks happened to be one of the brief periods during the war when British naval superiority slipped away. The French were now prepared to cooperate energetically in a brilliant stroke. Admiral de Grasse, operating with a powerful ﬂeet in the West Indies, advised the Americans that he was free to join with them in an assault on Cornwallis at Yorktown. Quick to seize this opportunity, General Washington made a swift march of more than three hundred miles to the Chesapeake from the New York area. Accompanied by Rochambeau’s French army, Washington beset the British by land, while de Grasse blockaded them by sea after beating off the British ﬂeet. Completely cornered, Cornwallis surrendered his entire force of seven thousand men on October 19, 1781, as his band appropriately played “The World Turn’d Upside Down.” The triumph was no less French than American: the French provided essentially all the sea power and about half of the regular troops in the besieging army of some sixteen thousand men. Stunned by news of the disaster, Prime Minister Lord North cried, “Oh God! It’s all over! It’s all over!” But it was not. George III stubbornly planned to continue the struggle, for Britain was far from being crushed. It still had ﬁ fty-four thousand troops in North America, including thirty-two thousand in the United States. Washington returned with his army to New York, there to continue keeping a vigilant eye on the British force of ten thousand men.



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

Battle of the Chesapeake
 Capes, 1781 A young French naval ofﬁcer, Pierre Joseph Jennot, sketched what is probably the only depiction of the epochal sea battle by a participant. The British and French ﬂeets ﬁrst engaged on September 5 and for two days chased each other while drifting one hundred miles south. On September 8 the French turned back northward and occupied Chesapeake Bay, cutting off General Cornwallis, ashore in Yorktown, from support and escape by sea. When General Washington, with more French help, blocked any British retreat by land, a doomed Cornwallis surrendered.

 Fighting actually continued for more than a year after Yorktown, with Patriot–Loyalist warfare in the South especially savage. “No quarter for Tories” was the common battle cry. One of Washington’s most valuable contributions was to keep the languishing cause alive, the army in the ﬁeld, and the states together during these critical months. Otherwise a satisfactory peace treaty might never have been signed.

 personal rule of George III. A Whig ministry, rather favorable to the Americans, replaced the Tory regime of Lord North. Three American peace negotiators had meanwhile gathered at Paris: the aging but astute Benjamin Franklin; the ﬂ inty John Adams, vigilant for New Eng land interests; and the impulsive John Jay of New York, deeply

Peace at Paris
 After Yorktown, despite George III’s obstinate eagerness to continue ﬁghting, many Britons were weary of war and increasingly ready to come to terms. They had suffered heavy reverses in India and in the West Indies. The island of Minorca in the Mediterranean had fallen; the Rock of Gibraltar was tottering. Lord North’s ministry collapsed in March 1782, temporarily ending the

 Blundering George III, a poor loser, wrote this of America:

“


 Knavery seems to be so much the striking feature of its inhabitants that it may not in the end be an evil that they become aliens to this Kingdom.

”


Setting the Stage for Victory


 In 1800 the Prussian statesman Friedrich von Gentz (1764–1832) published an essay titled “Origins and Principles of the American Revolution, Compared with the French.” In it he argued that

“


 the Americans escaped the most dangerous of all the rocks, which in our times threatens the founders of any revolution: the deadly passion for making political experiments with abstract theories and untried systems.

”


 John Quincy Adams (1767–1848) translated von Gentz’s work into English, because, he said,

“


 it rescues [the American] revolution from the disgraceful imputation of having proceeded from the same principles as the French.

”


 suspicious of Old World intrigue. The three envoys had explicit instructions from Congress to make no separate peace and to consult with their French allies at all stages of the negotiations. But the American representatives chafed under this directive. They well knew that it had been written by a subservient Congress, with the French Foreign Ofﬁce indirectly guiding the pen. France was in a painful position. It had induced Spain to enter the war on its side, in part by promising to deliver British-held Gibraltar. Yet the towering rock was defying frantic joint assaults by French and Spanish troops. Spain also coveted the immense transAllegheny area, on which restless American pioneers were already settling. France, ever eager to smash Britain’s empire, desired an independent United States, but one independent in the abstract, not in action. It therefore schemed to keep the new Republic cooped up east of the Allegheny Mountains. A weak America—like a horse sturdy enough to plow but not vigorous enough to kick—would be easier to manage in promoting French interests and policy. France was paying a heavy price in men and trea sure to win America’s independence, and it wanted to get its money’s worth. But John Jay was unwilling to play France’s game. Suspiciously alert, he perceived that the French could not satisfy the conﬂ icting ambitions of both Ameri-



 cans and Spaniards. He saw signs—or thought he did— indicating that the Paris Foreign Ofﬁce was about to betray America’s trans-Appalachian interests to satisfy those of Spain. He therefore secretly made separate overtures to London, contrary to his instructions from Congress. The hard-pressed British, eager to entice one of their enemies from the alliance, speedily came to terms with the Americans. A preliminary treaty of peace was signed in 1782; the ﬁ nal peace, the next year. By the Treaty of Paris of 1783, the British formally recognized the independence of the United States. In addition, they granted generous boundaries, stretching majestically to the Mississippi on the west, to the Great Lakes on the north, and to Spanish Florida on the south. (Spain had recently captured Florida from Britain.) The Yankees, though now divorced from the empire, were to retain a share in the priceless ﬁsheries of Newfoundland. The Canadians, of course, were profoundly displeased. The Americans, on their part, had to yield important concessions. Loyalists were not to be further persecuted, and Congress was to recommend to the state legislatures that conﬁscated Loyalist property be restored. As for the debts long owed to British creditors, the states vowed to put no lawful obstacles in the way of their collection. Unhappily for future harmony, the assurances regarding both Loyalists and debts were not carried out in the manner hoped for by London. As for Britain, its acceptance of defeat in North America eventually paid enormous strategic dividends. Persisting in the colonial conﬂict might well have bled Britain dry. But shutting down the war against the Americans enabled London to rebuild its army and navy and eventually prevail in its titanic struggle with Napoleon—and to become the preeminent world power in the nineteenth century.

A
New Nation Legitimized  Britain’s terms were liberal almost beyond belief. The enormous trans-Appalachian area was thrown in as a virtual gift, for George Rogers Clark had captured only a small segment of it. Why the generosity? Had the United States beaten Britain to its knees? The key to the riddle may be found in the Old World. At the time the peace terms were drafted, Britain was trying to seduce America from its French alliance, so it made the terms as alluring as possible. The shaky Whig ministry, hanging on by its ﬁ ngernails for only a few



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

The Reconciliation Between
Britannia and Her Daughter
 America (detail) America (represented by an Indian) is invited to buss (kiss) her mother. Compare this cartoon with the one on p. 127.

 months, was more friendly to the Americans than were the Tories. It was determined, by a policy of liberality, to salve recent wounds, reopen old trade channels, and prevent future wars over the coveted trans-Appalachian region. This farsighted policy was regrettably not followed by the successors of the Whigs. In spirit, the Americans made a separate peace— contrary to the French alliance. In fact, they did not. The Paris Foreign Ofﬁce formally approved the terms of peace, though disturbed by the lone-wolf course of its American ally. France was immensely relieved by the prospect of bringing the costly conﬂ ict to an end

 and of freeing itself from its embarrassing promises to the Spanish crown. America alone gained from the world-girdling war. The British, though soon to stage a comeback, were battered and beaten. The French savored sweet revenge but plunged headlong down the slippery slope to bankruptcy and revolution. The Americans fared much better. Snatching their independence from the furnace of world conﬂ ict, they began their national career with a splendid territorial birthright and a priceless heritage of freedom. Seldom, if ever, have any people been so favored.

Chronology




CHRONOLOGY
Battles of Lexington and Concord Second Continental Congress Americans capture British garrisons at Ticonderoga and Crown Point Battle of Bunker Hill King George III formally proclaims colonies in rebellion Failed invasion of Canada 
1778–


 Clark’s victories in the West



 Battle of King’s Mountain Battle of Cowpens Greene leads Carolina campaign French and Americans force Cornwallis to surrender at Yorktown

 Paine’s Common Sense Declaration of Independence Battle of Trenton



 North’s ministry collapses in Britain



Treaty of Paris




Battle of Brandywine
Battle of Germantown
Battle of Saratoga




Treaty of Fort Stanwix




 Formation of French-American alliance Battle of Monmouth





KEY TERMS
Second Continental Congress (146) Bunker Hill, Battle of (147) Olive Branch Petition (147) Hessians (148) Common Sense (150) Declaration of Independence (151) Declaration of the Rights of Man (152) Loyalists (156) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Patriots (156) Long Island, Battle of (157) Trenton, Battle of (158) Saratoga, Battle of (160) Model Treaty (160) Armed Neutrality (161) Fort Stanwix, Treaty of (164) privateers (165) Yorktown, Battle of (165) Paris, Treaty of (167) 
Ethan Allen
Benedict Arnold
Richard Montgomery
Thomas Paine
Richard Henry Lee
Lord Charles Cornwallis
William Howe
John (“Gentleman
Johnny”) Burgoyne


Benjamin Franklin
Comte de Rochambeau
Nathanael Greene
Joseph Brant
George Rogers Clark
Admiral de Grasse




 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

Whose Revolution?


H


 istorians once assumed that the Revolution was just another chapter in the unfolding story of human liberty—an important way station on a divinely ordained pathway toward moral perfection in human affairs. This approach, often labeled the “Whig view of history,” was best expressed in George Bancroft’s ten-volume History of the United States of America, published between the 1830s and 1870s. By the end of the nineteenth century, a group of historians known as the “imperial school” challenged Bancroft, arguing that the Revolution was best understood not as the fulﬁ llment of national destiny, but as a constitutional conﬂ ict within the British Empire. For historians like George Beer, Charles Andrews, and Lawrence Gipson, the Revolution was the product of a collision between two different views of empire. While the Americans were moving steadily toward more self-government, Britain increasingly tightened its grip, threatening a stranglehold that eventually led to wrenching revolution. By the early twentieth century, these approaches were challenged by the so-called progressive historians, who argued that neither divine destiny nor constitutional quibbles had much to do with the Revolution. Rather, the Revolution stemmed from deepseated class tensions within American society. Once released by revolt, those tensions produced a truly transformed social order. Living themselves in a reform age when entrenched economic interests cowered under heavy attack, progressive historians like Carl Becker insisted that the Revolution was not just about “home rule” within the British Empire, but also about “who should rule at home” in America, the upper or lower classes. J. Franklin Jameson took Becker’s analysis one step further in his inﬂuential The American Revolution Considered as a Social Movement (1926). He claimed that the Revolution not only grew out of intense struggles between social groups, but also inspired many ordinary Americans to seek greater economic and political power, fundamentally democratizing society in its wake. In the 1950s the progressive historians fell out of favor as the political climate became more conser vative. Interpretations of the American Revolution as a class struggle did not play well in a country obsessed with the spread of communism, and in its place arose

 the so-called consensus view. Historians such as Robert Brown and Edmund Morgan downplayed the role of class conﬂ ict in the Revolutionary era, but emphasized that colonists of all ranks shared a commitment to certain fundamental political principles of self-government. The unifying power of ideas was now back in fashion almost a hundred years after Bancroft. Since the 1950s two broad interpretations have contended with each other and perpetuated the controversy over whether political ideals or economic and social realities were most responsible for the Revolution. The ﬁ rst, articulated most prominently by Bernard Bailyn, has emphasized ideological and psychological factors. Focusing on the power of ideas to foment revolution, Bailyn argued that the colonists, incited by their reading of seventeenth-century and early-eighteenth-century Eng lish political theorists, grew extraordinarily (perhaps even exaggeratedly) suspicious of any attempts to tighten the imperial reins on the colonies. When confronted with new taxes and commercial regulations, these hypersensitive colonists screamed “conspiracy against liberty” and “corrupt ministerial plot.” In time they took up armed insurrection in defense of their intellectual commitment to liberty. A second school of historians, writing during the 1960s and 1970s and inspired by the social movements of that turbulent era, revived the progressive interpretation of the Revolution. Gary Nash, in The Urban Crucible (1979), and Edward Countryman, in A People in Revolution (1981), pointed to the increasing social and economic divisions among Americans in both the urban seaports and the isolated countryside in the years leading up to the Revolution. Attacks by laborers on political elites and expressions of resentment toward wealth were taken as evidence of a society that was breeding revolutionary change from within, quite aside from British provocations. While the concerns of the progressive historians echo in these socioeconomic interpretations of the Revolution, the neoprogressives have been more careful not to reduce the issues simplistically to the one-ring arena of economic self-interest. Instead, they have argued that the varying material circumstances of American participants led them to hold distinctive

To Learn More


 versions of republicanism, giving the Revolution a less uniﬁed and more complex ideological underpinning than the idealistic historians had previously suggested. The dialogue between proponents of “ideas” and “interests” has gradually led to a more nuanced meeting of the two views. Most recently, scholars have taken a more transatlantic view of the Revolution’s origins, asking when and how colonists shifted from identifying as “British” to viewing themselves as “American.” Fred Anderson has argued that long before rebellion, the Seven Years’ War (1756–1763) helped create a sense of



 American identity apart from Britain. Other historians, such as T. H. Breen, argue that British nationalism actually intensiﬁed in the colonies over the course of the eighteenth century, as economic and cultural ties between Britain and North America strengthened through increased trade and the migration of ideas with the growth of print culture. Only when colonists realized that the British did not see them as equal imperial citizens, entitled to the same rights as Englishmen, did American nationalism emerge and Americans rebel.

To Learn More
David Armitage, The Declaration of Independence: A Global
History (2007)
Robert M. Calhoon, The Loyalists in Revolutionary America
(1973)
Colin G. Calloway, The American Revolution in Indian
Country (1995)
 Caroline Cox, A Proper Sense of Honor: Service and Sacriﬁce in George Washington’s Army (2004) Joseph J. Ellis, His Excellency: George Washington (2004) David Hackett Fischer, Washington’s Crossing (2004) James H. Hutson, John Adams and the Diplomacy of the American Revolution (1980) Linda K. Kerber, Women of the Republic: Intellect and Ideology in Revolutionary America (1980) Samuel E. Morison, John Paul Jones (1959)

Mary Beth Norton, The British-Americans: The Loyalist
Exiles in England (1972)
 ———, Liberty’s Daughters: The Revolutionary Experience of American Women (1980) Cassandra Pybus, Epic Journeys of Freedom: Runaway Slaves of the American Revolution and Their Global Quest for Liberty (2006) Alan Taylor, Liberty Men and Great Proprietors: The Revolutionary Settlement on the Maine Frontier, 1760– 1820 (1990) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

 PART

 TWO

Building the
New Nation





1776–1860


B


 y 1783 Americans had won their freedom. Now they had to build their country. To be sure, they were blessed with a vast and fertile land, and they inherited from their colonial experience a proud legacy of selfrule. But history provided scant precedent for erecting a republic on a national scale. No law of nature guaranteed that the thirteen rebellious colonies would stay glued together as a single nation, or that they would preserve, not to mention expand, their democratic way of life. New institutions had to be created, new habits of thought cultivated. Who could predict whether the American experiment in gov-

 ernment by the people would succeed? The feeble national government cobbled together under the Articles of Confederation during the Revolutionary War soon proved woefully inadequate to the task of nation building. In less than ten years after the Revolutionary War’s conclusion, the Articles were replaced by a new Constitution, but even its adoption did not end the debate over just what form American government should take. Would the president, the Congress, or the courts be the dominant branch? What should be the proper division of authority between the federal government and the

 The Verdict of the People (detail) This election-day crowd exudes the exuberant spirit of the era of Andrew Jackson, when the advent of universal white male suffrage made the United States the modern world’s ﬁrst mass participatory democracy. Yet the black man with the wheelbarrow, literally pushing his way into the painting, is a pointed reminder that the curse of slavery still blighted this happy scene.

 states? How could the rights of individuals be protected against a potentially powerful government? What economic policies would best serve the infant Republic? How should the nation defend itself against foreign foes? What principles should guide foreign policy? Was America a nation at all, or was it merely a geographic expression, destined to splinter into several bitterly quarreling sections, as had happened to so many other would-be countries? After a shaky start under George Washington and John Adams in the 1790s, buffeted by foreign troubles and domestic crises, the new Republic passed a major test when power was peacefully transferred from the conser vative Federalists to the more liberal Jeffersonians in the election of 1800. A conﬁdent President Jefferson proceeded boldly to expand the national territory with the landmark Louisiana Purchase in 1803. But before long Jefferson, and then his successor, James Madison, were embroiled in what eventually proved to be a fruitless effort to spare the United States from the ravages of the war then raging in Europe. America was dangerously divided during the War of 1812 and suffered a humiliating defeat. But a new sense of national unity and purpose was unleashed in the land thereafter. President Monroe, presiding over this “Era of Good Feelings,” proclaimed in the Monroe Doctrine of 1823 that both of the American continents were off-limits to further European intervention. The foundations of a continental-scale economy were laid, as a “transportation revolution” stitched the country together with canals and railroads and turnpikes. Settlers ﬂooded over those new arteries into the burgeoning West, often brusquely shouldering aside the native peoples. Immigrants, especially from Ireland and Germany, ﬂocked to American shores. The combination of new lands, new labor, and revolutionary new technologies like the telegraph and the railroad fed the growth of a market economy, including the

Women Weavers at Work
 (detail) These simple cotton looms heralded the dawn of the Industrial Revolution, which transformed the lives of Americans even more radically than the events of 1776.

 commercialization of agriculture and the beginnings of the factory system of production. Old ways of life withered as the market economy drew women as well as men, children as well as adults, blacks as well as whites, into its embrace. Ominously, the slave system grew robustly as the production of cotton, mostly for sale on European markets, exploded into the booming Southwest. Meanwhile, the United States in the era of Andrew Jackson gave the world an impressive lesson in political science. Between roughly 1820 and 1840, Americans virtually invented mass democracy, creating huge political parties and enormously expanding political participation by enfranchising nearly all adult white males. Nor was the spirit of innovation conﬁ ned to the political realm. A wave of reform and cultural vitality swept through many sectors of American society. Utopian experiments proliferated. Religious revivals and even new religions, like Mormonism, ﬂourished. A national literature blossomed. Crusades were launched for temperance, prison reform, women’s rights, and the abolition of slavery. By the second quarter of the nineteenth century, the outlines of a distinctive American national character had begun to emerge. Americans were a diverse, restless people, tramping steadily westward, eagerly forging their own nascent Industrial Revolution, proudly exercising their democratic political rights, impatient with the old, in love with the new, testily asserting their superiority over all other peoples—and increasingly divided, in heart, in conscience, and in politics, over the single greatest blight on their record of nation making and democracy building: slavery.

The Confederation
 and the Constitution




1776–1790
 “The example of changing a constitution by assembling the wise men of the State instead of assembling armies will be worth as much to the world as the former examples we had given them.” THOMAS JEFFERSON 1789

T


 he American Revolution was not a revolution in the sense of a radical or total change. It did not suddenly and violently overturn the entire political and social framework, as later occurred in the French and Russian Revolutions. What happened was accelerated evolution rather than outright revolution. During the conﬂ ict itself, people went on working and praying, marrying and playing. Many of them were not seriously disturbed by the actual ﬁghting, and the most isolated communities scarcely knew that a war was on. Yet some striking changes were ushered in, affecting social customs, political institutions, and ideas about society, government, and even gender roles. The exodus of some eighty thousand substantial Loyalists robbed the new ship of state of conser vative ballast. This weakening of the aristocratic upper crust, with all its culture and elegance, paved the way for new, Patriot elites to emerge. It also cleared the ﬁeld for more egalitarian ideas to sweep across the land.

The Pursuit of Equality
 “All men are created equal,” the Declaration of Independence proclaimed, and equality was every where the watchword. Most states reduced (but usually did not eliminate altogether) property-holding requirements for voting. Ordinary men and women demanded to be addressed as “Mr.” and “Mrs.”—titles once reserved for the wealthy and highborn. Employers were now called “boss,” not “master.” In 1784 New Yorkers released a shipload of freshly arrived indentured servants, on the grounds that their status violated democratic ideals; by 1800 servitude was virtually unknown. Most Americans ridiculed the lordly pretensions of Continental Army ofﬁcers who formed an exclusive hereditary order, the Society of the Cincinnati. Social democracy was further stimulated by the growth of trade orga ni zations for artisans and laborers. Citizens

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Aftermath of the Revolution


 in several states, ﬂushed with republican fervor, also sawed off the remaining shackles of medieval inheritance laws, such as primogeniture, which awarded all of a father’s property to the eldest son. A protracted ﬁght for separation of church and state resulted in notable gains. Although the well-entrenched Congregational Church continued to be legally established in some New Eng land states, the Anglican Church, tainted by association with the British crown, was humbled. De-anglicized, it re-formed as the Protestant Episcopal Church and was every where disestablished. The struggle for divorce between religion and government proved ﬁercest in Virginia. It was prolonged to 1786, when freethinking Thomas Jefferson and his co-reformers, including the Baptists, won a complete victory with the passage of the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. (See Table 5.1, on established churches, on p. 97.) The egalitarian sentiments unleashed by the war likewise challenged the institution of slavery. Philadelphia Quakers in 1775 founded the world’s ﬁ rst antislavery society. Hostilities hampered the noxious trade in “black ivory,” and the Continental Congress in 1774 called for the complete abolition of the slave trade, a summons to which most of the states responded positively. Several northern states went further and either abolished slavery outright or provided for the gradual emancipation of blacks. Even on the plantations of Virginia, a few idealistic masters freed their human chattels—the ﬁ rst frail sprouts of the later abolitionist movement. But this revolution of sentiments was sadly incomplete. No states south of Pennsylvania abolished slavery, and in both North and South, the law discriminated harshly against freed blacks and slaves alike. Emancipated African Americans could be barred from purchasing property, holding certain jobs, and educating their children. Laws against interracial marriage also sprang up at this time. Why, in this dawning democratic age, did abolition not go further and cleanly blot the evil of slavery from

 The impact of the American Revolution was worldwide. About 1783 a British ship stopped at some islands off the East African coast, where the natives were revolting against their Arab masters. When asked why they were ﬁghting, they replied,

“


 America is free, Could not we be?

”




 Elizabeth “Mumbet” Freeman (ca. 1744–1829), by Susan Anne Livingston Ridley Sedgwick, 1811 In 1781, having overheard Revolutionary-era talk about the “rights of man,” Mumbet sued her Massachusetts master for her freedom from slavery. She won her suit and lived the rest of her life as a paid domestic servant in the home of the lawyer who had pleaded her case.

 the fresh face of the new nation? The sorry truth is that the ﬂedgling idealism of the Founding Fathers was sacriﬁced to political expediency. A ﬁght over slavery would have fractured the fragile national unity that was so desperately needed. “Great as the evil [of slavery] is,” the young Virginian James Madison wrote in 1787, “a dismemberment of the union would be worse.” Nearly a century later, the slavery issue did wreck the Union—temporarily. Likewise incomplete was the extension of the doctrine of equality to women. Some women did serve (disguised as men) in the military, and New Jersey’s new constitution in 1776 even, for a time, enabled women to vote. But though Abigail Adams teased her husband, John, in 1776 that “the Ladies” were determined “to foment a rebellion” of their own if they were not given political rights, most of the women in the



Chapter 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 1776–1790


 The Revolution enhanced the expectations and power of women as wives and mothers. As one “matrimonial republican” wrote in 1792,

“


 I object to the word ‘obey’ in the marriageservice because it is a general word, without limitations or deﬁnition. . . . The obedience between man and wife, I conceive, is, or ought to be mutual. . . . Marriage ought never to be considered a contract between a superior and an inferior, but a reciprocal union of interest, an implied partnership of interests, where all differences are accommodated by conference; and where the decision admits of no retrospect.

”


 Revolutionary era were still doing traditional women’s work. Yet women did not go untouched by Revolutionary ideals. Central to republican ideology was the concept of civic virtue—the notion that democracy depended on the unselﬁsh commitment of each citizen to the public good. And who could better cultivate the habits of a virtuous citizenry than mothers, to whom society entrusted the moral education of the young? Indeed the selﬂess devotion of a mother to her family was often cited as the very model of proper republican behavior. The idea of “republican motherhood” thus took root, elevating women to a newly prestigious role as the special keepers of the nation’s conscience. Educational opportunities for women expanded, in the expectation that educated wives and mothers could better cultivate the virtues demanded by the Republic in their husbands, daughters, and sons. Republican women now bore crucial responsibility for the survival of the nation.

Constitution Making
 in the States The Continental Congress in 1776 called upon the colonies to draft new constitutions. In effect, the Continental Congress was actually asking the colonies to summon themselves into being as new states. The sovereignty of these new states, according to the theory of republicanism, would rest on the authority of the

 people. For a time the manufacture of governments was even more pressing than the manufacture of gunpowder. Although the states of Connecticut and Rhode Island merely retouched their colonial charters, constitution writers elsewhere worked tirelessly to capture on black-inked parchment the republican spirit of the age. Massachusetts contributed one especially noteworthy innovation when it called a special convention to draft its constitution and then submitted the ﬁ nal draft directly to the people for ratiﬁcation. Once adopted in 1780, the Massachusetts constitution could be changed only by another specially called constitutional convention. This procedure was later imitated in the drafting and ratiﬁcation of the federal Constitution. Adopted almost a decade before the federal Constitution, the Massachusetts constitution remains the longest-lived constitution in the world. The newly penned state constitutions had many features in common. Their similarity, as it turned out, made easier the drafting of a workable federal charter when the time was ripe. In the British tradition, a “constitution” was not a written document, but rather an accumulation of laws, customs, and precedents. Americans invented something different. The documents they drafted were contracts that deﬁ ned the powers of government, as did the old colonial charters, but they drew their authority from the people, not from the royal seal of a distant king. As written documents the state constitutions were intended to represent a fundamental law, superior to the transient whims of ordinary legislation. Most of these documents included bills of rights, speciﬁcally guaranteeing long-prized liberties against later legislative encroachment. Most of them required the annual election of legislators, who were thus forced to stay in touch with the mood of the people. All of them deliberately created weak executive and judicial branches, at least by present-day standards. A generation of quarreling with His Majesty’s ofﬁcials had implanted a deep distrust of despotic governors and arbitrary judges. In all the new state governments, the legislatures, as presumably the most democratic branch of government, were given sweeping powers. But as Thomas Jefferson warned, “173 despots [in a legislature] would surely be as oppressive as one.” Many Americans soon came to agree with him. The democratic character of the new state legislatures was vividly reﬂected by the presence of many members from the recently enfranchised poorer west-

Copley Family Portrait, ca. 1776–1777
 portrait painting like this one by John Singleton Copley (1738–1815) documents physical likenesses, clothing styles, and other material possessions typical of an era. But it can do more than that. In the execution of the painting itself, the preeminent portrait painter of colonial America revealed important values of his time. Copley’s composition and use of light emphasized the importance of the mother in the family. Mrs. Copley is the visual center of the painting: the light falls predominantly on her,

A


 ern districts. Their inﬂuence was powerfully felt in their several successful movements to relocate state capitals from the haughty eastern seaports into the less pretentious interior. In the Revolutionary era, the capitals of New Hampshire, New York, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia were all moved westward. These geographical shifts portended political shifts that deeply discomﬁted many more conser vative Americans.

 and she provides the focus of activity for the family group. Although Copley had moved to Eng land in 1774 to avoid the disruptions of war, he had made radical friends in his hometown of Boston and surely had imbibed the sentiment of the age about “republican motherhood”—a sentiment that revered women as homemakers and mothers, the cultivators of good republican values in young citizens. What other prevailing attitudes, about gender and age, for example, might this painting reveal?

Economic Crosscurrents
 Economic changes begotten by the war were likewise noteworthy, but not overwhelming. States seized control of former crown lands, and although rich speculators had their day, many of the large Loyalist holdings were conﬁscated and eventually cut up into small farms. Roger Morris’s huge estate in New York, for





Chapter 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 1776–1790


 Western Merchants Negotiating for Tea in Hong Kong, ca. 1800 Yankee merchants and shippers ﬁgured prominently in the booming trade with China in the late eighteenth century. Among the American entrepreneurs who prospered in the China trade was Warren Delano, ancestor of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt.

 example, was sliced into 250 parcels—thus accelerating the spread of economic democracy. The frightful excesses of the French Revolution were avoided, partly because cheap land was easily available, and because America had so few deeply entrenched landed aristocrats to be overthrown. It is highly signiﬁcant that in the United States, economic democracy, broadly speaking, preceded political democracy. A sharp stimulus was given to manufacturing by the prewar nonimportation agreements and later by the war itself. Goods that had formerly been imported from Britain were mostly cut off, and the ingenious Yankees were forced to make their own. Ten years after the Revolution, busy Brandywine Creek, south of Philadelphia, was turning the water wheels of numerous

 mills along an eight-mile stretch. Yet America remained overwhelmingly a nation of soil-tillers. Economically speaking, independence had drawbacks. Much of the coveted commerce of Britain was still reserved for the loyal parts of the empire. American ships were now barred from British and British West Indies harbors. Fisheries were disrupted, and bounties for ships’ stores had abruptly ended. In some respects the hated British Navigation Laws were more disagreeable after independence than before. New commercial outlets, fortunately, compensated partially for the loss of old ones. Americans could now trade freely with foreign nations, subject to local restrictions—a boon they had not enjoyed in the days of mercantilism. Enterprising Yankee shippers ventured

Problems of a New Government


 boldly—and proﬁtably—into the Baltic and China Seas. In 1784 the Empress of China, carrying a valuable weed (ginseng) that was highly prized by Chinese herb doctors as a cure for impotence, led the way into the East Asian markets. Yet the general economic picture was far from rosy. War had spawned demoralizing extravagance, speculation, and proﬁteering, with proﬁts for some as indecently high as 300 percent. State governments had borrowed more during the war than they could ever hope to repay. Runaway inﬂation had been ruinous to many citizens, and Congress had failed in its feeble attempts to curb economic laws. The average citizen was probably worse off ﬁ nancially at the end of the shooting than at the start. The whole economic and social at mosphere was unhealthy. A newly rich class of proﬁteers was noisily conspicuous, whereas many once-wealthy people were left destitute. The controversy leading to the Revolutionary War had bred a keen distaste for taxes and encouraged disrespect for the majesty of the law generally. John Adams had been shocked when gleefully told by a horse-jockey neighbor that the courts of justice were all closed—a plight that proved to be only temporary.

A
Shaky Start Toward Union  What would the Americans do with the independence they had so dearly won? The Revolution had dumped the responsibility of creating and operating a new central government squarely into their laps. Prospects for erecting a lasting regime were far from bright. It is always difﬁcult to set up a new government and doubly difﬁcult to set up a new type of government. The picture was further clouded in America by leaders preaching “natural rights” and looking suspiciously at all persons clothed with authority. America was more a name than a nation, and unity ran little deeper than the color on the map. Disruptive forces stalked the land. The departure of the conser vative Tory element left the political system inclined toward experimentation and innovation. Patriots had fought the war with a high degree of disunity, but they had at least concurred on allegiance to a common cause. Now even that was gone. It would have been almost a miracle if any government fashioned in all this confusion had long endured. Hard times, the bane of all regimes, set in shortly after the war and hit bottom in 1786. As if other troubles



 were not enough, British manufacturers, with dammedup surpluses, began ﬂooding the American market with cut-rate goods. War-baby American industries, in particular, suffered industrial colic from such ruthless competition. One Philadelphia newspaper in 1783 urged readers to don home-stitched garments of homespun cloth: Of foreign gewgaws let’s be free, And wear the webs of liberty. Yet hopeful signs could be discerned. The thirteen sovereign states were basically alike in governmental structure and functioned under similar constitutions. Americans enjoyed a rich political inheritance, derived partly from Britain and partly from their own homegrown devices for self-government. Finally, they were blessed with political leaders of a high order in men like George Washington, James Madison, John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, and Alexander Hamilton.

Creating a Confederation
The Second Continental Congress of Revolutionary
 days was little more than a conference of ambassadors from the thirteen states. It was totally without constitutional authority and in general did only what it dared to do, though it asserted some control over military affairs and foreign policy. In nearly all respects, the thirteen states were sovereign, for they coined money, raised armies and navies, and erected tariff barriers. The legislature of Virginia even ratiﬁed separately the treaty of alliance of 1778 with France. Shortly before declaring independence in 1776, Congress appointed a committee to draft a written constitution for the new nation. The ﬁ nished product was the Articles of Confederation. Adopted by Congress in 1777, it was translated into French after the Battle of Saratoga so as to convince France that America had a genuine government in the making. The Articles were not ratiﬁed by all thirteen states until 1781, less than eight months before the victory at Yorktown. The chief apple of discord was western lands. Six of the jealous states, including Pennsylvania and Maryland, had no holdings beyond the Allegheny Mountains. Seven, notably New York and Virginia, were favored with enormous acreage, in most cases on the basis of earlier charter grants. The six land-hungry states argued that the more fortunate states would not have retained possession of this splendid prize if all the other states had not fought for it also. A major



Chapter 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 1776–1790


 is

Claimed by
 CONN. and VA. 40°N Ceded by VA. 1784; ceded by CONN. 1786

 sR

 ri L. E

Oh


 io

 n

.


Ceded by N.C. 1790
 eR se (TENNESSEE) es

 by MASS. Claimed by CONN. Ceded to PA. in 1782

 PENNSYLVANIA

.


SOUTH CAROLINA

R.
 e

 re

.L


N.H.
MASS. RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT

NEW JERSEY

N


AT L A N T I C O C E A N

 GEORGIA

Gulf of
Mexico




 (MASS.)

NORTH CAROLINA

30°N




 MAINE

 VIRGINIA

Ceded by S.C.
 to Georgia 1795



 aw

DELAWARE MARYLAND

 n

.


R


 s is s ip pi R

Red


Claimed by Georgia.
Ceded 1802


70°W


Susquehanna R.


Ceded by
Virginia 1792
 (KENTUCKY)

Te


Mi s


NEW YORK

R


Ceded by S.C.
 to Georgia 1787

.


 e

Western Reserve
 Claimed by CONN. Ceded 1800 Claimed by Virginia. Ceded 1784 .

SPANISH LOUISIANA
Ar k a nsa 
 rio Onta L.Ceded

 on

.


Claimed by
 MASS. and VA. Ceded by VA. 1784; ceded by MASS. 1785

 k Hur

.


R


Claimed by
N.H. and N.Y.
Ceded 1791
 (VERMONT) Ceded by MASS. to N.Y. 1786

 e

Claimed by
Virginia.
Ceded 1784


 iR

 i M

 o uri

La


La k e M i c h
 i

M


 ip p

 ss

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 e Superior

 NORTHWEST sis TERRITORY s

Claimed by U.S. and
Great Britain


St


La k


80°W


 nc

90°W


 gan

100°W


SPANISH FLORIDA 400
Km. 


400 Mi.


 Boundary of territory ceded by New York, 1782 Territory ceded by Virginia, 1784 Territory ceded by Georgia, 1802 Other claims Original thirteen states after their cessions States without land claims

Map 9.1 Western Land Cessions to the United States, 1782–1802
Interactive Map


 complaint was that the land-rich states could sell their trans-Allegheny tracts and thus pay off pensions and other debts incurred in the common cause. States without such holdings would have to tax themselves heavily to defray these obligations. Why not turn the whole western area over to the central government? Unanimous approval of the Articles of Confederation by the thirteen states was required, and landstarved Maryland stubbornly held out until March 1, 1781. Maryland at length gave in when New York surrendered its western claims and Virginia seemed about to do so. To sweeten the pill, Congress pledged itself to dispose of these vast areas for the “common beneﬁt.” It further agreed to carve from the new public domain not colonies, but a number of “republican” states, which

 in time would be admitted to the Union on terms of complete equality with all the others. This extraordinary commitment faithfully reﬂected the anticolonial spirit of the Revolution, and the pledge was later fully redeemed in the famed Northwest Ordinance of 1787 (see Map 9.1). Fertile public lands thus transferred to the central government proved to be an invaluable bond of union. The states that had thrown their heritage into the common pot had to remain in the Union if they were to reap their share of the advantages from the land sales. An army of westward-moving pioneers purchased their farms from the federal government, directly or indirectly, and they learned to look to the national capital, rather than to the state capitals—with a consequent

A
Crippled Confederation 

 weakening of local inﬂuence. Finally, a uniform national land policy was made possible.

The Articles of Confederation:
 America’s First Constitution The Articles of Confederation—some have said “Articles of Confusion”—provided for a loose confederation or “ﬁ rm league of friendship.” Thirteen independent states were thus linked together for joint action in dealing with common problems, such as foreign affairs. A clumsy Congress was to be the chief agency of government. There was no executive branch—George III had left a bad taste—and the vital judicial arm was left almost exclusively to the states. Congress, though dominant, was severely hobbled. Each state had a single vote, so that some sixty-eight thousand Rhode Islanders had the same voice as more than ten times that many Virginians. All bills dealing with subjects of importance required the support of



 nine states; any amendment of the Articles themselves required unanimous ratiﬁcation. Unanimity was almost impossible, and this meant that the amending process, perhaps fortunately, was unworkable. If it had been workable, the Republic might have struggled along with a patched-up Articles of Confederation rather than replace it with an effective Constitution. The shackled Congress was weak—and was purposely designed to be weak. Suspicious states, having just won control over taxation and commerce from Britain, had no desire to yield their newly acquired privileges to an American parliament—even one of their own making. Two handicaps of Congress were crippling. It had no power to regulate commerce, and this loophole left the states free to establish different, and often conﬂ icting, laws regarding tariffs and navigation. Nor could Congress enforce its tax-collection program. It established a tax quota for each of the states and then asked them please to contribute their share on a voluntary basis. The central authority—a “government by

 Independence Hall, Philadelphia, 1776 Originally built in the 1730s as a meeting place for the Pennsylvania colonial assembly, this building witnessed much history: here Washington was given command of the Continental Army, the Declaration of Independence was signed, and the Constitution was hammered out. The building began to be called “Independence Hall” in the 1820s and is today a major tourist destination in Philadelphia.



Chapter 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 1776–1790


 supplication”—was lucky if in any year it received onefourth of its requests. The feeble national government in Philadelphia could advise and advocate and appeal. But in dealing with the independent states, it could not command or coerce or control. It could not act directly upon the individual citizens of a sovereign state; it could not even protect itself against gross indignities. In 1783 a group of mutinous Pennsylvania soldiers, whose pay was in arrears, marched to Philadelphia and made a threatening demonstration in front of Independence Hall. After Congress appealed in vain to the state for protection, its members ﬂed to safety at Princeton College in New Jersey. The new Congress, with all its paper powers, was even less effective than the old Continental Congress, which had wielded no constitutional powers at all. Yet the Articles of Confederation, weak though they were, proved to be a landmark in government. They were for those days a model of what a loose confederation could be. Thomas Jefferson enthusiastically hailed the new structure as the best one “existing or that ever did exist.” To compare it with the European governments, he thought, was like comparing “heaven and hell.” But although the Confederation was praiseworthy as confederations went, the troubled times demanded not a loosely woven confederation but a tightly knit federation. This involved the yielding by the states of their sovereignty to a completely recast federal government, which in turn would leave them free to control their local affairs. In spite of their defects, the anemic Articles of Confederation were a signiﬁcant steppingstone toward the present Constitution. They clearly outlined the general powers that were to be exercised by the central government, such as making treaties and establishing a postal ser vice. As the ﬁ rst written constitution of the Republic, the Articles kept alive the ﬂ ickering ideal of union and held the states together—until such time as they were ripe for the establishment of a strong constitution by peaceful, evolutionary methods. Without this intermediary jump, the states probably would never have consented to the breathtaking leap from the old boycott Association of 1774 to the Constitution of the United States.

Landmarks in Land Laws
 Handcuffed though the Congress of the Confederation was, it succeeded in passing supremely farsighted

 pieces of legislation. These related to an immense part of the public domain recently acquired from the states and commonly known as the Old Northwest. This area of land lay northwest of the Ohio River, east of the Mississippi River, and south of the Great Lakes. The ﬁ rst of these red-letter laws was the Land Ordinance of 1785 (see Map 9.2). It provided that the acreage of the Old Northwest should be sold and that the proceeds should be used to help pay off the national debt. The vast area was to be surveyed before sale and settlement, thus forestalling endless confusion and lawsuits. It was to be divided into townships six miles square, each of which in turn was to be split into thirtysix sections of one square mile each. The sixteenth section of each township was set aside to be sold for the beneﬁt of the public schools—a priceless gift to education in the Northwest. The orderly settlement of the Northwest Territory, where the land was methodically surveyed and titles duly recorded, contrasted sharply with the chaos south of the Ohio River, where uncertain ownership was the norm and fraud was rampant. Even more noteworthy was the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, which related to the governing of the Old Northwest. This law came to grips with the problem of how a nation should deal with its colonies—the same problem that had bedeviled the king and Parliament in London. The solution provided by the Northwest Ordinance was a judicious compromise: temporary tutelage, then permanent equality. First, there would be two evolutionary territorial stages, during which the area would be subordinate to the federal government. Then, when a territory could boast sixty thousand inhabitants, it might be admitted by Congress as a state, with all the privileges of the thirteen charter members. (This is precisely what the Continental Congress had promised the states when they surrendered their lands in 1781.) The ordinance also forbade slavery in the Old Northwest—a path-breaking step, though it exempted slaves already present. The wisdom of Congress in handling this explosive problem deserves warm praise. If it had attempted to chain the new territories in permanent subordination, a second American Revolution almost certainly would have erupted in later years, fought this time by the West against the East. Congress thus neatly solved the seemingly insoluble problem of empire. The scheme worked so well that its basic principles were ultimately carried over from the Old Northwest to other frontier areas.

Troubled Foreign Relations


90°W


50°N


80°W


 Section 16 reserved for school funds

Northwest Territory


Boundaries
 indefinite

 Present state boundary Lak

 e Superio

 r

N


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 The Seven Ranges —first area surveyed



36 Km.


36 Mi.


6 Miles




A
Township 

L
 ak

 an R.





200 Km.




Lak


200 Mi.


















10 11 12




18 17 16 15 14 13
19 20 21 22 23 24
30 29 28 27 26 25


 e E

PENNSYLVANIA ANIA A

 pi

Lake Michi
 g

 ip

 ron

 i ss

 u e H

M


 iss



 rie

SPANISH LOUISIANA

P
PA PA.

31 32 33 34 35 36


640 Acres
 Half section 320 acres

Oh


 io

R.


1 Mile


40°N


 VIRGINIA

Marietta
 TENNESSEE

O


 KENTUCKY

 hi

 o

R.


Quarter
 section 160 acres

 Half-quarter section 80 acres

VIRGINIA
Quarter quarter section 40 acres 
N.C.


 Map 9.2 Surveying the Old Northwest under the Land Ordinance of 1785 Sections of a township under the Land Ordinance of 1785. Interactive Map

 The World’s Ugly Duckling Foreign relations, especially with London, remained troubled during these anxious years of the Confederation. Britain resented the stab in the back from its rebellious offspring and for eight years refused to send a minister to America’s “backwoods” capital. London suggested, with barbed irony, that if it sent one, it would have to send thirteen. Britain ﬂatly declined to make a commercial treaty or to repeal its ancient Navigation Laws. Lord Shefﬁeld, whose ungenerous views prevailed, argued persuasively in a widely sold pamphlet that Britain would win back America’s trade anyhow. Commerce, he insisted, would naturally follow old channels. So why go to the Americans hat in hand? The British also ofﬁcially closed their proﬁtable West Indies trade to the United States, though the Yankees, with their time-tested skill in smuggling, illegally partook nonetheless. Scheming British agents were also active along the

 far-ﬂung northern frontier. They intrigued with the disgruntled Allen brothers of Vermont and sought to annex that rebellious area to Britain. Along the northern border, the redcoats continued to hold a chain of trading posts on U.S. soil, and there they maintained their fur trade with the Indians. One plausible excuse for remaining was the failure of the American states to honor the treaty of peace in regard to debts and Loyalists. But the main purpose of Britain in hanging on was probably to curry favor with the Indians and keep their tomahawks lined up on the side of the king as a barrier against future American attacks on Canada. All these grievances against Britain were maddening to patriotic Americans. Some citizens demanded, with more heat than wisdom, that the United States force the British into line by imposing restrictions on their imports to America. But Congress could not control commerce, and the states refused to adopt a uniform tariff policy. Some “easy states” deliberately lowered their tariffs in order to attract an unfair share of trade.



Chapter 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 1776–1790


 Spain, though recently an enemy of Britain, was openly unfriendly to the new Republic. It controlled the mouth of the all-important Mississippi, down which the pioneers of Tennessee and Kentucky were forced to ﬂoat their produce. In 1784 Spain closed the river to American commerce, threatening the West with strangulation. Spain likewise claimed a large area north of the Gulf of Mexico, including a part of West Florida, granted to the United States by the British in 1783. At Natchez, on disputed soil, it held an important fort. It also schemed with the neighboring Indians, grievously antagonized by the rapacious land policies of Georgia and North Carolina, to hem in the Americans east of the Appalachians. Spain and Britain to-

90°W


80°W


70°W


B R I TI SH N O R TH AM ER I C A
C AN ADA)
Mi ss iss 
 pi R ip

N


MAINE (MASS.)

Fort Michilimackinac
 (U.S. soil) .

Detroit
 (U.S. soil)

N.Y.


N.H.


Fort Niagara
 (U.S. soil)

 MASS.

 PA.

 io Oh

St. Louis


SPANISH LOUISIANA

N.J.
 MD.

R.


U N I TED
STAT ES

SOUTH CAROLINA

New Orleans




 GEORGIA

Natchez


40°N


The Horrid Specter of Anarchy


 DEL.

VIRGINIA NORTH CAROLINA

Disputed by
Spain and U.S.


R.I.
 CONN.

 gether, radiating their inﬂuence out among resentful Indian tribes, prevented America from exercising effective control over about half of its total territory (see Map 9.3). Even France, America’s comrade-in-arms, cooled off now that it had humbled Britain. The French demanded the repayment of money loaned during the war and restricted trade with their bustling West Indies and other ports. Pirates of the North African states, including the arrogant Dey of Algiers, were ravaging America’s Mediterranean commerce and enslaving Yankee sailors. The British purchased protection for their own subjects, and as colonists the Americans had enjoyed this shield. But as an independent nation, the United States was too weak to ﬁght and too poor to bribe. A few Yankee shippers engaged in the Mediterranean trade with forged British protection papers, but not all were so bold or so lucky. John Jay, secretary for foreign affairs, derived some hollow satisfaction from these insults. He hoped they would at least humiliate the American people into framing a new government at home that would be strong enough to command respect abroad.

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

400 Km.


400 Mi.


30°N


SPANISH FLORIDA

 British influence Spanish influence British fort on U.S. soil

Map 9.3 Main Centers of Spanish and British
 Inﬂuence After 1783 This map shows graphically that the United States in 1783 achieved complete independence in name only, particularly in the area west of the Appalachian Mountains. Not until twenty years had passed did the new Republic, with the purchase of Louisiana from France in 1803, eliminate foreign inﬂuence from the east bank of the Mississippi River. Much of Florida remained in Spanish hands until the Adams-Onís Treaty of 1819 (see p. 265–267). Interactive Map

 Economic storm clouds continued to loom in the mid1780s. The requisition system of raising money was breaking down; some of the states refused to pay anything, while complaining bitterly about the tyranny of “King Congress.” Interest on the public debt was piling up at home, and the nation’s credit was evaporating abroad. Individual states were getting out of hand. Quarrels over boundaries generated numerous minor pitched battles. Some of the states were levying duties on goods from their neighbors; New York, for example, taxed ﬁ rewood from Connecticut and cabbages from New Jersey. A number of the states were again starting to grind out depreciated paper currency, and a few of them had passed laws sanctioning the semiworthless “rag money.” As a contemporary rhymester put it, Bankrupts their creditors with rage pursue; No stop, no mercy from the debtor crew. An alarming uprising, known as Shays’s Rebellion, ﬂared up in western Massachusetts in 1786. Impoverished backcountry farmers, many of them Revolutionary War veterans, were losing their farms through mortgage foreclosures and tax delinquencies. Led by

The Constitutional Convention


 Debtors Protest, 1787 This drawing done on the eve of the writing of the U.S. Constitution features a farmer with a plow, a rake, and a bottle complaining, “Takes all to pay taxes.” The discontent of debt-rich and currency-poor farmers alarmed republican leaders and helped persuade them that the Articles of Confederation needed to be replaced with a new constitution.

 Captain Daniel Shays, a veteran of the Revolution, these desperate debtors demanded that the state issue paper money, lighten taxes, and suspend property takeovers. Hundreds of angry agitators, again seizing their muskets, attempted to enforce their demands. Massachusetts authorities responded with drastic action. Supported partly by contributions from wealthy citizens, they raised a small army. Several skirmishes occurred—at Springﬁeld three Shaysites were killed, and one was wounded—and the movement collapsed. Daniel Shays, who believed that he was ﬁghting anew against tyranny, was condemned to death but was later pardoned. Shays’s followers were crushed, but the nightmarish memory lingered on. The Massachusetts legislature soon passed debtor-relief laws of the kind Shays had championed, seemingly conﬁ rming Thomas Jefferson’s fear of “democratic despotism.” “An elective despotism was not the government we fought for,” Jefferson wrote. The outbursts of Shays and other distressed debtors struck fear in the hearts of the propertied class, who began to suspect that the Revolution had created a monster of “mobocracy.” Unbridled republicanism, it seemed to many of the elite, had fed an insatiable appetite for liberty that was fast becoming license. Civic virtue was no longer sufﬁcient to rein in self-interest



 and greed. It had become “undeniably evident,” one skeptic sorrowfully lamented, “that some malignant disorder has seized upon our body politic.” If republicanism was too shaky a ground upon which to construct a new nation, a stronger central government would provide the needed foundation. A few panicky citizens even talked of importing a European monarch to carry on where George III had failed. How critical were conditions under the Confederation? Conservatives, anxious to safeguard their wealth and position, naturally exaggerated the seriousness of the nation’s plight. They were eager to persuade their fellow citizens to amend the Articles of Confederation in favor of a muscular central government. But the poorer states’ rights people pooh-poohed the talk of anarchy. Many were debtors who feared that a powerful federal government would force them to pay their creditors. Yet friends and critics of the Confederation agreed that it needed some strengthening. Popular toasts were “Cement to the Union” and “A hoop to the barrel.” The chief differences arose over how this goal should be attained and how a maximum degree of states’ rights could be reconciled with a strong central government. America probably could have muddled through somehow with amended Articles of Confederation. But the adoption of a completely new constitution certainly spared the Republic much costly indecision, uncertainty, and turmoil. The nationwide picture was actually brightening before the Constitution was drafted. Nearly half the states had not issued semiworthless paper currency, and some of the monetary black sheep showed signs of returning to the sound-money fold. Prosperity was beginning to emerge from the fog of depression. By 1789

 Social tensions reached a fever pitch during Shays’s Rebellion in 1787. In an interview with a local Massachusetts paper, instigator Daniel Shays (1747–1825) explained how the debt-ridden farmers hoped to free themselves from the demands of a merchantdominated government. The rebels would seize arms and

“


 march directly to Boston, plunder it, and then . . . destroy the nest of devils, who by their inﬂuence, make the Court enact what they please, burn it and lay the town of Boston in ashes.

”




Chapter 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 1776–1790


 overseas shipping had largely regained its place in the commercial world. If conditions had been as grim in 1787 as painted by foes of the Articles of Confederation, the move for a new constitution would hardly have encountered such heated opposition.

A
Convention of “Demigods”  Control of commerce, more than any other problem, touched off the chain reaction that led to a constitutional convention. Interstate squabbling over this issue had become so alarming by 1786 that Virginia, taking the lead, issued a call for a convention at Annapolis, Maryland. Nine states appointed delegates, but only ﬁve were ﬁ nally represented. With so laughable a showing, nothing could be done about the ticklish question of commerce. A charismatic New Yorker, thirty-oneyear-old Alexander Hamilton, brilliantly saved the convention from complete failure by engineering the adoption of his report. It called upon Congress to summon a convention to meet in Philadelphia the next year, not to deal with commerce alone, but to bolster the entire fabric of the Articles of Confederation. Congress, though slowly and certainly dying in New York City, was reluctant to take a step that might hasten its day of reckoning. But after six of the states had seized the bit in their teeth and appointed delegates anyhow, Congress belatedly issued the call for a convention “for the sole and express purpose of revising” the Articles of Confederation.

 Alexander Hamilton (1755–1804) clearly revealed his preference for an aristocratic government in his Philadelphia speech (1787):

“


 All communities divide themselves into the few and the many. The ﬁrst are the rich and wellborn, the other the mass of the people. . . . The people are turbulent and changing; they seldom judge or determine right. Give therefore to the ﬁrst class a distinct, permanent share in the government. They will check the unsteadiness of the second, and as they cannot receive any advantage by change, they therefore will ever maintain good government.

”


 Every state chose representatives, except for independent-minded Rhode Island (still “Rogues’ Island”), a stronghold of paper-moneyites. These leaders were all appointed by the state legislatures, whose members had been elected by voters who could qualify as property holders. This double distillation inevitably brought together a select group of propertied men— though it is a grotesque distortion to claim that they shaped the Constitution primarily to protect their personal ﬁ nancial interests. When one of them did suggest restricting federal ofﬁce to major property owners, he was promptly denounced for the unwisdom of “interweaving into a republican constitution a veneration for wealth.” A quorum of the ﬁ fty-ﬁve emissaries from twelve states ﬁ nally convened at Philadelphia on May 25, 1787, in the imposing red-brick statehouse. The smallness of the assemblage facilitated intimate acquaintance and hence compromise. Sessions were held in complete secrecy, with armed sentinels posted at the doors. Delegates knew that they would generate heated differences, and they did not want to advertise their own dissensions or put the ammunition of harmful arguments into the mouths of the opposition. The caliber of the participants was extraordinarily high—“demigods,” Jefferson called them. The urgency of the crisis induced the ablest men to drop their personal pursuits and come to the aid of their country. Most of the members were lawyers, and most of them fortunately were old hands at constitution making in their own states. George Washington, towering austere and aloof among the “demigods,” was unanimously elected chairman. His enormous prestige, as “the Sword of the Revolution,” served to quiet overheated tempers. Benjamin Franklin, then eighty-one, added the urbanity of an elder statesman, though he was inclined to be indiscreetly talkative in his declining years. Concerned for the secrecy of their deliberations, the convention assigned chaperones to accompany Franklin to dinner parties and make sure he held his tongue. James Madison, then thirty-six and a profound student of government, made contributions so notable that he has been dubbed “the Father of the Constitution.” Alexander Hamilton, then only thirty-two, was present as an advocate of a super-powerful central government. His ﬁve-hour speech in behalf of his plan, though the most eloquent of the convention, left only one delegate convinced—himself. Most of the ﬁery Revolutionary leaders of 1776 were absent. Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, and Thomas

Searching for Compromise




 Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826), despite his high regard for the leaders at the Philadelphia convention, still was not unduly concerned about Shaysite rebellions. He wrote in November 1787,

“


 What country before ever existed a century and a half without a rebellion? . . . The tree of liberty must be refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants. It is its natural manure.

”


 Rising Sun Symbol at the Top of Washington’s Chair This brass sun adorned the chair in which George Washington sat during the Constitutional Convention. Pondering the symbol, Benjamin Franklin observed, “I have the happiness to know it is a rising and not a setting sun.”

 Paine were in Europe; Samuel Adams and John Hancock were not elected by Massachusetts. Patrick Henry, ardent champion of states’ rights, was chosen as a delegate from Virginia but declined to serve, declaring that he “smelled a rat.” It was perhaps well that these architects of revolution were absent. The time had come to yield the stage to leaders interested in fashioning solid political systems.

Patriots in Philadelphia
 The ﬁ fty-ﬁve delegates were a conser vative, well-to-do body: lawyers, merchants, shippers, land speculators, and moneylenders. Not a single spokesperson was present from the poorer debtor groups. Nineteen of the ﬁ fty-ﬁve owned slaves. They were young (the average age was about forty-two) but experienced statesmen. Above all, they were nationalists, more interested in preserving and strengthening the young Republic than in further stirring the roiling cauldron of popular democracy. The delegates hoped to crystallize the last evaporating pools of Revolutionary idealism into a stable political structure that would endure. They strongly desired a ﬁ rm, digniﬁed, and respected government. They believed in republicanism but sought to protect the American experiment from its weaknesses abroad

 and excesses at home. In a broad sense, the piratical Dey of Algiers, who drove the delegates to their work, was a Founding Father. They aimed to clothe the central authority with genuine power, especially in controlling tariffs, so that the United States could wrest satisfactory commercial treaties from foreign nations. The shortsighted hostility of the British mercantilists spurred the constitution framers to their task, and in this sense the illiberal Lord Shefﬁeld was also a Founding Father. Other motives hovered in the Philadelphia hall. Delegates were determined to preserve the union, forestall anarchy, and ensure security of life and property against dangerous uprisings by the “mobocracy.” Above all, they sought to curb the unrestrained democracy rampant in the various states. “We have, probably, had too good an opinion of human nature in forming our confederation,” Washington concluded. The specter of the recent outburst in Massachusetts was especially alarming, and in this sense Daniel Shays was yet another Founding Father. Grinding necessity extorted the Constitution from a reluctant nation. Fear occupied the ﬁ fty-sixth chair.

Hammering Out a
Bundle of Compromises
 Some of the travel-stained delegates, when they ﬁ rst reached Philadelphia, decided upon a daring step. They would completely scrap the old Articles of Confederation, despite explicit instructions from Congress to revise. Technically, these bolder spirits were determined to overthrow the existing government of the United States (see Table 9.1) by peaceful means. A scheme proposed by populous Virginia, and known as “the large-state plan,” was ﬁrst pushed forward



Chapter 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 1776–1790


Table 9.1 Evolution of Federal Union
Years


Attempts at Union


Participants


1643–1684
1686–1689
1772–1776
1775–1781
1781–1789
1789–1790


 New Eng land Confederation Dominion of New Eng land Albany Congress Stamp Act Congress Committees of Correspondence First Continental Congress (adopts The Association) Second Continental Congress Articles of Confederation Federal Constitution



 as the framework of the Constitution. The Virginia Plan’s essence was that representation in both houses of a bicameral Congress should be based on population—an arrangement that would naturally give the larger states an advantage. Tiny New Jersey, suspicious of brawny Virginia, countered with “the small-state plan.” The New Jersey Plan provided for equal representation in a unicameral Congress by states, regardless of size and population, as under the existing Articles of Confederation. The weaker states feared that under the Virginia scheme, the stronger states would band together and lord it over the rest. Angry debate, heightened by a stiﬂ ing heat wave, led to deadlock. The danger loomed that the convention would unravel in complete failure. Even skeptical old Benjamin Franklin seriously proposed that the daily sessions be opened with a prayer by a local clergyman. After bitter and prolonged debate, the Great Compromise of the convention was hammered out and agreed upon. A cooling of tempers came coincidentally with a cooling of the temperature. The larger states were conceded representation by population in the House of Representatives (Art. I, Sec. II, para. 3; see the Appendix), and the smaller states were appeased by equal representation in the Senate (see Art. I, Sec. III, para. 1). Each state, no matter how poor or small, would have two senators. The big states obviously yielded more. As a sop to them, the delegates agreed that every tax bill or revenue measure must originate in the House, where population counted more heavily (see Art. I, Sec. VII, para. 1). This critical compromise broke the logjam, and from then on success seemed within reach. The ﬁ nal Constitution was short, not least because it grew out of the Anglo-American common law legal tradition, which made it unnecessary to be speciﬁc about every conceivable detail. It mostly provided a ﬂexible guide to broad rules of procedure, rather than

 colonies colonies colonies colonies colonies colonies colonies states states

 a ﬁ xed set of detailed laws. The original (unamended) Constitution contained just seven articles and ran to about ten printed pages. Elsewhere, where civil law traditions prevailed, constitutions took the form of elaborate legal codes and were often strikingly lengthy. India’s constitution, for example, which came into force in 1950, contains almost four hundred articles and runs to nearly two hundred pages. In a signiﬁcant reversal of the arrangement most state constitutions had embodied, the new Constitution provided for a robust—though still legally restrained—executive in the presidency. The framers were here partly inspired by the example of Massachusetts, where a vigorous, popularly elected governor had suppressed Shays’s Rebellion. The president was to have broad authority to make appointments to domestic ofﬁces—including judgeships—as well as veto power over legislation. Yet presidential power was far from absolute. The president, as commander in

 Dr. James McHenry (1753–1816), a delegate from Maryland to the Constitutional Convention of 1787, took notes on the arguments made for and against the drafting of a new constitution:

“


 Gov. Randolph observed that the confederation is incompetent to any one object for which it was instituted. The framers of it wise and great men; but human rights were the chief knowle[d]ge of the times when it was framed so far as they applied to oppose Great Britain. Requisitions for men and money had never offered their form to our assemblies. None of those vices that have since discovered themselves were apprehended.

”


A
Conservative Constitution 



 Signing of the Constitution of the United States, 1787 George Washington presided from the dais as the Constitutional Convention’s president. At a table in the front row sat James Madison, later called the Father of the Constitution, who recorded the proceedings in shorthand. Daily from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M., from late May through mid-September 1787, the ﬁfty-ﬁve delegates wrangled over ideas for a new federal government.

 chief, was granted the power to wage war, but Congress retained the crucial right to declare war—a division of responsibilities that has been an invitation to conﬂ ict between president and Congress ever since. The Constitution as drafted was a bundle of compromises; they stand out in every section. A key compromise was the method of electing the president indirectly by the Electoral College, rather than by direct means. While the large states would have the advantage in the ﬁ rst round of popular voting, as a state’s share of electors was based on the total of its senators and representatives in Congress, the small states would gain a larger voice if no candidate got a majority of electoral votes and the election was thrown to the House of Representatives, where each state would have, for this purpose only, just a single vote (see Art. II, Sec. I, para. 2). Although the framers of the Constitution expected election by the House to occur frequently, it has happened just twice, in 1800 and in 1824. Sectional jealousy also intruded. Should the voteless slave of the southern states count as a person in apportioning direct taxes and in according representation in the House of Representatives? The South, not wishing to be deprived of inﬂuence, answered “yes.” The North replied “no,” arguing that, as slaves were not citi-

 zens, the North might as logically demand additional representation based on its horses. As a compromise between total representation and none at all, it was decided that a slave might count as three-ﬁ fths of a person. Hence the memorable, if arbitrary, three-ﬁfths compromise (see Art. I, Sec. II, para. 3). Most of the states wanted to shut off the African slave trade. But South Carolina and Georgia, requiring slave labor in their rice paddies and malarial swamps, raised vehement protests. By way of compromise, the convention stipulated that the slave trade might continue until the end of 1807, at which time Congress could turn off the spigot (see Art. I, Sec. IX, para. 1). It did so as soon as the prescribed interval had elapsed. Meanwhile, all the new state constitutions except Georgia’s forbade overseas slave trade.

Safeguards for Conservatism
 Heated clashes among the delegates have been overplayed. The area of agreement was actually large; otherwise the convention would have speedily disbanded. Economically, the members of the Constitutional Convention generally saw eye to eye; they demanded



Chapter 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 1776–1790


 sound money and the protection of private property. Politically, they were in basic agreement; they favored a stronger government, with three branches and with checks and balances among them—what critics branded a “triple-headed monster.” Finally, the convention was virtually unanimous in believing that manhood-suffrage democracy—government by “democratick babblers”—was something to be feared and fought. Daniel Shays, the prime bogeyman, still frightened the conser vative-minded delegates. They deliberately erected safeguards against the excesses of the “mob,” and they made these barriers as strong as they dared. The awesome federal judges were to be appointed for life. The powerful president was to be elected indirectly by the Electoral College; the lordly senators were to be chosen indirectly by state legislatures (see Art. I, Sec. III, para. 1). Only in the case of one-half of one of the three great branches—the House of Representatives—were qualiﬁed (propertied) citizens permitted to choose their ofﬁcials by direct vote (see Art. I, Sec. II, para. 1). Yet the new charter also contained democratic elements. Above all, it stood foursquare on the two great principles of republicanism: that the only legitimate government was one based on the consent of the governed, and that the powers of government should be limited—in this case speciﬁcally limited by a written constitution. The virtue of the people, not the authority of the state, was to be the ultimate guarantor of liberty, justice, and order. “We the people,” the preamble began, in a ringing afﬁ rmation of these republican doctrines. At the end of seventeen muggy weeks—May 25 to September 17, 1787—only forty-two of the original ﬁ ftyﬁve members remained to sign the Constitution. Three of the forty-two, refusing to do so, returned to their states to resist ratiﬁcation. The remainder, adjourning

 One of the Philadelphia delegates recorded in his journal a brief episode involving Benjamin Franklin, who was asked by a woman when the convention ended,

“


 Well, Doctor, what have we got, a republic or a monarchy?

”


 The elder statesman answered,

“


 A republic, if you can keep it.

”


 to the City Tavern, celebrated the toastworthy occasion. But no members of the convention were completely happy about the result. They were too near their work—and too weary. Whatever their personal desires, they ﬁ nally had to compromise and adopt what was acceptable to the entire body, and what presumably would be acceptable to the entire country.

The Clash of Federalists
 and Antifederalists The Framing Fathers early foresaw that nationwide acceptance of the Constitution would not be easy to obtain. A formidable barrier was unanimous ratiﬁcation by all thirteen states, as required for amendment by the still-standing Articles of Confederation. But since absent Rhode Island was certain to veto the Constitution, the delegates boldly adopted a different scheme. They stipulated that when nine states had registered their approval through specially elected conventions, the Constitution would become the supreme law of the land in those states ratifying (see Art. VII). This was extraordinary, even revolutionary. It was in effect an appeal over the heads of the Congress that had called the convention, and over the heads of the legislatures that had chosen its members, to the people—or those of the people who could vote. In this way the framers could claim greater popular sanction for their handiwork. A divided Congress submitted the document to the states on this basis, without recommendation of any kind. The American people were somewhat astonished, so well had the secrets of the convention been concealed. The public had expected the old Articles of Confederation to be patched up; now it was handed a startling new document in which, many thought, the precious jewel of state sovereignty was swallowed up (see Table 9.2). One of the hottest debates of American history forthwith erupted. The antifederalists, who opposed the stronger federal government, were arrayed against the federalists, who obviously favored it. A motley crew gathered in the antifederalist camp. Its leaders included prominent revolutionaries like Samuel Adams, Patrick Henry, and Richard Henry Lee. Their followers consisted primarily, though not exclusively, of states’ rights devotees, backcountry dwellers, and one-horse farmers—in general, the poorest classes (see Map 9.4). They were joined by paper-moneyites and debtors, many of whom feared that a potent central government would force them to pay off their

Federalists and Antifederalists




Table 9.2 Strengthening the Central Government
Under Articles of Confederation


Under Federal Constitution


 A loose confederation of states 1 vote in Congress for each state

 A ﬁ rm union of people 2 votes in Senate for each state; representation by population in House (see Art. I, Secs. II, III) Simple majority vote in Congress, subject to presidential veto (see Art. I, Sec. VII, para. 2) Laws executed by powerful president (see Art. II, Secs. II, III) Congress to regulate both foreign and interstate commerce (see Art. I, Sec. VIII, para. 3) Extensive power in Congress to levy taxes (see Art. I, Sec. VIII, para. 1) Federal courts, capped by Supreme Court (see Art. III) Amendment less difﬁcult (see Art. V) Ample power to enforce laws by coercion of individuals and to some extent of states

 Vote of 9 states in Congress for all important mea sures Laws administered loosely by committees of Congress No congressional power over commerce No congressional power to levy taxes Limited federal courts Unanimity of states for amendment No authority to act directly upon individuals and no power to coerce states

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 rior

R.


 aw

 re

 nc

 e

NEW YORK
June 1788 Vote 30 for, 27 against 
.L


La k e S u p e


St


La
 ke

NEW HAMPSHIRE
June 1788 Vote 57 for, 47 against MASSACHUSETTS February 1788 Vote 187 for, 168 against RHODE ISLAND May 1790 Vote 34 for, 32 against 40°N CONNECTICUT January 1788 Vote 128 for, 40 against 
 n

La k e M i c h
 iga

 n

 ro Hu

N


 ntario

Lake O


 e Lak

Erie


PENNSYLVANIA
December 1787 Vote 46 for, 23 against 
Ohio


Interactive Map


R.


MARYLAND
April 1788 Vote 63 for, 11 against 
KENTUCKY DISTRICT

 n

TENNESSEE DISTRICT

 s es

 ee

 VIRGINIA 70° W June 1788 Vote 89 for, 79 against

R.


Te
 n

 Map 9.4 The Struggle over Ratiﬁcation This mottled map shows that federalist support tended to cluster around the coastal areas, which had enjoyed proﬁtable commerce with the outside world, including the export of grain and tobacco. Impoverished frontiersmen, suspicious of a powerful new central government under the Constitution, were generally antifederalists.

NEW JERSEY
December 1787 Vote 38 for, 0 against DELAWARE December 1787 Vote 30 for, 0 against 
NORTH CAROLINA
November 1789 Vote 194 for, 77 against SOUTH CAROLINA May 1788 Vote 149 for, 73 against 
 Federalist majority Antifederalist majority

GEORGIA
January 1788 Vote 26 for, 0 against 30 °N 
 Evenly divided Politically unorganized



8 0 °W






300 Km.


300 Mi.


AT L A N T I C OCEAN



Chapter 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 1776–1790


 Richard Henry Lee (1732–1794), a prominent antifederalist, attacked the proposed constitution in 1788:

“


 ’Tis really astonishing that the same people, who have just emerged from a long and cruel war in defense of liberty, should now agree to ﬁx an elective despotism upon themselves and their posterity.

”


 The same year, prominent Patriot Patrick Henry (1736–1799) agreed that the proposed constitution endangered everything the Revolution had sought to protect:

“


 This constitution is said to have beautiful features; but when I come to examine these features, Sir, they appear to me horridly frightful: Among other deformities, it has an awful squinting; it squints towards monarchy: And does not this raise indignation in the breast of every American? Your President may easily become King: Your Senate is so imperfectly constructed that your dearest rights may be sacriﬁced by what may be a small minority; . . . Where are your checks in this Government?

”


 debts—and at full value. Large numbers of antifederalists saw in the Constitution a plot by the upper crust to steal power back from the common folk. Silver-buckled federalists had power and inﬂuence on their side. They enjoyed the support of such commanding ﬁgures as George Washington and Benjamin Franklin. Most of them lived in the settled areas along the seaboard, not in the raw backcountry. Overall, they were wealthier than the antifederalists, more educated, and better orga nized. They also controlled the press. More than a hundred newspapers were published in America in the 1780s; only a dozen supported the antifederalist cause. Antifederalists voiced vehement objections to the “gilded trap” known as the Constitution. They cried with much truth that it had been drawn up by the aristocratic elements and hence was antidemocratic. They likewise charged that the sovereignty of the states was being submerged and that the freedoms of the indi-

 vidual were jeopardized by the absence of a bill of rights. They decried the dropping of annual elections for congressional representatives, the erecting of a federal stronghold ten miles square (later the District of Columbia), the creation of a standing army, the omission of any reference to God, and the highly questionable procedure of ratifying with only two-thirds of the states. A Philadelphia newspaper added that Benjamin Franklin was “a fool from age” and George Washington “a fool from nature.”

The Great Debate in the States
 Special elections, some apathetic but others hotly contested, were held in the various states for members of the ratifying conventions (see Table 9.3). The candidates—federalist or antifederalist—were elected on the basis of their pledges for or against the Constitution. With the ink barely dry on the parchment, four small states quickly accepted the Constitution, for they had come off much better than they expected. Pennsylvania, number two on the list of ratiﬁers, was the ﬁ rst large state to act, but not until high-handed irregularities had been employed by the federalist legislature in calling a convention. These included the forcible seating of two antifederalist members, their clothes torn and their faces red with rage, in order to complete a quorum. Massachusetts, the second most populous state, provided an acid test. If the Constitution had failed in Massachusetts, the entire movement might easily have bogged down. The Boston ratifying convention at ﬁ rst contained an antifederalist majority. It included grudging Shaysites and the aging Samuel Adams, as suspicious of government power in 1787 as he had been in 1776. The assembly buzzed with dismaying talk of summoning another constitutional convention, as though the nation had not already shot its bolt. Clearly the choice was not between this Constitution and a better one, but between this Constitution and the creaking Articles of Confederation. The absence of a bill of rights alarmed the antifederalists. But the federalists gave them solemn assurances that the ﬁ rst Congress would add such a safeguard by amendment, and ratiﬁcation was then secured in Massachusetts by the rather narrow margin of 187 to 168. Three more states fell into line. The last of these was New Hampshire, whose convention at ﬁ rst had contained a strong antifederalist majority. The federal-

Ratifying the Constitution




 Table 9.3 Ratiﬁcation of the Constitution State

Date


Vote in
Convention


Rank in
Population


Population


1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.


Dec. 7, 1787
Dec. 12, 1787
Dec. 18, 1787
Jan. 2, 1788
Jan. 9, 1788
Feb. 7, 1788


Unanimous
46 to 23
Unanimous
Unanimous
128 to 40
187 to 168




59,096
433,611
184,139
82,548
237,655
475,199


Apr. 28, 1788
May 23, 1788
June 21, 1788
June 26, 1788
July 26, 1788
Nov. 21, 1789
May 29, 1790


63 to 11
149 to 73
57 to 46
89 to 79
30 to 27
195 to 77
34 to 32




319,728
249,073
141,899
747,610
340,241
395,005
69,112


7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.


Delaware
Pennsylvania
New Jersey
Georgia
Connecticut
Massachusetts
 (incl. Maine) Maryland South Carolina New Hampshire Virginia New York North Carolina Rhode Island

 ists cleverly arranged a prompt adjournment and then won over enough waverers to secure ratiﬁcation. Nine states—all but Virginia, New York, North Carolina, and Rhode Island—had now taken shelter under the “new federal roof,” and the document was ofﬁcially adopted on June 21, 1788. Francis Hopkinson exulted in his song “The New Roof”: Huzza! my brave boys, our work is complete; The world shall admire Columbia’s fair seat. But such rejoicing was premature so long as the four dissenters, conspicuously New York and Virginia, dug in their heels.

The Four Laggard States
 Proud Virginia, the biggest and most populous state, provided ﬁerce antifederalist opposition. There the college-bred federalist orators, for once, encountered worthy antagonists, including the ﬁery Patrick Henry. He professed to see in the fearsome document the death warrant of liberty. George Washington, James Madison, and John Marshall, on the federalist side, lent inﬂuential support. With New Hampshire about to ratify, the new Union was going to be formed anyhow, and Virginia could not very well continue comfortably as an independent state. After exciting debate in the state convention, ratiﬁcation carried, 89 to 79.

 New York also experienced an uphill struggle, burdened as it was with its own heavily antifederalist state convention. Alexander Hamilton at heart favored a much stronger central government than that under debate, but he contributed his sparkling personality and persuasive eloquence to whipping up support for federalism as framed. He also joined John Jay and James Madison in penning a masterly series of articles for the New York newspapers. Though designed as propaganda, these essays remain the most penetrating commentary ever written on the Constitution and are still widely sold in book form as The Federalist. Probably the most famous of these is Madison’s Federalist No. 10, which brilliantly refuted the conventional wisdom of the day that it was impossible to extend a republican form of government over a large territory. New York ﬁ nally yielded. Realizing that the state could not prosper apart from the Union, the convention ratiﬁed the document by the close count of 30 to 27. At the same time, it approved thirty-two proposed amendments and—vain hope—issued a call for yet another convention to modify the Constitution. Last-ditch dissent developed in only two states. A hostile convention met in North Carolina, then adjourned without taking a vote. Rhode Island did not even summon a ratifying convention, rejecting the Constitution by popular referendum. The two most ruggedly individualist centers of the colonial era— homes of the “otherwise minded”—thus ran true to



Chapter 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 1776–1790


Banner Paraded by the Society
 of Pewterers in New York City, 1788 This silk banner was carried by members of the Society of Pewterers in a parade in New York City, on July 23, 1788, to celebrate the impending ratiﬁcation of the United States Constitution by New York State. The enthusiasm of these craftsmen for the Constitution conﬁrms that not all federalists were well-to-do.

The First Coin Authorized by Congress, 1787
 The Fugio cent was minted by a private company and remained in circulation until the 1850s. The word Fugio (“I ﬂy”) and the sundial show that time ﬂies; “Mind Your Business” urges diligence.

 form. They were to change their course, albeit unwillingly, only after the new government had been in operation for some months. The race for ratiﬁcation, despite much apathy, was close and quite bitter in some localities. No lives were lost, but riotous disturbances broke out in New York and Pennsylvania, involving bruises and bloodshed. There was much behind-the-scenes pressure on delegates who had promised their constituents to vote against the Constitution. The last four states ratiﬁed,

A
Triumphant Cartoon This cartoon appeared in the Massachusetts Centinel on August 2, 1788. Note the two laggards, especially the sorry condition of Rhode Island. 
The New Constitution


 not because they wanted to but because they had to. They could not safely exist outside the fold.

A
Conservative Triumph  The minority had triumphed—twice. A militant minority of American radicals had engineered the military Revolution that cast off the unwritten British constitution. A militant minority of conser vatives—now embracing many of the earlier radicals—had engineered

 Two Massachusetts citizens took opposite positions on the new Constitution. Jonathan Smith, a farmer unsympathetic to Shays’s Rebellion of 1787, wrote,

“


 I am a plain man, and I get my living by the plow. I have lived in a part of the country where I have known the worth of good government by the want of it. The black cloud of Shays rebellion rose last winter in my area. It brought on a state of anarchy that led to tyranny. . . . When I saw this Constitution I found that it was a cure for these disorders. I got a copy of it and read it over and over. . . . I don’t think the worse of the Constitution because lawyers, and men of learning, and moneyed men are fond of it. [They] are all embarked in the same cause with us, and we must all swim or sink together.

”


 Amos Singletary (1721–1806), who described himself as a “poor” man, argued against the Constitution:

“


 We fought Great Britain—some said for a three-penny tax on tea; but it was not that. It was because they claimed a right to tax us and bind us in all cases whatever. And does not this Constitution do the same? . . . These lawyers and men of learning and money men, that talk so ﬁnely and gloss over matters so smoothly, to make us poor illiterate people swallow down the pill. . . . They expect to be the managers of the Constitution, and get all the power and money into their own hands. And then they will swallow up all us little folks, just as the whale swallowed up Jonah!

”




 the peaceful revolution that overthrew the inadequate constitution known as the Articles of Confederation. Eleven states, in effect, had seceded from the Confederation, leaving the two still in, actually out in the cold. A majority had not spoken. Only about one-fourth of the adult white males in the country, chieﬂy the propertied people, had voted for delegates to the ratifying conventions. Careful estimates indicate that if the new Constitution had been submitted to a manhoodsuffrage vote, as in New York, it would have encountered much more opposition, probably defeat. Conservatism was victorious. Safeguards had been erected against mob-rule excesses, while the republican gains of the Revolution were conserved. Radicals such as Patrick Henry, who had ousted British rule, saw themselves in turn upended by American conser vatives. The federalists were convinced that by setting the drifting ship of state on a steady course, they could restore economic and political stability. Yet if the architects of the Constitution were conservative, it is worth emphasizing that they conserved the principle of republican government through a redeﬁnition of popular sovereignty. Unlike the antifederalists, who believed that the sovereignty of the people resided in a single branch of government—the legislature—the federalists contended that every branch—executive, judiciary, and legislature—effectively represented the people. By ingeniously embedding the doctrine of selfrule in a self-limiting system of checks and balances among these branches, the Constitution reconciled the potentially conﬂ icting principles of liberty and order. It represented a marvelous achievement, one that elevated the ideals of the Revolution even while setting boundaries to them. One of the distinctive— and enduring—paradoxes of American history was thus revealed: in the United States, conser vatives and radicals alike have championed the heritage of republican revolution.



Chapter 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 1776–1790


 CHRONOLOGY

 First Continental Congress calls for abolition of slave trade



 Military ofﬁcers form Society of the Cincinnati



 Philadelphia Quakers found world’s ﬁ rst antislavery society



Land Ordinance of 1785






 New Jersey constitution temporarily gives women the vote



Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom
 Shays’s Rebellion Meeting of ﬁve states to discuss revision of the Articles of Confederation

 Articles of Confederation adopted by Second Continental Congress



Northwest Ordinance
Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia




 Ratiﬁcation by nine states guarantees a new government under the Constitution





 Massachusetts adopts ﬁ rst constitution drafted in convention and ratiﬁed by popular vote Articles of Confederation put into effect

KEY TERMS
Society of the Cincinnati (174) disestablished (175) Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom (175) civic virtue (176) Articles of Confederation (179) Old Northwest (182) Land Ordinance of 1785 (182) Northwest Ordinance (182) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Shays’s Rebellion (184) Virginia Plan (188) New Jersey Plan (188) Great Compromise (188) common law (188) civil law (188) three-ﬁfths compromise (189) antifederalists (190) federalists (190) The Federalist (193) 
 Lord Shefﬁeld Daniel Shays Patrick Henry

Varying Viewpoints




The Constitution: Revolutionary or Counterrevolutionary?


A


 lthough the Constitution has endured for over two centuries as the basis of American government, historians have differed sharply over how to interpret its origins and meaning. The so-called Nationalist School of historians, writing in the late nineteenth century, viewed the Constitution as the logical culmination of the Revolution and, more generally, as a crucial step in the God-given progress of AngloSaxon peoples. As described in John Fiske’s The Critical Period of American History (1888), the young nation, buffeted by foreign threats and growing internal chaos, with only a weak central government to lean on, was saved by the adoption of a more rigorous Constitution, the ultimate fulﬁ llment of republican ideals. By the early twentieth century, however, the progressive historians had turned a more critical eye to the Constitution. Having observed the Supreme Court of their own day repeatedly overrule legislation designed to better social conditions for the masses, they began to view the original document as an instrument created by elite conser vatives to wrest political power away from the common people. For historians like Carl Becker and Charles Beard, the Constitution was part of the Revolutionary struggle between the lower classes (small farmers, debtors, and laborers) and the upper classes (merchants, ﬁ nanciers, and manufacturers). Beard’s An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United States (1913) argued that the Articles of Confederation had protected debtors and small property owners and displeased wealthy elites heavily invested in trade, the public debt, and the promotion of manufacturing. Only a stronger, more centralized government could protect their extensive property interests. Reviewing the economic holdings of the Founding Fathers, Beard determined that most of those men were indeed deeply involved in investments that would increase in value under the Constitution. In effect, Beard argued, the Constitution represented a successful attempt by conser vative elites to buttress their own economic supremacy at the expense of less fortunate Americans. He further contended that the Constitution was ratiﬁed by default, because the people most disadvantaged by the new government did not possess the property qualiﬁ-

 cations needed to vote—more evidence of the class conﬂ ict underlying the struggle between the federalists and the antifederalists. Beard’s economic interpretation of the Constitution held sway through the 1940s. Historians like Merrill Jensen elaborated on Beard’s analysis by arguing that the 1780s were not in fact mired in chaos, but rather were hopeful times for many Americans. In the 1950s, however, this analysis fell victim to the attacks of the “consensus” historians, who sought explanations for the Constitution in factors other than class interest. Scholars such as Robert Brown and Forrest McDonald convincingly disputed Beard’s evidence about delegates’ property ownership and refuted his portrayal of the masses as propertyless and disfranchised. They argued that the Constitution derived from an emerging consensus that the country needed a stronger central government. Scholars since the 1950s have searched for new ways to understand the origins of the Constitution. The most inﬂuential work has been Gordon Wood’s Creation of the American Republic (1969). Wood reinterpreted the ratiﬁcation controversy as a struggle to deﬁ ne the true essence of republicanism. Antifederalists so feared human inclination toward corruption that they shuddered at the prospect of putting powerful political weapons in the hands of a central government. They saw small governments susceptible to local control as the only safeguard against tyranny. Federalists, on the other hand, believed that a strong, balanced national government would rein in selﬁsh human instincts and channel them toward the pursuit of the common good. Alarmed by the indulgences of the state governments, the federalists, James Madison in particular (especially in Federalist No. 10), developed the novel ideal of an “extensive republic,” a polity that would achieve stability by virtue of its great size and diversity. This conception challenged the conventional wisdom that a republic could survive only if it extended over a small area with a homogeneous population. In this sense, Wood argued, the Constitution represented a bold experiment—the fulﬁ llment, rather than the repudiation, of the most advanced ideas of the Revolutionary era—even though it emanated from traditional elites determined to curtail dangerous disruptions to the social order.



Chapter 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 1776–1790


To Learn More
 Richard Bernstein with Kim S. Rice, Are We to Be a Nation? The Making of the Constitution (1987) Ruth Bloch, Visionary Republic: Millennial Themes in American Thought, 1756–1800 (1986) Richard Bushman, The Reﬁnement of America: Persons, Houses, Cities (1992) Ron Chernow, Alexander Hamilton (2004) Joseph Ellis, Founding Brothers: The Revolutionary Generation (2001) Joanne Pope Melish, Disowning Slavery: Gradual Emancipation and “Race” in New England, 1780–1860 (1998) Jack Rakove, James Madison and the Creation of the American Republic (2002)

 ———, ed., The Federalist: The Essential Essays, by Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay (2003) David Szatmary, Shays’ Rebellion (1980) Gordon S. Wood, The Radicalism of the American Revolution (1991)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Launching the
New Ship of State





1789–1800
 I shall only say that I hold with Montesquieu, that a government must be ﬁtted to a nation, as much as a coat to the individual; and, consequently, that what may be good at Philadelphia may be bad at Paris, and ridiculous at Petersburg [Russia]. ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 1799

A


 merica’s new ship of state did not spread its sails to the most favorable breezes. Within twelve troubled years, the American people had risen up and thrown overboard both the British yoke and the Articles of Confederation. A decade of lawbreaking and constitution smashing was not the best training for government making. Americans had come to regard a central authority, replacing that of George III, as a necessary evil—something to be distrusted, watched, and curbed. The ﬁ nances of the infant government were likewise precarious. The revenue had declined to a trickle, whereas the public debt, with interest heavily in arrears, was mountainous. Worthless paper money, both state and national, was as plentiful as metallic money was scarce. America’s precarious national security was also threatened by the wars that rocked Europe in the wake of the French Revolution of 1789—an event that

 also roiled domestic politics in the ﬂedgling United States. In the face of all those difﬁculties, the Americans were brashly trying to erect a republic on an immense scale, something that no other people had attempted and that traditional political theory deemed impossible. The eyes of a skeptical world were on the upstart United States.

Growing Pains
 When the Constitution was launched in 1789, the Republic was continuing to grow at an amazing rate. Population was doubling about every twenty-ﬁve years, and the ﬁ rst ofﬁcial census of 1790 recorded almost 4 million people. Cities had blossomed proportionately: Philadelphia numbered 42,000, New York 33,000, Boston 18,000, Charleston 16,000, and Baltimore 13,000.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 The French statesman Anne Robert Jacques Turgot (1727–1781) had high expectations for a united America:

“


 This people is the hope of the human race. . . . The Americans should be an example of political, religious, commercial and industrial liberty. . . . But to obtain these ends for us, America . . . must not become . . . a mass of divided powers, contending for territory and trade.

”


 America’s population was still about 90 percent rural, despite the ﬂourishing cities. All but 5 percent of the people lived east of the Appalachian Mountains. The trans-Appalachian overﬂow was concentrated chieﬂy in Kentucky, Tennessee, and Ohio, all of which were welcomed as states within fourteen years. (Vermont preceded them, becoming the fourteenth state in 1791.) Foreign visitors to America looked down their noses at the roughness and crudity resulting from axand-riﬂe pioneering life. People of the western waters—in the stumpstudded clearings of Kentucky, Tennessee, and Ohio— were particularly restive and dubiously loyal. The mouth of the Mississippi, their life-giving outlet, lay in the hands of unfriendly Spaniards. Smooth-talking Spanish and British agents, jingling gold, moved freely among the settlers and held out seductive promises of independence. Many observers wondered whether the emerging United States would ever grow to maturity.

Washington for President
 George Washington, the esteemed war hero, was unanimously drafted as president by the Electoral College in 1789—the only presidential nominee ever to be honored by unanimity. His presence was imposing: 6 feet 2 inches, 175 pounds, broad and sloping shoulders, strongly pointed chin, and pockmarks (from smallpox) on nose and cheeks. Much preferring the quiet of Mount Vernon to the turmoil of politics, he was perhaps the only president who did not in some way angle for this exalted ofﬁce. Balanced rather than brilliant, he commanded his followers by strength of character rather than by the arts of the politician.

 Washington Honored This idealized portrait symbolizes the reverential awe in which Americans held “the Father of His Country.”

 Washington’s long journey from Mount Vernon to New York City, the temporary capital, was a triumphal procession. He was greeted by roaring cannon, pealing bells, ﬂower-carpeted roads, and singing and shouting citizens. With appropriate ceremony, he solemnly and somewhat ner vously took the oath of ofﬁce on April 30, 1789, on a crowded balcony overlooking Wall Street, which some have regarded as a bad omen. Washington soon put his stamp on the new government, especially by establishing the cabinet. The Constitution does not mention a cabinet (see Table 10.1); it merely provides that the president “may require” written opinions of the heads of the executive-branch departments (see Art. II, Sec. II, para. 1 in the Appendix). But this system proved so cumbersome, and involved so much homework, that cabinet meetings gradually evolved in the Washington administration. At ﬁ rst only three full-ﬂedged department heads served under the president: Secretary of State Thomas

The Bill of Rights


Jefferson, Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, and Secretary of War Henry Knox.


The Bill of Rights
 The new nation faced some unﬁ nished business. Many antifederalists had sharply criticized the Constitution drafted at Philadelphia for its failure to provide guarantees of individual rights such as freedom of religion and trial by jury. Many states had ratiﬁed the federal Constitution on the understanding that it would soon be amended to include such guarantees. Drawing up a bill of rights headed the list of imperatives facing the new government. Amendments to the Constitution could be proposed in either of two ways—by a new constitutional convention requested by two-thirds of the states or by a two-thirds vote of both houses of Congress. Fearing that a new convention might unravel the narrow federalist victory in the ratiﬁcation struggle, James Madison determined to draft the amendments himself. He then guided them through Congress, where his intellectual



 and political skills were quickly making him the leading ﬁgure. Adopted by the necessary number of states in 1791, the ﬁ rst ten amendments to the Constitution, popularly known as the Bill of Rights, safeguard some of the most precious American principles. Among these are protections for freedom of religion, speech, and the press; the right to bear arms and to be tried by a jury; and the right to assemble and petition the government for redress of grievances. The Bill of Rights also prohibits cruel and unusual punishments and arbitrary government seizure of private property. To guard against the danger that enumerating such rights might lead to the conclusion that they were the only ones protected, Madison inserted the crucial Ninth Amendment. It declares that specifying certain rights “shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.” In a gesture of reassurance to the states’ righters, he included the equally signiﬁcant Tenth Amendment, which reserves all rights not explicitly delegated or prohibited by the federal Constitution “to the States respectively, or to the people.” By preserving a strong central government

Table 10.1 Evolution of the Cabinet
Position


Date Established


Comments


 Secretary of state Secretary of Treasury Secretary of war Attorney general



 Secretary of navy Postmaster general Secretary of interior Secretary of agriculture Secretary of commerce and labor Secretary of commerce Secretary of labor



 Loses cabinet status, 1947 Loses cabinet status, 1970

 Secretary of defense



 Secretary of health, education, and welfare Secretary of housing and urban development Secretary of transportation Secretary of energy Secretary of health and human ser vices Secretary of education Secretary of veterans’ affairs Secretary of homeland security



 Subordinate to this secretary, without cabinet rank, are secretaries of army, navy, and air force Ofﬁce divided, 1979

 Loses cabinet status, 1947 Not head of Justice Dept. until 1870

 Ofﬁce divided, 1913



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 while specifying protections for minority and individual liberties, Madison’s amendments partially swung the federalist pendulum back in an antifederalist direction. (See Amendments I–X.) The ﬁ rst Congress also nailed other newly sawed government planks into place. It created effective federal courts under the Judiciary Act of 1789. The act orga nized the Supreme Court, with a chief justice and ﬁve associates, as well as federal district and circuit courts, and established the ofﬁce of attorney general. New Yorker John Jay, Madison’s collaborator on The Federalist papers and one of the young Republic’s most seasoned diplomats, became the ﬁ rst chief justice of the United States.

Hamilton Revives the
Corpse of Public Credit
 The key ﬁgure in the new government was still smoothfaced Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, a native of the British West Indies. Hamilton’s genius was unquestioned, but critics claimed he loved his adopted country more than he loved his countrymen. Doubts about his character and his loyalty to the republican experiment always swirled about his head. Hamilton regarded himself as a kind of prime minister in Washington’s cabinet and on occasion thrust his hands into the affairs of other departments, including that of his archrival, Thomas Jefferson, who served as secretary of state. A ﬁ nancial wizard, Hamilton set out immediately to correct the economic vexations that had crippled the Articles of Confederation. His plan was to shape the ﬁscal policies of the administration in such a way as to favor the wealthier groups. They, in turn, would gratefully lend the government monetary and political support. The new federal regime would thrive, the propertied classes would fatten, and prosperity would trickle down to the masses. The youthful ﬁ nancier’s ﬁ rst objective was to bolster the national credit. Without public conﬁdence in the government, Hamilton could not secure the funds with which to ﬂoat his risky schemes. He therefore boldly urged Congress to “fund” the entire national debt “at par” and to assume completely the debts incurred by the states during the recent war. Funding at par meant that the federal government would pay off its debts at face value, plus accumulated interest—a then-enormous total of more than $54 million. So many people believed the infant Treasury in-

Alexander Hamilton (1755–1804), by John Trumbull,
 1792 He was one of the youngest and most brilliant of the Founding Fathers, who might have been president but for his ultraconservatism, a scandalous adultery, and a duelist’s bullet. Hamilton favored a strong central government with a weak legislature to unify the infant nation and encourage industry. His chief rival, Thomas Jefferson, who extolled states’ rights as a bulwark of liberty and thought the United States should remain an agricultural society, regarded Hamilton as a monarchist plotter and never forgave him for insisting that “the British Govt. was the best in the world: and that he doubted much whether any thing short of it would do in America.”

 capable of meeting those obligations that government bonds had depreciated to ten or ﬁ fteen cents on the dollar. Yet speculators held ﬁstfuls of them, and when Congress passed Hamilton’s mea sure in 1790, they grabbed for more. Some of them galloped into rural areas ahead of the news, buying for a song the depreciated paper holdings of farmers, war veterans, and widows. Hamilton was willing, even eager, to have the new government shoulder additional obligations. While

 Hamilton's Financial Politics

 push ing the funding scheme, he urged Congress to assume the debts of the states, totaling some $21.5 million. The secretary made a convincing case for assumption. The state debts could be regarded as a proper national obligation, for they had been incurred in the war for independence. But foremost in Hamilton’s thinking was the belief that assumption would chain the states more tightly to the “federal chariot.” Thus the secretary’s maneuver would shift the attachment of wealthy creditors from the states to the federal government. The support of the rich for the national administration was a crucial link in Hamilton’s political strategy of strengthening the central government. States burdened with heavy debts, like Massachusetts, were delighted by Hamilton’s proposal. States with small debts, like Virginia, were less charmed. The stage was set for some old-fashioned horse trading. Virginia did not want the state debts assumed, but it did want the forthcoming federal district*—now the District of Columbia—to be located on the Potomac River. It would thus gain in commerce and prestige. Hamilton persuaded a reluctant Jefferson, who had recently come home from France, to line up enough votes in Congress for assumption. In return, Virginia would have the federal district on the Potomac. The bargain was carried through in 1790.

Customs Duties and
Excise Taxes
 The new ship of state thus set sail dangerously overloaded. The national debt had swelled to $75 million owing to Hamilton’s insistence on honoring the outstanding federal and state obligations alike. Anyone less determined to establish such a healthy public credit could have sidestepped $13 million in back interest and could have avoided the state debts entirely. But Hamilton, “Father of the National Debt,” was not greatly worried. His objectives were as much political as economic. He believed that within limits, a national debt was a “national blessing”—a kind of Union adhesive. The more creditors to whom the government owed money, the more people there would be with a personal stake in the success of his ambitious enterprise. His unique contribution was to make a debt—ordinarily a liability—an asset for vitalizing the

 *Authorized by the Constitution, Art. I, Sec. VIII, para. 17.



Debt Owed
Foreigners
$11,710,000
Federal Domestic Debt
$42,414,000
State Debt
$21,500,000


Miscellaneous
Revenue


Excise
Revenue
 (on Whiskey, etc.)

Customs
Duties
(Tariffs)


 Figure 10.1 Hamilton’s Financial Structure Supported by Revenues

 ﬁ nancial system as well as the government itself (see Figure 10.1). Where was the money to come from to pay interest on this huge debt and run the government? Hamilton’s ﬁ rst answer was customs duties, derived from a tariff. Tariff revenues, in turn, depended on a vigorous foreign trade, another crucial link in Hamilton’s overall economic strategy for the new Republic. The ﬁ rst tariff law, imposing a low tariff of about 8 percent on the value of dutiable imports, was speedily passed by the ﬁrst Congress in 1789, even before Hamilton was sworn in. Revenue was by far the main goal, but the mea sure was also designed to erect a low protective wall around infant industries, which bawled noisily for more shelter than they received. Hamilton had the vision to see that the Industrial Revolution would soon reach America, and he argued strongly in favor of more protection for the well-to-do manufacturing groups—another vital element in his economic program. But Congress was still dominated by the agricultural and commercial interests, and it voted only two slight increases in the tariff during Washington’s presidency. Hamilton, with characteristic vigor, sought additional internal revenue and in 1791 secured from Congress an excise tax on a few domestic items, notably whiskey. The new levy of seven cents a gallon was borne chieﬂy by the distillers who lived in the backcountry, where the wretched roads forced the farmer to reduce (and liquefy) bulky bushels of grain to horseback proportions. Whiskey ﬂowed so freely on the frontier in the form of distilled liquor that it was used for money.



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 One of the most eloquent tributes to Hamilton’s apparent miracle working came from Daniel Webster (1782–1852) in the Senate (1831):

“


 He smote the rock of the national resources, and abundant streams of revenue gushed forth. He touched the dead corpse of public credit, and it sprung upon its feet.

”


Hamilton Battles Jefferson
 for a Bank As the capstone for his ﬁ nancial system, Hamilton proposed a bank of the United States. An enthusiastic admirer of most things Eng lish, he took as his model the Bank of Eng land. Speciﬁcally, he proposed a powerful private institution, of which the government would be the major stockholder and in which the federal Treasury would deposit its surplus monies. The central government not only would have a convenient strongbox, but federal funds would stimulate business by remaining in circulation. The bank would also print urgently needed paper money and thus provide a sound and stable national currency, badly needed since the days when the Continental dollar was “not worth a Continental.” The proposed bank would indeed be useful. But was it constitutional? Jefferson, whose written opinion on this question Washington requested, argued vehemently against the bank. There was, he insisted, no speciﬁc authorization in the Constitution for such a ﬁ nancial octopus. He was convinced that all powers not speciﬁcally granted to the central government were reserved to the states, as provided in the about-to-be-ratiﬁed Bill of Rights (see Amendment X). He therefore concluded that the states, not Congress, had the power to charter banks. Believing that the Constitution should be interpreted “literally” or “strictly,” Jefferson and his states’ rights disciples zealously embraced the theory of “strict construction.” Hamilton, also at Washington’s request, prepared a brilliantly reasoned reply to Jefferson’s arguments. Hamilton in general believed that what the Constitution did not forbid it permitted; Jefferson, in contrast, generally believed that what it did not permit it forbade. Hamilton boldly invoked the clause of the Constitution that stipulates that Congress may pass any laws “necessary and proper” to carry out the powers vested in

 the various government agencies (see Art. I, Sec. VIII, para. 18). The government was explicitly empowered to collect taxes and regulate trade. In carrying out these basic functions, Hamilton argued, a national bank would be not only “proper” but “necessary.” By inference or implication—that is, by virtue of “implied powers”—Congress would be fully justiﬁed in establishing the Bank of the United States. In short, Hamilton contended for a “loose” or “broad” interpretation of the Constitution. He and his federalist followers thus evolved the theory of “loose construction” by invoking the “elastic clause” of the Constitution—a precedent for enormous federal powers. Hamilton’s ﬁ nancial views prevailed. His eloquent and realistic arguments were accepted by Washington, who reluctantly signed the bank mea sure into law. This explosive issue had been debated with much heat in Congress, where the old North-South cleavage still lurked ominously. The most enthusiastic support for the bank naturally came from the commercial and ﬁnancial centers of the North, whereas the strongest opposition arose from the agricultural South. The Bank of the United States, as created by Congress in 1791, was chartered for twenty years. Located in Philadelphia, it was to have a capital of $10 million, one-ﬁ fth of it owned by the federal government. Stock was thrown open to public sale. To the agreeable surprise of Hamilton, a milling crowd oversubscribed in less than two hours, pushing aside many would-be purchasers.

Mutinous Moonshiners
 in Pennsylvania The Whiskey Rebellion, which ﬂared up in southwestern Pennsylvania in 1794, sharply challenged the new national government. Hamilton’s high excise tax bore harshly on these homespun pioneer folk. They regarded it not as a tax on a frivolous luxury but as a burden on an economic necessity and a medium of exchange. Even preachers of the gospel were paid in “Old Monongahela rye.” Rye and corn crops distilled into alcohol were more cheaply transported to eastern markets than bales of grain. Deﬁant distillers ﬁ nally erected whiskey poles, similar to the liberty poles of anti–stamp tax days in 1765, and raised the cry “Liberty and No Excise.” Boldly tarring and feathering revenue ofﬁcers, they brought collections to a halt. President Washington, once a revolutionary, was alarmed by what he called these “self-created societ-

The Whiskey Rebellion




 The Whiskey Boys The cartoonist clearly favored the Pennsylvania rebels who resisted Hamilton’s imposition of an excise tax on whiskey.

 ies.” With the hearty encouragement of Hamilton, he summoned the militias of several states. Anxious moments followed the call, for there was much doubt as to whether men in other states would muster to crush a rebellion in a fellow state. Despite some opposition, an army of about thirteen thousand rallied to the colors, and two widely separated columns marched briskly forth in a gorgeous, leaf-tinted Indian summer, until knee-deep mud slowed their progress.

Attorney Hugh Henry Brackenridge (1748–1816)
 mediated between the Whiskey Rebels and the town of Pittsburgh. He later wrote of the hated excise tax,

“


 I saw the operation to be unequal in this country. . . . It is true that the excise paid by the country would be that only on spirits consumed in it. But even in the case of exports, the excise must be advanced in the ﬁrst instance by the distiller and this would prevent effectually all the poorer part from carrying on the business. I . . . would have preferred a direct tax with a view to reach unsettled lands which all around us have been purchased by speculating men.

”


 When the troops reached the hills of western Pennsylvania, they found no insurrection. The “Whiskey Boys” were overawed, dispersed, or captured. Washington, with an eye to healing old sores, pardoned the two small-fry convicted culprits. The Whiskey Rebellion was minuscule—some three rebels were killed—but its consequences were mighty. George Washington’s government, now substantially strengthened, commanded a new respect. Yet the foes of the administration condemned its brutal display of force—for having used a sledgehammer to crush a gnat.

The Emergence of
Political Parties
 Almost overnight, Hamilton’s ﬁscal feats had established the government’s sound credit rating. The Treasury could now borrow needed funds in the Netherlands on favorable terms. But Hamilton’s ﬁ nancial successes—funding, assumption, the excise tax, the bank, the suppression of the Whiskey Rebellion—created some political liabilities. All these schemes encroached sharply upon states’ rights. Many Americans, dubious about the new Constitution in the ﬁ rst place, might never have approved it if they had foreseen how the states were going to be



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 overshadowed by the federal colossus. Now, out of resentment against Hamilton’s revenue-raising and centralizing policies, an orga nized opposition began to build. What once was a personal feud between Hamilton and Jefferson developed into a full-blown and frequently bitter political rivalry. National political parties, in the modern sense, were unknown in America when George Washington took his inaugural oath. There had been Whigs and Tories, federalists and antifederalists, but these groups were factions rather than parties. They had sprung into existence over hotly contested special issues; they had faded away when their cause had triumphed or ﬁ zzled. The Founders at Philadelphia had not envisioned the existence of permanent political parties. Organized opposition to the government—especially a democratic government based on popular consent—seemed tainted by disloyalty. Opposition to the government affronted the spirit of national unity that the glorious cause of the Revolution had inspired. The notion of a formal party apparatus was thus a novelty in the 1790s, and when Jefferson and Madison ﬁ rst orga nized their opposition to the Hamiltonian program, they conﬁ ned their activities to Congress and did not anticipate creating a long-lived and popular party. But as their antagonism to Hamilton stiffened, and as the amazingly boisterous and widely read newspapers of the day spread their political message, and Hamilton’s, among

 the people, primitive semblances of political parties began to emerge. The two-party system has existed in the United States since that time (see Table 10.2). Ironically, in light of early suspicions about the very legitimacy of parties, their competition for power has actually proved to be among the indispensable ingredients of a sound democracy. The party out of power—“the loyal opposition”— traditionally plays the invaluable role of the balance wheel on the machinery of government, ensuring that politics never drifts too far out of kilter with the wishes of the people.

The Impact of the
French Revolution
 When Washington’s ﬁ rst administration ended in early 1793, Hamilton’s domestic policies had already stimulated the formation of two political camps— Jeffersonian Democratic-Republicans and Hamiltonian Federalists. As Washington’s second term began, foreign-policy issues brought the differences between them to a fever pitch. Only a few weeks after Washington’s inauguration in 1789, the curtain had risen on the ﬁ rst act of the French Revolution. (See “Thinking Globally: Two Revolutions,” pp. 208–209.) Twenty-six years were to pass before the seething continent of Europe collapsed into

Table 10.2 Evolution of Major Parties*
Year


Hamiltonians


Jeffersonians


 ca. 1792 Federalists ca. 1816 Death of Federalists

 ca. 1820

Democratic-Republicans


Republicans
 One party: Era of Good Feelings

 ca. 1825 National Republicans

Whigs




Republicans
 To present

*See


 the Appendix (Presidential Elections) for third parties.

Democratic-Republicans
(Jacksonian Democrats)
Democrats


 To present

The French Revolution


 a peace of exhaustion. Few non-American events have left a deeper scar on American political and social life. In a sense the French Revolution was misnamed: it was a historic, global revolution that sent tremors through much of the Western world and beyond. In its early stages, the upheaval was surprisingly peaceful, involving as it did a successful attempt to impose constitutional shackles on Louis XVI. The American people, loving liberty and deploring despotism, cheered. They were ﬂattered to think that the outburst in France was but the second chapter of their own glorious Revolution, as to some extent it was. Only a few ultraconser vative Federalists—fearing change, reform, and “leveling” principles—were from the outset dubious or outspokenly hostile to the “despicable mobocracy.” The more ardent Jeffersonians were overjoyed. The French Revolution entered a more ominous phase in 1792, when France declared war on hostile Austria. Powerful ideals and powerful armies alike were on the march. Late in that year, the electrifying news reached America that French citizen armies had hurled back the invading foreigners and that France had proclaimed itself a republic. Americans enthusiastically sang “The Marseillaise” and other rousing French Revolutionary songs, and they renamed thor-



 British political observer William Cobbett (1763– 1835) wrote of the frenzied reaction in America to the death of Louis XVI,

“


 Never was the memory of a man so cruelly insulted as that of this mild and humane monarch. He was guillotined in efﬁgy, in the capital of the Union [Philadelphia], twenty or thirty times every day, during one whole winter and part of the summer. Men, women and children ﬂocked to the tragical exhibition, and not a single paragraph appeared in the papers to shame them from it.

”


 oughfares with democratic ﬂare. King Street in New York, for example, became Liberty Street, and in Boston, Royal Exchange Alley became Equality Lane. But centuries of pent-up poison could not be purged without baleful results. The guillotine was set up, the king was beheaded in 1793, the church was attacked, and the head-rolling Reign of Terror was begun. Back in America, God-fearing Federalist aristocrats ner vously

 The Execution of Queen Marie Antoinette, 1793 The bloody excesses of the notorious guillotine disgusted many Americans and soured them on the promises of the French Revolution.

THINKING GLOBALLY

Two Revolutions


O


 n July 14, 1789, a howling mob stormed the Bastille—a dank Parisian prison described by the Marquis de Lafayette as France’s “fortress of despotism”—killed half a dozen soldiers, and paraded the severed heads of its commanding ofﬁcer and the mayor of Paris throughout the city. The French Revolution was thus bloodily launched. Bastille Day is still celebrated as France’s national birthday, just as Americans celebrate the Fourth of July. The roots of the two Revolutions were thickly intertwined. To defray the cost of the war that had ousted France from North America in 1763, Britain had levied new taxes on its colonists, provoking them to revolt in 1776. In turn, aiding the rebellious Americans forced the French government to seek new revenues, lighting the fuse that led to the political explosion in Paris in 1789. Even more notable was the intellectual commonality between the two upheavals. The ideas that inspired the American and French revolutionaries grew from the common heritage of radical eighteenth-century Enlightenment thinking about equality, freedom, and the sovereignty of

 the people. The French Declaration of the Rights of Man (1789) deliberately echoed Thomas Jefferson’s Declaration of Independence (1776) when it said that “men are born and remain free and equal in rights,” among which were “liberty, property, security, and resistance to oppression.” Many French thinkers openly credited the American Revolution as the inspiration for their own. As the American revolutionary Thomas Paine remarked to George Washington, “The principles of America opened the Bastille.” Indeed, in many ways the French were even more radical than the Americans; their Revolution abolished slavery (temporarily), something the Americans failed to do for almost one hundred years more. And yet the two Revolutions unfolded in dramatically different ways and left vastly different legacies. The Americans largely disarmed after winning their independence; allowed some eighty thousand hard-core Loyalists to depart without suffering grievous retribution (see “Makers of America: The Loyalists,” pp. 154–155); peacefully resumed their habits of worship, toil, and governance; and pro-

 Storming the Bastille, 1789 This event signaled the outbreak of the French Revolution.



 ceeded to draft the U.S. Constitution, under which they have lived, with amendments, for more than two centuries. The American revolutionaries, in short, secured the fruits of their Revolution fairly easily, while the French struggled through ghastly bloodshed to ultimate failure—an outcome that haunted European politics for at least a century thereafter. Revolutionaries in France had to grapple with the constant threats of counterrevolution at home and armed intervention from abroad. As a result, they soon descended into grisly violence, including the execution of some forty thousand Frenchmen in the notorious Reign of Terror of 1793–1794, the guillotining of the king and queen, and preemptive attacks on neighboring countries. They stripped the Catholic Church of its property and privileges, brieﬂy experimented with a new state religion called the Cult of Reason, and eventually conceded supreme power to a brash young general, Napoleon Bonaparte, who convulsed all of Europe in the name of “liberty, equality, and fraternity.” Napoleon was ﬁnally defeated at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815, after which the Bourbon monarchy was restored to the throne. Why did these two great eruptions, sprung from a shared chain of events and espousing almost identical political philosophies, fare so differently? Many scholars have found the answer in the two countries’ markedly different pre-Revolutionary histories. France’s Revolution confronted implacably entrenched adversaries in the landed nobility and the clergy. Those two “estates,” as they were called, clung tenaciously to their ancient privileges, as did the princes and potentates who ruled in all the countries on France’s borders. To succeed, the French Revolution had to concentrate power in the hands of a state powerful enough to extinguish its internal enemies and to forestall foreign intervention as well. Those stark necessities help account for the fact that down to the present day, central governments are stronger in almost all European societies than in the United States. The Americans faced no such obstacles. They had no aristocracy worthy of the name, no church with the kind of inﬂuence that the Catholic Church commanded in France, and no menacing neighbors to fear. They had the luxury of being able to focus on limiting the power of the state, not enlarging it. Theirs was largely a colonial conﬂict, whereas France had to endure a class conﬂict. Not until Reconstruction following the Civil War would Americans confront a comparable task of mustering sufﬁcient power to uproot and permanently extinguish an entire social order. It has been said that to mount a revolution is “to murder and create.” What was exceptional about the American

 revolutionaries was that they were spared the necessity to murder. The American Revolution grew not from abstract ideas, but from the preceding two centuries of American experience. It was less a revolution in the usual sense than a consolidation of already well-established norms, values, and behaviors. Alexander Hamilton understood that crucial point when he wrote to the Marquis de Lafayette in 1789, “I dread the reveries of your philosophic politicians.”

The Key to the Bastille, Mount Vernon, Virginia
 The Marquis de Lafayette instructed Thomas Paine, his American Revolutionary War comrade, to deliver the key to the liberated Bastille to George Washington. It hangs to this day in the entry hall of Washington’s home at Mount Vernon, Virginia, a lasting symbol of the deep afﬁnity between the French and American Revolutions.





Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 ﬁ ngered their tender white necks and eyed the Jeffersonian masses apprehensively. Lukewarm Federalist approval of the early Revolution turned, almost overnight, to heated talk of “blood-drinking cannibals.” Sober-minded Jeffersonians regretted the bloodshed. But they felt, with Jefferson, that one could not expect to be carried from “despotism to liberty in a feather bed” and that a few thousand aristocratic heads were a cheap price to pay for human freedom. Such approbation was shortsighted, for dire peril loomed ahead. The earlier battles of the French Revolution had not hurt America directly, but now Britain was sucked into the contagious conﬂ ict. The conﬂagration speedily spread to the New World, where it vividly affected the expanding young American Republic. Thus was repeated the familiar story of every major European war, beginning with 1688, that involved a watery duel for control of the Atlantic Ocean. (See Table 6.2 on p. 114.)

 Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation Ominously, the Franco-American alliance of 1778 was still on the books. By its own terms, it was to last “forever.” It bound the United States to help the French defend their West Indies against future foes, and the booming British ﬂeets were certain to attack these strategic islands. Many Jeffersonian Democratic-Republicans favored honoring the alliance. Aﬂame with the liberal ideals of the French Revolution, red-blooded Jeffersonians were eager to enter the conﬂ ict against Britain, the recent foe, at the side of France, the recent friend. America owed France its freedom, they argued, and now was the time to pay the debt of gratitude. But President George Washington, levelheaded as usual, was not swayed by the clamor of the crowd. Backed by Hamilton, he believed that war had to be avoided at all costs. Washington was coolly playing for enormous stakes. The nation in 1793 was militarily feeble, economically wobbly, and politically disunited. But solid foundations were being laid, and American cradles were continuing to rock a bumper crop of babies. Washington wisely reasoned that if America could avoid the broils of Europe for a generation or so, it would then be populous enough and powerful enough to assert its maritime rights with strength and success. Otherwise it might invite catastrophe. The strategy of delay—of playing for time while the birthrate fought

 America’s battles—was a cardinal policy of the Founding Fathers. It was based on a shrewd assessment of American strengths and weaknesses at this critical moment in the young Republic’s history. Hamilton and Jefferson, often poles apart on other issues, were in agreement here. Accordingly, Washington boldly issued his Neutrality Proclamation in 1793, shortly after the outbreak of war between Britain and France. This epochal document not only proclaimed the government’s ofﬁcial neutrality in the widening conﬂ ict but sternly warned American citizens to be impartial toward both armed camps. As America’s ﬁ rst formal declaration of aloofness from Old World quarrels, Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation proved to be a major prop of the spreading isolationist tradition. It also proved to be enormously controversial. The pro-French Jeffersonians were enraged by the Neutrality Proclamation, especially by Washington’s method of announcing it unilaterally, without consulting Congress. The pro-British Federalists were heartened. Debate soon intensiﬁed. An impetuous, thirtyyear-old representative of the French Republic, Citizen Edmond Genêt, had landed at Charleston, South Carolina. With unrestrained zeal he undertook to ﬁt out privateers and otherwise take advantage of the existing Franco-American alliance. The giddy-headed envoy— all sail and no anchor—was soon swept away by his enthusiastic reception by the Jeffersonian Republicans. He foolishly came to believe that the Neutrality Proclamation did not reﬂect the true wishes of the American people, and he consequently embarked upon unneutral activity not authorized by the French alliance— including the recruitment of armies to invade Spanish Florida and Louisiana, as well as British Canada. Even Madison and Jefferson were soon disillusioned by his conduct. After he threatened to appeal over the head of “Old Washington” to the sovereign voters, the president demanded Genêt’s withdrawal, and the Frenchman was replaced by a less impulsive emissary. Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation clearly illustrates the truism that self-interest is the basic cement of alliances. In 1778 both France and America stood to gain; in 1793 only France. Technically, the Americans did not ﬂout their obligation because France never ofﬁcially called upon them to honor it. American neutrality in fact favored France. The French West Indies urgently needed Yankee foodstuffs. If the Americans had entered the war at France’s side, the British ﬂeets would have blockaded the American coast and cut off those essential supplies. America was thus much



The French Revolution




La k
Supere
 ior





100 Km.


80°W


ER W DA LO NA CA

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA

100 Mi.


 n

Hu


L.


M


 ke

 ich

La


 ron

P
 UP

Fort
Point au Fer


 ER

N
 CA

Lak


 AD

A


 a e Ont

 rio

Fort
 Dutchman’s Point

Fort Oswegatchie


 VT.

Fort Oswego


NEW YORK
Original 13 states 
Fort Detroit


 Wayne’s Victory Fallen Timbers,

La


 ke

E


 Territory ceded to the United States, 1783

 rie

 Treaty line Indian battle British fort on American soil

Fort Miami


40°N


 PENNSYLVANIA

 MD.

 io

R.


 of Line Treaty , 1795 le il v Green Oh

 St. Clair’s Defeat,

R.


Fort Niagara


NORTHWEST TERRITORY

 Harmar’s Defeat, 1790

 ce

.L


 aw

 re

Ft. Michilimackinac


St


 n

 ig

 a

N


DEL. VIRGINIA

Map 10.1 American Posts Held by the British and British-American Clashes
After 1783
Interactive Map


 more useful to France as a reliable neutral provider than as a blockaded partner-in-arms.

 Embroilments with Britain President Washington’s far-visioned policy of neutrality was sorely tried by the British. For ten long years, they had been retaining the chain of northern frontier posts on U.S. soil, all in deﬁance of the peace treaty of 1783 (see Map 10.1). The London government was reluctant to abandon the lucrative fur trade in the Great Lakes region and also hoped to build up an Indian buffer state to contain the ambitious Americans. British agents openly sold ﬁrearms and ﬁ rewater to the Indians of the Miami Confederacy, an alliance of eight Indian nations who terrorized Americans invading their lands. Little Turtle, war chief of the Miamis, gave notice

 that the confederacy regarded the Ohio River as the United States’ northwestern, and their own southeastern, border. In 1790 and 1791, Little Turtle’s braves defeated armies led by Generals Josiah Harmar and Arthur St. Clair, kill ing hundreds of soldiers and handing the United States what remains one of its worst defeats in the history of the frontier. But in 1794, when a new army under General “Mad Anthony” Wayne routed the Miamis at the Battle of Fallen Timbers, the British refused to shelter Indians ﬂeeing from the battle. Abandoned when it counted by their red-coated friends, the Indians soon offered Wayne the peace pipe. In the Treaty of Greenville, signed in August 1795, the confederacy gave up vast tracts of the Old Northwest, including most of presentday Indiana and Ohio. In exchange the Indians received a lump-sum payment of $20,000, an annual annuity of $9,000, the right to hunt the lands they had ceded, and,



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 Signing the Treaty of Greenville, 1795 Following General Wayne’s victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794, the Miami Indians surrendered their claims to much of the Old Northwest.

 most important, what they hoped was recognition of their sovereign status. Although the treaty codiﬁed an unequal relationship, the Indians felt that it put some limits on the ability of the United States to decide the fate of Indian peoples.

 Thomas Paine (1737–1809), then in France and resenting George Washington’s anti-French policies, addressed the president in an open letter (1796) that reveals his bitterness:

“


 And as to you, sir, treacherous in private friendship (for so you have been to me, and that in the day of danger) and a hypocrite in public life, the world will be puzzled to decide, whether you are an apostate or an imposter; whether you have abandoned good principles, or whether you ever had any.

”


 On the sea frontier, the British were eager to starve out the French West Indies and naturally expected the United States to defend them under the FrancoAmerican alliance. Hard-boiled commanders of the Royal Navy, ignoring America’s rights as a neutral, struck savagely. They seized about three hundred American merchant ships in the West Indies, impressed scores of seamen into ser vice on British vessels, and threw hundreds of others into foul dungeons. These actions, especially impressment, incensed patriotic Americans. A mighty outcry arose, chieﬂy from Jeffersonians, that America should once again ﬁght George III in defense of its liberties. At the very least, it should cut off all supplies to its oppressor through a nationwide embargo. But the Federalists stoutly resisted all demands for drastic action. Hamilton’s high hopes for economic development depended on trade with Britain. War with the world’s mightiest commercial empire would pierce the heart of the Hamiltonian ﬁ nancial system.

 Washington's Farewell

 Jay’s Treaty and Washington’s Farewell President Washington, in a last desperate gamble to avert war, decided to send Chief Justice John Jay to London in 1794. The Jeffersonians were acutely unhappy over the choice, partly because they feared that so notorious a Federalist and Anglophile would sell out his country. Arriving in London, Jay gave the Jeffersonians further cause for alarm when, at the presentation ceremony, he routinely kissed the queen’s hand. Unhappily, Jay entered the negotiations with weak cards, which were further sabotaged by Hamilton. The latter, fearful of war with Britain, secretly supplied the British with the details of America’s bargaining strategy. Not surprisingly, Jay won few concessions. The British did promise to evacuate the chain of posts on U.S. soil—a pledge that inspired little conﬁdence, since it had been made before in Paris (to the same John Jay!) in 1783. In addition, Britain consented to pay damages for the recent seizures of American ships. But the British stopped short of pledging anything about future maritime seizures and impressments or about supplying arms to Indians. And they forced Jay to give ground by binding the United States to pay the debts still owed to British merchants on pre-Revolutionary accounts. Jay’s unpopular pact, more than any other issue, vitalized the newborn Democratic-Republican party of Thomas Jefferson. When the Jeffersonians learned of Jay’s concessions, their rage was fearful to behold. The treaty seemed like an abject surrender to Britain, as well as a betrayal of the Jeffersonian South. Southern planters would have to pay the major share of the preRevolutionary debts, while rich Federalist shippers were collecting damages for recent British seizures. Jeffersonian mobs hanged, burned, and guillotined in efﬁgy that “damn’d archtraitor, Sir John Jay.” Even George Washington’s huge popularity was compromised by the controversy over the treaty. Jay’s Treaty had other unforeseen consequences. Fearing that the treaty foreshadowed an AngloAmerican alliance, Spain moved hastily to strike a deal with the United States. Pinckney’s Treaty of 1795 with Spain granted the Americans virtually every thing they demanded, including free navigation of the Mississippi, the right of deposit (warehouse rights) at New Orleans, and the large disputed territory of western Florida. (See Map 9.3 on p. 184.)



 Exhausted after the diplomatic and partisan battles of his second term, President Washington decided to retire. His choice contributed powerfully to establishing a two-term tradition for American presidents.* In his Farewell Address to the nation in 1796 (never delivered orally but printed in the newspapers), Washington strongly advised the avoidance of “permanent alliances” like the still-vexatious Franco-American Treaty of 1778. Contrary to general misunderstanding, Washington did not oppose all alliances, but favored only “temporary alliances” for “extraordinary emergencies.” This was admirable advice for a weak and divided nation in 1796. But what is sound counsel for a young stripling may not apply later to a mature and muscular giant. Washington’s contributions as president were enormous, even though the sparkling Hamilton at times seemed to outshine him. The central government, its ﬁscal feet now under it, was solidly established. The West was expanding. The merchant marine was plowing the seas. Above all, Washington had kept the nation out of both overseas entanglements and foreign wars. The experimental stage had passed, and the presidential chair could now be turned over to a less impressive ﬁgure. But republics are notoriously ungrateful. When Washington left ofﬁce in 1797, he was showered with the brickbats of partisan abuse, quite in contrast with the bouquets that had greeted his arrival.

John Adams Becomes President
 Who should succeed the exalted “Father of His Country”? Alexander Hamilton was the best-known member of the Federalist party, now that Washington had bowed out. But his ﬁ nancial policies, some of which had fattened the speculators, had made him so unpopular that he could not hope to be elected president. The Federalists were forced to turn to Washington’s vice president, the experienced but ungracious John Adams, a rugged chip off old Plymouth Rock. The DemocraticRepublicans naturally rallied behind their master organizer and leader, Thomas Jefferson. Political passions ran feverishly high in the presidential campaign of 1796. The lofty presence of

 *Not broken until 1940 by Franklin D. Roosevelt and made a part of the Constitution in 1951 by the Twenty-second Amendment. (See the Appendix.)



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


Although Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826) and John
 Adams hardly saw eye to eye, Jefferson displayed grudging respect for Adams in a piece of private correspondence in 1787:

“


 He is vain, irritable, and a bad calculator of the force and probable effect of the motives which govern men. This is all the ill which can possibly be said of him. He is as disinterested as the Being who made him.

”


John Adams, by John Singleton Copley, 1783
 When he entered Harvard College in 1751, Adams intended to prepare for the ministry, but four absorbing years of study excited him about other intellectual and career possibilities: “I was a mighty metaphysician, at least I thought myself such.” Adams also tried his hand at being a mighty scientist, doctor, and orator. Upon graduation he became a schoolmaster but soon decided to take up the law.

 Washington had hitherto imposed some restraints; now the lid was off. Cultured Federalists like Fisher Ames referred to the Jeffersonians as “ﬁ re-eating salamanders, poison-sucking toads.” Federalists and Democratic-Republicans even drank their ale in separate taverns. The issues of the campaign, as it turned out, focused heavily on personalities. But the Jeffersonians again assailed the too-forceful crushing of the

 Whiskey Rebellion and, above all, the negotiation of Jay’s hated treaty. John Adams, with most of his support in New England, squeezed through by the narrow margin of 71 votes to 68 in the Electoral College. Jefferson, as runnerup, became vice president.* One of the ablest statesmen of his day, Adams at sixty-two was a stuffy ﬁgure. Sharp-featured, bald, relatively short (ﬁve feet seven inches), and thickset (“His Rotundity”), he impressed observers as a man of stern principles who did his duty with stubborn devotion. Although learned and upright, he was a tactless and prickly intellectual aristocrat, with no appeal to the masses and with no desire to cultivate any. Many citizens regarded him with “respectful irritation.” The crusty New Eng lander suffered from other handicaps. He had stepped into Washington’s shoes, which no successor could hope to ﬁ ll. In addition, Adams was hated by Hamilton, who had resigned from the Treasury in 1795 and who now headed the war faction of the Federalist party, known as the “High Federalists.” The famed ﬁ nancier even secretly plotted with cer tain members of the cabinet against the president, who had a conspiracy rather than a cabinet on his hands. Adams regarded Hamilton as “the most ruthless, impatient, artful, indefatigable and unprincipled intriguer in the United States, if not in the world.” Most ominous of all, Adams inherited a violent quarrel with France—a quarrel whose gunpowder lacked only a spark.

 *The possibility of such an inharmonious two-party combination in the future was removed by the Twelfth Amendment to the Constitution in 1804. (See the Appendix.)

The French Crisis




 The XYZ Affair When President Adams’s envoys to Paris were asked to pay a huge bribe as the price of doing diplomatic business, humiliated Americans rose up in wrath against France. Here an innocent young America is being plundered by Frenchmen as John Bull looks on in amusement from across the English Channel.

 Unofﬁcial Fighting with France The French were infuriated by Jay’s Treaty. They condemned it as the initial step toward an alliance with Britain, their perpetual foe. They further assailed the pact as a ﬂagrant violation of the Franco-American Treaty of 1778. French warships, in retaliation, began to seize defenseless American merchant vessels, altogether about three hundred by mid-1797. Adding insult to outrage, the Paris regime haughtily refused to receive America’s newly appointed envoy and even threatened him with arrest. President Adams kept his head, temporarily, even though the nation was mightily aroused. True to Washington’s policy of steering clear of war at all costs, he tried again to reach an agreement with the French and appointed a diplomatic commission of three men, including John Marshall, the future chief justice. Adams’s envoys, reaching Paris in 1797, hoped to meet with Charles Maurice de Talleyrand, the crafty French foreign minister. They were secretly approached

 by three go-betweens, later referred to as X, Y, and Z in the published dispatches. The French spokesmen, among other concessions, demanded an unneutral loan of 32 million ﬂorins, plus what amounted to a bribe of $250,000, for the privilege of merely talking with Talleyrand. These terms were intolerable. The American trio knew that bribes were standard diplomatic devices in Europe, but they gagged at paying a quarter of a million dollars for mere talk, without any assurances of a settlement. Negotiations quickly broke down, and John Marshall, on reaching New York in 1798, was hailed as a conquering hero for his steadfastness. The XYZ Affair sent a wave of war hysteria sweeping through the United States, catching up even President Adams. The slogan of the hour became “Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute.” The Federalists were delighted at this unexpected turn of affairs, whereas all except the most rabid Jeffersonians hung their heads in shame over the misbehavior of their French friends. War preparations in the United States were pushed along at a feverish pace, despite considerable Jeffersonian opposition in Congress. The Navy Department



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


Preparation for War to Defend
Commerce: The Building of
 the Frigate Philadelphia In 1803 this frigate ran onto the rocks near Tripoli harbor, and about three hundred ofﬁcers and men were imprisoned by the Tripolitans (see Map 11.2 on p. 233). The ship was reﬂoated for service against the Americans, but Stephen Decatur led a party of men that set it aﬁre.

 was created; the three-ship navy was expanded; the United States Marine Corps was reestablished (originally created in 1775, the Marine Corps had been disbanded at the end of the Revolutionary War). A new army of ten thousand men was authorized (but not fully raised). Bloodshed was conﬁ ned to the sea, and principally to the West Indies. In two and a half years of undeclared hostilities (1798–1800), American privateers and menof-war of the new navy captured over eighty armed vessels ﬂying the French colors, though several hundred Yankee merchant ships were lost to the enemy. Only a slight push, it seemed, might plunge both nations into a full-dress war.

 Americans would send a new minister, he would be received with proper respect. This French furor brought to Adams a degree of personal acclaim that he had never known before—and was never to know again. He doubtless perceived that a full-ﬂedged war, crowned by the conquest of the Floridas and Louisiana, would bring new plaudits to the Federalist party—and perhaps a second term to himself. But the heady wine of popularity did not sway his ﬁ nal judgment. He, like other Founding Fathers, realized full well that war must be avoided while the country was relatively weak. Adams unexpectedly exploded a bombshell when, early in 1799, he submitted to the Senate the name of a new minister to France. Hamilton and his war-hawk

Adams Puts Patriotism
Above Party
 Embattled France, its hands full in Europe, wanted no war. An outwitted Talleyrand realized that to ﬁght the United States would merely add one more foe to his enemy roster. The British, who were lending the Americans cannon and other war supplies, were actually driven closer to their wayward cousins than they were to be again for many years. Talleyrand therefore let it be known, through roundabout channels, that if the

 The ﬁrmness of President John Adams (1735–1826) was revealed in his message to Congress (June 1798):

“


 I will never send another minister to France without assurances that he will be received, respected, and honored as the representative of a great, free, powerful, and independent nation.

”


The Alien and Sedition Hysteria


 faction were enraged. But public opinion—Jeffersonian and reasonable Federalist alike—was favorable to one last try for peace. America’s envoys (now three) found the political skies brightening when they reached Paris early in 1800. The ambitious “Little Corporal,” the Corsican Napoleon Bonaparte, had recently seized dictatorial power. He was eager to free his hands of the American squabble so that he might continue to redraw the map of Europe and perhaps create a New World empire in Louisiana. The afﬂ ictions and ambitions of the Old World were again working to America’s advantage. After a great deal of haggling, a memorable treaty known as the Convention of 1800 was signed in Paris. France agreed to annul the twenty-two-year-old marriage of (in)convenience, but as a kind of alimony the United States agreed to pay the damage claims of American shippers. So ended the nation’s only peacetime military alliance for a century and a half. Its troubled history does much to explain the traditional antipathy of the American people to foreign entanglements. John Adams, ﬂ inty to the end, deserves immense credit for his belated push for peace, even though he was moved in part by jealousy of Hamilton. Adams not only avoided the hazards of war, but also unwittingly smoothed the path for the peaceful purchase of Louisiana three years later. He should indeed rank high among the forgotten purchasers of this vast domain. If America had drifted into a full-blown war with France in 1800, Napoleon would not have sold Louisiana to Jefferson on any terms in 1803. President Adams, the bubble of his popularity pricked by peace, was aware of his signal contribution to the nation. He later suggested as the epitaph for his tombstone (not used), “Here lies John Adams, who took upon himself the responsibility of peace with France in the year 1800.”

The Federalist Witch Hunt
 Exulting Federalists had meanwhile capitalized on the anti-French frenzy to drive through Congress in 1798 a sheaf of laws designed to mufﬂe or minimize their Jeffersonian foes. The ﬁ rst of these oppressive laws was aimed at supposedly pro-Jeffersonian “aliens.” Most European immigrants, lacking wealth, were scorned by the aristocratic Federalist party. But they were welcomed as voters by the less prosperous and more democratic Jeffersonians. The Federalist Congress, hoping to dis-



 courage the “dregs” of Europe, erected a disheartening barrier. They raised the residence requirements for aliens who desired to become citizens from a tolerable ﬁve years to an intolerable fourteen. This drastic new law violated the traditional American policy of opendoor hospitality and speedy assimilation. Two additional Alien Laws struck heavily at undesirable immigrants. The president was empowered to deport dangerous foreigners in time of peace and to deport or imprison them in time of hostilities. Though defensible as a war mea sure—and an ofﬁcially declared war with France seemed imminent—this was an arbitrary grant of executive power contrary to American tradition and to the spirit of the Constitution, even though the stringent Alien Laws were never enforced. The “lockjaw” Sedition Act, the last mea sure of the Federalist clampdown, was a direct slap at two priceless freedoms guaranteed in the Constitution by the Bill of Rights—freedom of speech and freedom of the press (First Amendment). This law provided that anyone who impeded the policies of the government or falsely defamed its ofﬁcials, including the president, would be liable to a heavy ﬁ ne and imprisonment. Severe though the mea sure was, the Federalists believed that it was justiﬁed. The verbal violence of the day was unrestrained, and foul-penned editors, some of them exiled aliens, viliﬁed Adams’s anti-French policy in vicious terms. Many outspoken Jeffersonian editors were indicted under the Sedition Act, and ten were brought to trial. All of them were convicted, often by packed juries swayed by prejudiced Federalist judges. Some of the victims were harmless partisans, who should have been spared the notoriety of martyrdom. Among them was Congressman Matthew Lyon (the “Spitting Lion”), who had earlier gained fame by spitting in the face of a Federalist. He was sentenced to four months in jail for writing of President Adams’s “unbounded thirst for ridiculous pomp, foolish adulation, and selﬁsh avarice.” Another culprit was lucky to get off with a ﬁ ne of $100 after he had expressed the wish that the wad of a cannon ﬁ red in honor of Adams had landed in the seat of the president’s breeches. The Sedition Act seemed to be in direct conﬂ ict with the Constitution. But the Supreme Court, dominated by Federalists, was of no mind to declare this Federalist law unconstitutional. (The Federalists intentionally wrote the law to expire in 1801, so that it could not be used against them if they lost the next election.) This attempt by the Federalists to crush free speech and silence the opposition party, high-handed



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


Congressional Pugilists
 Satirical representation of Matthew Lyon’s ﬁght in Congress with the Federalist representative Roger Griswold.

 as it was, undoubtedly made many converts for the Jeffersonians. Yet the Alien and Sedition Acts, despite pained outcries from the Jeffersonians they muzzled, commanded widespread popular support. Anti-French hysteria played directly into the hands of witch-hunting conser-

 In 1800 James Callender (1758–1803) published a pamphlet that assailed the president in strong language. For blasts like the following tirade, Callender was prosecuted under the Sedition Act, ﬁned $250, and sentenced to prison for nine months:

“


 The reign of Mr. Adams has, hitherto, been one continued tempest of malignant passions. As president, he has never opened his lips, or lifted his pen, without threatening and scolding. The grand object of his administration has been to exasperate the rage of contending parties, to calumniate and destroy every man who differs from his opinions. . . . Every person holding an ofﬁce must either quit it, or think and vote exactly with Mr. Adams.

”


 vatives. In the congressional elections of 1798–1799, the Federalists, riding a wave of popularity, scored the most sweeping victory of their entire history.

The Virginia (Madison)
 and Kentucky (Jefferson) Resolutions Resentful Jeffersonians naturally refused to take the Alien and Sedition Acts lying down. Jefferson himself feared that if the Federalists managed to choke free speech and free press, they would then wipe out other precious constitutional guarantees. His own ﬂedgling political party might even be stamped out of existence. If this had happened, the country might have slid into a dangerous one-party dictatorship. Fearing prosecution for sedition, Jefferson secretly penned a series of resolutions, which the Kentucky legislature approved in 1798 and 1799. His friend and fellow Virginian James Madison drafted a similar but less extreme statement, which was adopted by the legislature of Virginia in 1798. Both Jefferson and Madison stressed the compact theory—a theory popular among Eng lish political philosophers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. As applied to America by the Jeffersonians, this concept meant that the thirteen sovereign states, in creat-

Federalists Versus Republicans


 ing the federal government, had entered into a “compact,” or contract, regarding its jurisdiction. The national government was consequently the agent or creation of the states. Since water can rise no higher than its source, the individual states were the ﬁ nal judges of whether their agent had broken the “compact” by overstepping the authority originally granted. Invoking this logic, Jefferson’s Kentucky resolutions concluded that the federal regime had exceeded its constitutional powers and that with regard to the Alien and Sedition Acts, “nulliﬁcation”—a refusal to accept them—was the “rightful remedy.” No other state legislatures, despite Jefferson’s hopes, fell into line. Some of them ﬂatly refused to endorse the Virginia and Kentucky resolutions. Others, chieﬂy in Federalist states, added ringing condemnations. Many Federalists argued that the people, not the states, had made the original compact, and that it was up to the Supreme Court—not the states—to nullify unconstitutional legislation passed by Congress. This practice, though not speciﬁcally authorized by the Constitution, was ﬁ nally adopted by the Supreme Court in 1803 (see pp. 231–232). The Virginia and Kentucky resolutions were a brilliant formulation of the extreme states’ rights view regarding the Union—indeed more sweeping in their implications than their authors had intended. They were later used by southerners to support nulliﬁcation— and ultimately secession. Yet neither Jefferson nor Madison, as Founding Fathers of the Union, had any

 intention of breaking it up; they were groping for ways to preserve it. Their resolutions were basically campaign documents designed to crystallize opposition to the Federalist party and to unseat it in the upcoming presidential election of 1800. The only real nulliﬁcation that Jefferson had in view was the nulliﬁcation of Federalist abuses.

Federalists Versus
Democratic-Republicans
 As the presidential contest of 1800 approached, the differences between Federalists and DemocraticRepublicans were sharply etched (see Table 10.3). As might be expected, most federalists of the preConstitution period (1787–1789) became Federalists in the 1790s. Largely welded by Hamilton into an effective group by 1793, they openly advocated rule by the “best people.” “Those who own the country,” remarked Federalist John Jay, “ought to govern it.” With their intellectual arrogance and Tory tastes, Hamiltonians distrusted full-blown democracy as the fountain of all mischiefs and feared the “swayability” of the untutored common folk. Hamiltonian Federalists also advocated a strong central government with the power to crush democratic excesses like Shays’s Rebellion, protect the lives and estates of the wealthy, subordinate the sovereigntyloving states, and promote foreign trade. They believed

Table 10.3 The Two Political Parties, 1793–1800
Federalist Features


Democratic-Republican (Jeffersonian) Features


 Rule by the “best people” Hostility to extension of democracy A powerful central government at the expense of states’ rights Loose interpretation of Constitution Government to foster business; concentration of wealth in interests of capitalistic enterprise A protective tariff Pro-British (conser vative Tory tradition) National debt a blessing, if properly funded An expanding bureaucracy A powerful central bank Restrictions on free speech and press Concentration in seacoast area

 Rule by the informed masses Friendliness toward extension of democracy A weak central government so as to preserve states’ rights Strict interpretation of Constitution No special favors for business; agriculture preferred No special favors for manufacturers Pro-French (radical revolutionary tradition) National debt a bane; rigid economy Reduction of federal ofﬁceholders Encouragement to state banks Relatively free speech and press Concentration in South and Southwest; in agricultural areas and backcountry A minimal navy for coastal defense

 A strong navy to protect shippers





Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


Thomas Jefferson at Natural Bridge, by Caleb Boyle,
 ca. 1801 A great statesman, Jefferson wrote his own epitaph: “Here was buried Thomas Jefferson, Author of the Declaration of Independence, of the Statute of Virginia for Religious Freedom, and Father of the University of Virginia.”

 that government should support private enterprise but not interfere with it. This attitude came naturally to the merchants, manufacturers, and shippers along the Atlantic seaboard, who made up the majority of Federalist support. Farther inland, few Hamiltonians dwelled. The hinterland was largely anti-Federalist territory. Leading the anti-Federalists, who came eventually to be known as Democratic-Republicans or sometimes simply Republicans, was Thomas Jefferson. His rivalry with Hamilton deﬁ ned the archetypal conﬂ ict in American political history. The two leaders appealed to dif-

 ferent constituencies and expressed different theories of society, politics, and diplomacy. Lanky and relaxed in appearance, lacking personal aggressiveness, weak-voiced, and unable to deliver a rabble-rousing speech, Jefferson became a master political organizer through his ability to lead people rather than drive them. His strongest appeal was to the middle class and to the underprivileged— the “dirt” farmers, the laborers, the artisans, and the small shopkeepers. Liberal-thinking Jefferson, with his aristocratic head set on a farmer’s frame, was a bundle of inconsistencies. By one set of tests, he should have been a Federalist, for he was a Virginia aristocrat and slaveowner who lived in an imposing hilltop mansion at Monticello. A so-called traitor to his own upper class, Jefferson cherished uncommon sympathy for the common people, especially the downtrodden, the oppressed, and the persecuted. As he wrote in 1800, “I have sworn upon the altar of God eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man.” Jeffersonian Republicans demanded a weak central regime. They believed that the best government was the one that governed least. The bulk of the power, Jefferson argued, should be retained by the states. There the people, in intimate contact with local affairs, could keep a more vigilant eye on their public servants. Otherwise a dictatorship might develop. Central authority—a kind of necessary evil—was to be kept at a minimum through a strict interpretation of the Constitution. The national debt, which he saw as a curse illegitimately bequeathed to later generations, was to be paid off. Jeffersonian Republicans, themselves primarily agrarians, insisted that there should be no special privileges for special classes, particularly manufacturers. Agriculture, to Jefferson, was the favored branch of the economy and formed the foundation of his political thought. “Those who labor in the earth are the chosen people of God,” he said. Most of his followers naturally came from the agricultural South and Southwest. Above all, Jefferson advocated the rule of the people. But he did not propose thrusting the ballot into the hands of every adult white male. He favored government for the people, but not by all the people—only by those white men who were literate enough to inform themselves and wear the mantle of American citizenship worthily. Universal education would have to precede universal suffrage. The ignorant, he argued, were incapable of self-government. But he had profound

 Jefferson's Republic

 Thomas Jefferson’s vision of a republican America was peopled with virtuous farmers, not factory hands. As early as 1784, he wrote,

“


 While we have land to labor then, let us never wish to see our citizens occupied at a work-bench, or twirling a distaff. . . . For the general operations of manufacture, let our workshops remain in Europe. . . . The mobs of great cities add just so much to the support of pure government, as sores do to the strength of the human body.

”


 faith in the reasonableness and teachableness of the masses and in their collective wisdom when taught. Landlessness among American citizens threatened popular democracy as much as illiteracy, in Jefferson’s eyes. He feared that propertyless dependents would be political pawns in the hands of their landowning superiors. How could the emergence of a landless class of voters be avoided? The answer, in part, was by slavery. A system of black slave labor in the South ensured that white yeoman farmers could remain independent landowners. Without slavery, poor whites would have to provide the cheap labor so necessary for the cultivation of tobacco and rice, and their low wages would preclude their ever owning property. Jefferson thus tortuously reconciled slaveholding—his own included—with his more democratic impulses. Yet for his time, Jefferson’s conﬁdence that white, free men could become responsible and knowledgeable citizens was open-minded. He championed their freedom of speech, for without free speech, the misdeeds of tyranny could not be exposed. Jefferson even dared to say that given the choice of “a government without newspapers” and “newspapers without a gov-



 ernment,” he would opt for the latter. Yet no other American leader, except perhaps Abraham Lincoln, ever suffered more foul abuse from editorial pens; Jefferson might well have prayed for freedom from the Federalist press. Differences over foreign policy deﬁned another sharp distinction between Hamilton and Jefferson. Hamilton looked outward and eastward. He sought to build a strong national state that would assert and expand America’s commercial interests. “No Government could give us tranquility and happiness at home,” he declared, “which did not possess sufﬁcient stability and strength to make us respectable abroad.” Foreign trade, especially with Britain, was a key cog in Hamilton’s ﬁscal machinery, and friendship with Britain was thus indispensable. Jeffersonian Republicans, unlike the Federalist “British boot-lickers,” were basically proFrench. They earnestly believed that it was to America’s advantage to support the liberal ideals of the French Revolution, rather than applaud the reaction of the British Tories. Jefferson, in effect, faced inward and westward. His priorities were to protect and strengthen democracy at home, especially in the frontier regions beyond the Appalachians, rather than ﬂex America’s muscles abroad. So as the young Republic’s ﬁ rst full decade of nationhood came to a close, the Founders’ hopes seemed already imperiled. Conﬂ icts over domestic politics and foreign policy undermined the unity of the Revolutionary era and called into question the very viability of the American experiment in democracy. As the presidential election of 1800 approached, the danger loomed that the fragile and battered American ship of state, like many another before it and after it, would founder on the rocks of controversy. The shores of history are littered with the wreckage of nascent nations torn asunder before they could grow to a stable maturity. Why should the United States expect to enjoy a happier fate?



Chapter 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 1789–1800


 CHRONOLOGY

 Constitution formally put into effect Judiciary Act of 1789 Washington elected president French Revolution begins Declaration of the Rights of Man (France)



 First ofﬁcial census



 Bill of Rights adopted Vermont becomes fourteenth state Bank of the United States created Excise tax passed



 Washington reelected president

1792–


Federalist and Democratic-Republican
 parties formed



 Louis XVI beheaded; radical phase of French Revolution France declares war on Britain and Spain Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation Citizen Genêt affair

KEY TERMS
Bill of Rights (201) Judiciary Act of 1789 (202) funding at par (202) assumption (203) tariff (203) excise tax (203) Bank of the United States (204) Whiskey Rebellion (204) Reign of Terror (207) Neutrality Proclamation (210) 


Whiskey Rebellion
Battle of Fallen Timbers
 Jay’s Treaty with Britain



 Treaty of Greenville: Indians cede Ohio Pinckney’s Treaty with Spain



 Washington’s Farewell Address



 Adams becomes president XYZ Affair



Alien and Sedition Acts


1798–


 Virginia and Kentucky resolutions

1798–


 Undeclared war with France



 Convention of 1800: peace with France

PEOPLE TO KNOW
Fallen Timbers, Battle of (211) Greenville, Treaty of (211) Jay’s Treaty (213) Pinckney’s Treaty (213) Farewell Address (213) XYZ Affair (215) Convention of 1800 (217) Alien Laws (217) Sedition Act (217) Virginia and Kentucky resolutions (219) 
George Washington
Alexander Hamilton
Louis XVI
 Edmond Genêt Little Turtle “Mad Anthony” Wayne

John Jay
John Adams
Charles Maurice de
Talleyrand


To Learn More




To Learn More
Joanne Freeman, Affairs of Honor: National Politics in the
New Republic (2001)
Frank Lambert, The Barbary Wars: American Independence
 in the Atlantic World (2005) Michael Merrill and Sean Wilentz, eds., The Key of Liberty: The Life and Democratic Writings of William Manning, “A Laborer,” 1747–1814 (1992) Jeffrey L. Pasley, “The Tyranny of Printers”: Newspaper Politics in the Early American Republic (2001) Jeffrey L. Pasley, Andrew W. Robertson, and David Waldstreicher, eds., Beyond the Founders: New Approaches to the Political History of the Early American Republic (2004) Bernard Schwartz, The Great Rights of Mankind: A History of the American Bill of Rights (1991) James Roger Sharp, American Politics in the Early Republic: The New Nation in Crisis (1993)

Thomas P. Slaughter, The Whiskey Rebellion: Frontier
Epilogue to the American Revolution (1986)
Robert W. Smith, Keeping the Republic: Ideology and Early
American Diplomacy (2004)
 Alan Taylor, William Cooper’s Town: Power and Persuasion on the Frontier of the Early American Republic (1995) Robert E. Wright, Hamilton Unbound: Finance and the Creation of the American Republic (2002)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Triumphs and
Travails of the
Jeffersonian Republic





1800–1812
 Timid men . . . prefer the calm of despotism to the boisterous sea of liberty.

I


 n the critical presidential contest of 1800, the ﬁ rst in which Federalists and Democratic-Republicans functioned as two national political parties, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson again squared off against each other. The choice seemed clear and dramatic: Adams’s Federalists waged a defensive struggle for strong central government and public order. Their Jeffersonian opponents presented themselves as the guardians of agrarian purity, liberty, and states’ rights. The next dozen years, however, would turn what seemed like a clear-cut choice in 1800 into a messier reality, as the Jeffersonians in power were confronted with a series of opportunities and crises requiring the assertion of federal authority. As the ﬁ rst challengers to rout a reigning party, the Republicans were the ﬁ rst to learn that it is far easier to condemn from the stump than to govern consistently.

Federalist and Republican
Mudslingers
 In ﬁghting for survival, the Federalists labored under heavy handicaps. Their Alien and Sedition Acts had aroused a host of enemies, although most of these critics were dyed-in-the-wool Jeffersonians anyhow. The Hamiltonian wing of the Federalist party, robbed of its glorious war with France, split openly with President Adams. Hamilton, a victim of arrogance, was so indiscreet as to attack the president in a privately printed pamphlet. Jeffersonians soon got hold of the pamphlet and gleefully published it. The most damaging blow to the Federalists was the refusal of Adams to give them a rousing ﬁght with France. Their feverish war preparations had swelled

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Federalists Versus Republicans


The Reverend Timothy Dwight (1752–1817),
 president of Yale College, predicted that in the event of Jefferson’s election,

“


 the Bible would be cast into a bonﬁre, our holy worship changed into a dance of [French] Jacobin phrensy, our wives and daughters dishonored, and our sons converted into the disciples of Voltaire and the dragoons of Marat.

”


 the public debt and had required disagreeable new taxes, including a stamp tax. After all these unpopular mea sures, the war scare had petered out, and the country was left with an all-dressed-up-but-no-place-to-go feeling. The military preparations now seemed not only unnecessary but extravagant, as seamen for the “new



 navy” were called “John Adams’s Jackasses.” Adams himself was known, somewhat ironically, as “the Father of the American Navy.” Thrown on the defensive, the Federalists concentrated their ﬁ re on Jefferson himself, who became the victim of one of America’s earliest “whispering campaigns.” He was accused of having robbed a widow and her children of a trust fund and of having fathered numerous mulatto children by his own slave women. (Jefferson’s long-rumored intimacy with one of his slaves, Sally Hemings, has been conﬁ rmed through DNA testing. See “Examining the Evidence,” p. 227.) As a liberal in religion, Jefferson had earlier incurred the wrath of the orthodox clergy, largely through his successful struggle to separate church and state in his native Virginia. Although Jefferson did believe in God, preachers throughout New Eng land, stronghold of Federalism and Congregationalism, thundered against his alleged atheism. Old ladies of Federalist families, fearing Jefferson’s election, even buried their Bibles or hung them in wells.

Washington and
Jefferson Compared, 1807
 This pro-Federalist, anti-Jefferson cartoon accuses Jefferson of sympathizing with French Revolutionary despotism.



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


The Jeffersonian
“Revolution of 1800”
 Jefferson won by a majority of 73 electoral votes to 65 (see Map 11.1). In defeat, the colorless and presumably unpopular Adams polled more electoral strength than he had gained four years earlier—except for New York.

 VT 4 NH

NY PA DR-8/F-7

NORTHWEST TERR.

INDIANA TERRITORY

 MA

 CT

 NJ

 RI

DE VA

 KY

MD DR-5/F-5

NC R-13/F-4

TN SC MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

 GA

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Jefferson (Democratic-Republican)
Burr




53%
53%


Adams (Federalist)
Pinckney
Jay




47%
46%


 Map 11.1 Presidential Election of 1800 (with electoral vote by state) New York was the key state in this election, and Aaron Burr helped swing it away from the Federalists with tactics that anticipated the political “machines” of a later day. Federalists complained that Burr “travels every night from one meeting of Republicans to another, haranguing . . . them to the most zealous exertions. [He] can stoop so low as to visit every low tavern that may happen to be crowded with his dear fellow citizens.” But Burr proved that the price was worth it. “We have beat you,” Burr told kid-gloved Federalists after the election, “by superior Management.” Interactive Map

 The Empire State fell into the Jeffersonian basket, and with it the election, largely because Aaron Burr, a master wire-puller, turned New York to Jefferson by the narrowest of margins. The Virginian polled the bulk of his strength in the South and West, particularly in those states where universal white manhood suffrage had been adopted. Decisive in Jefferson’s victory was the three-ﬁ fths clause of the Constitution. By counting three-ﬁ fths of the slave population for the purposes of congressional and Electoral College representation, the Constitution gave white southern voters a bonus that helped Jefferson win the White House. Northern critics fumed that Jefferson was a “Negro President” and an illegitimate embodiment of the “slave power” that the southern states wielded in the nation. Jeffersonian joy was dampened by an unexpected deadlock. Through a technicality Jefferson, the presidential candidate, and Burr, his vice-presidential running mate, received the same number of electoral votes for the presidency. Under the Constitution the tie could be broken only by the House of Representatives (see Art. II, Sec. I, para. 2). This body was controlled for several more months by the lame-duck Federalists, who preferred Burr to the hated Jefferson.* Voting in the House moved slowly to a climax, as exhausted representatives snored in their seats. The agonizing deadlock was broken at last when a few Federalists, despairing of electing Burr and hoping for moderation from Jefferson, refrained from voting. The election then went to the rightful candidate. John Adams, as fate would have it, was the last Federalist president of the United States. His party sank slowly into political oblivion and ultimately disappeared completely in the days of Andrew Jackson. Jefferson later claimed that the election of 1800 was a “revolution” comparable to that of 1776, and historians have sometimes referred to the Revolution of 1800. But the election was no revolution in the sense of a massive popular upheaval or an upending of the political system. In truth, Jefferson had narrowly squeaked through to victory. A switch of some 250 votes in New York would have thrown the election to Adams. Jefferson meant that his election represented a return to what he considered the original spirit of the Revolution. In his eyes Hamilton and Adams had betrayed the ide-

 *A “lame duck” has been humorously deﬁ ned as a politician whose political goose has been cooked in the recent elections. The possibility of another such tie was removed by the Twelfth Amendment in 1804 (see the Appendix). Before then, each elector had two votes, with the second-place ﬁ nisher becoming vice president.

The Thomas Jefferson–Sally Hemings Controversy
 ebate over whether Thomas Jefferson had sexual relations with Sally Hemings, a slave at Monticello, began as early as 1802, when James Callender published the ﬁ rst accusations and Federalist newspapers gleefully broadcast them throughout the country. Two years later this print, titled “A Philosophic Cock,” attacked Jefferson by depicting him as a rooster and Hemings as a hen. The rooster, or cock, was also a symbol of Revolutionary France. Jefferson’s enemies sought to discredit him for personal indiscretions as well as radical sympathies. Although he resolutely denied having an affair with Hemings, the charge that at ﬁ rst seemed to be only a politically motivated defamation refused to go away. In the 1870s two new oral sources of evidence came to light. Madison Hemings, Sally’s next-to-last child, claimed that his mother had identiﬁed Jefferson as the father of all ﬁve of her children. Soon thereafter James Par-

D


 ton’s biography of Jefferson revealed that among Jefferson’s white descendants, it was said that his nephew had fathered all or most of Sally’s children. In the 1950s several large publishing projects on Jefferson’s life and writings uncovered new evidence and inspired renewed debate. Most convincing was Dumas Malone’s calculation that Jefferson had been present at Monticello nine months prior to the birth of each of Sally’s children. Speculation continued throughout the rest of the century, with little new evidence, until scientiﬁc advances made possible DNA testing of the remains of Jefferson’s white and possible black descendants to determine paternity. Two centuries after Callender ﬁ rst cast aspersions on Jefferson’s morality, cutting-edge science helped establish the high probability that Jefferson had fathered Sally’s youngest son and the likelihood that he was the father of all of her children.





Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


Mrs. Benjamin Tallmadge and Son Henry Floyd and Daughter Maria Jones; Colonel Benjamin Tallmadge and Son
 William Tallmadge, by Ralph Earl, 1790 The Tallmadges were among the leading citizens of Litchﬁeld, a Federalist stronghold in the heavily Federalist state of Connecticut. Colonel Benjamin Tallmadge served with distinction in the Revolutionary War, became a wealthy merchant and banker, and represented his state in Congress from 1801 to 1817. Mary Floyd Tallmadge, like her husband, came from a prominent Long Island family. The opulence of the Tallmadges’ clothing and surroundings in these paintings abundantly testiﬁes to the wealth, and the social pretensions, of the Federalist elite. Note the toy carriage near the feet of the Tallmadge daughter— a replica of the actual, and elegant, carriage owned by the Tallmadge family.

A
Philadelphia woman wrote her sister-in-law about the pride she felt on the occasion of Thomas Jefferson’s inauguration as third president of the United States in 1801: 
“


 I have this morning witnessed one of the most interesting scenes a free people can ever witness. The changes of administration, which in every government and in every age have most generally been epochs of confusion, villainy and bloodshed, in this our happy country take place without any species of distraction, or disorder.

”


 als of 1776 and 1787. Jefferson’s mission, as he saw it, was to restore the republican experiment, to check the growth of government power, and to halt the decay of virtue that had set in under Federalist rule. No less “revolutionary” was the peaceful and orderly transfer of power on the basis of an election whose results all parties accepted. This was a remarkable achievement for a raw young nation, especially after all the partisan bitterness that had agitated the country during Adams’s presidency. It was particularly remarkable in that age; comparable successions would not take place in Britain for another generation. After a decade of division and doubt, Americans could take justiﬁable pride in the vigor of their experiment in democracy.

Jefferson as President


Responsibility Breeds
Moderation
 “Long Tom” Jefferson was inaugurated president on March 4, 1801, in the swampy village of Washington, the crude new national capital. Tall (six feet two and a half inches), with large hands and feet, red hair (“the Red Fox”), and prominent cheekbones and chin, he was an arresting ﬁgure. Having spent ﬁve years as U.S. minister to France (1784–1789), he was ﬂuent in French and a sophisticated, cosmopolitan “citizen of the world,” yet he never lost the common touch. Believing that the customary pomp did not beﬁt his democratic ideals, he spurned a horse-drawn coach and strode by foot to the Capitol from his boardinghouse. Jefferson’s inaugural address, beautifully phrased, was a classic statement of democratic principles. “The will of the majority is in all cases to prevail,” Jefferson declared. But, he added, “that will to be rightful must be reasonable; the minority possess their equal rights, which equal law must protect, and to violate would be oppression.” Seeking to allay Federalist fears of a bullin-the-china-closet overturn, Jefferson ingratiatingly intoned, “We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists.” As for foreign affairs, he pledged “honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances with none.” With its rustic setting, Washington lent itself admirably to the simplicity and frugality of the Jeffersonian Republicans. In this respect it contrasted sharply with the elegant at mosphere of Federalist Philadelphia, the former temporary capital. Extending democratic principles to etiquette, Jefferson established the rule of pell-mell at ofﬁcial dinners—that is, seating without regard to rank. The resplendent British minister, who had enjoyed precedence among the pro-British Federalists, was insulted. As president, Jefferson could be shockingly unconventional. He would receive callers in sloppy attire— once in a dressing gown and heel-less slippers. He

 President John F. Kennedy (1917–1963) once greeted a large group of Nobel Prize winners as

“


 the most extraordinary collection of talent, of human knowledge, that has ever been gathered together at the White House, with the possible exception of when Thomas Jefferson dined alone.

”




 started the precedent, unbroken until Woodrow Wilson’s presidency 112 years later, of sending messages to Congress to be read by a clerk. Personal appearances, in the Federalist manner, suggested too strongly a monarchical speech from the throne. Besides, Jefferson was painfully conscious of his weak voice and unimpressive platform presence. As if compelled by an evil twin, Jefferson was forced to reverse many of the political principles he had so vigorously championed. There were in fact two Thomas Jeffersons. One was the scholarly private citizen, who philosophized in his study. The other was the harassed public ofﬁcial, who made the disturbing discovery that bookish theories worked out differently in the noisy arena of practical politics. The open-minded Virginian was therefore consistently inconsistent; it is easy to quote one Jefferson to refute the other.

 Jefferson Inaugural Pitcher, 1801 This memento from the election of 1800 immortalized President Thomas Jefferson’s words, “We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists,” which turned out to be more hopeful than true. Jefferson was portrayed in the plain attire he favored, shunning the sartorial pretensions affected by many Federalists, such as the elegantly dressed Tallmadges shown on p. 228.



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


 Jefferson’s Cabinet at Monticello Jefferson’s study gave physical evidence of his fondness for ideas and inventions. He attached candles to his chair for light, read from a revolving book stand, and surrounded himself with an astronomical clock and an achromatic telescope through which he observed the eclipse of the sun in 1811. On the table is a polygraph, invented in London and promoted by Charles Willson Peale in Philadelphia. Jefferson used it to make copies of the letters he penned.

 Jeffersonians watched the Federalist appointees grow old in ofﬁce and grumbled that “few die, none resign.” Jefferson quickly proved an able politician. He was especially effective in the informal at mosphere of a dinner party. There he wooed congressional representatives while personally pouring imported wines and serving the tasty dishes of his French cook. In part Jefferson had to rely on his personal charm because his party was so weak-jointed. Denied the power to dispense patronage, the Democratic-Republicans could not build a loyal political following. Opposition to the Federalists was the chief glue holding them together, and as the Federalists faded, so did DemocraticRepublican unity. The era of well-developed, welldisciplined political parties still lay in the future.

 The triumph of Thomas Jefferson’s DemocraticRepublicans and the eviction of the Federalists marked the ﬁ rst party overturn in American history. The vanquished naturally feared that the victors would grab all the spoils of ofﬁce for themselves. But Jefferson, in keeping with his conciliatory inaugural address, showed unexpected moderation. To the dismay of his ofﬁceseeking friends, the new president dismissed few public servants for political reasons. Patronage-hungry

 The toleration of Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826) was reﬂected in his inaugural address:

“


 If there be any among us who would wish to dissolve this Union or to change its republican form, let them stand undisturbed as monuments of the safety with which error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it.

”


Jeffersonian Restraint
 At the outset Jefferson was determined to undo the Federalist abuses begotten by the anti-French hysteria. The hated Alien and Sedition Acts had already expired. The incoming president speedily pardoned the “martyrs” who were serving sentences under the Sedition Act, and the government remitted many ﬁ nes. Shortly after the Congress met, the Jeffersonians enacted the new naturalization law of 1802. This act reduced the unreasonable requirement of fourteen years of residence to the previous and more reasonable requirement of ﬁve years. Jefferson actually kicked away only one substantial prop of the Hamiltonian system. He hated the excise tax, which bred bureaucrats and bore heavily on his farmer following, and he early persuaded Congress to repeal it. His devotion to principle thus cost the federal government about a million dollars a year in urgently needed revenue. Swiss-born and French-accented Albert Gallatin, “Watchdog of the Treasury,” proved to be as able a sec-

John Marshall and the Supreme Court




 retary of the Treasury as Hamilton. Gallatin agreed with Jefferson that a national debt was a bane rather than a blessing and by strict economy succeeded in reducing it substantially while balancing the budget. Except for excising the excise tax, the Jeffersonians left the Hamiltonian framework essentially intact. They did not tamper with the Federalist programs for funding the national debt at par and assuming the Revolutionary War debts of the states. They launched no attack on the Bank of the United States, nor did they repeal the mildly protective Federalist tariff. In later years they embraced Federalism to such a degree as to recharter a bigger bank and to boost the protective tariff to higher levels. Paradoxically, Jefferson’s moderation thus further cemented the gains of the “Revolution of 1800.” By shrewdly absorbing the major Federalist programs, Jefferson showed that a change of regime need not be disastrous for the defeated group. His restraint pointed the way toward the two-party system that was later to become a characteristic feature of American politics.

The “Dead Clutch”
 of the Judiciary The “deathbed” Judiciary Act of 1801 was one of the last important laws passed by the expiring Federalist Congress. It created sixteen new federal judgeships and other judicial ofﬁces. President Adams remained at his desk until nine o’clock in the evening of his last day in ofﬁce, supposedly signing the commissions of the Federalist “midnight judges.” (Actually only three commissions were signed on his last day.) This Federalist-sponsored Judiciary Act, though a long-overdue reform, aroused bitter resentment. “Packing” these lifetime posts with anti-Jeffersonian partisans was, in Republican eyes, a brazen attempt by the ousted party to entrench itself in one of the three powerful branches of government. Jeffersonians condemned the last-minute appointees in violent language, denouncing the trickery of the Federalists as open deﬁance of the people’s will, expressed emphatically at the polls. The newly elected Republican Congress bestirred itself to repeal the Judiciary Act of 1801 the year after its passage. Jeffersonians thus swept sixteen benches from under the recently seated “midnight judges.” Jeffersonians likewise had their knives sharpened for the scalp of Chief Justice John Marshall, whom Adams had appointed to the Supreme Court (as a fourth choice) in

John Marshall on Assuming the Chief Justiceship, 1801
 Depicted here as a young man, Marshall was destined to serve on the Supreme Court for thirty-four years and deeply molded constitutional law. Born in a log cabin on the Virginia frontier, he attended law lectures for just a few weeks at the College of William and Mary— his only formal education. Yet Marshall would go on to prove himself a brilliant chief justice. One admiring lawyer wrote of him, “His black eyes . . . possess an irradiating spirit, which proclaims the imperial powers of the mind that sits enthroned therein.”

 the dying days of his term. The strong-willed Marshall, with his rasping voice and steel-trap mind, was a cousin of Thomas Jefferson. Marshall’s formal legal schooling had lasted only six weeks, but he dominated the Supreme Court with his powerful intellect and commanding personality. He shaped the American legal tradition more profoundly than any other single ﬁgure. Marshall had served at Valley Forge during the Revolution. While suffering there from cold and hunger, he had been painfully impressed with the drawbacks of feeble central authority. The experience made him a lifelong Federalist, committed above all else to strengthening the power of the federal government. States’ rights Jeffersonians condemned the crafty



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


 judge’s “twistiﬁcations,” but Marshall pushed ahead inﬂexibly on his Federalist course. He served for about thirty days under a Federalist administration and thirty-four years under the administrations of Jefferson and subsequent presidents. The Federalist party died out, but Marshall lived on, handing down Federalist decisions serenely for many more years. For over three decades, the ghost of Alexander Hamilton spoke through the lanky, black-robed judge. One of the “midnight judges” of 1801 presented John Marshall with a historic opportunity. He was obscure William Marbury, whom President Adams had named a justice of the peace for the District of Columbia. When Marbury learned that his commission was being shelved by the new secretary of state, James Madison, he sued for its delivery. Chief Justice Marshall knew that his Jeffersonian rivals, entrenched in the executive branch, would hardly spring forward to enforce

 In his decision in Marbury v. Madison, Chief Justice John Marshall (1755–1835) vigorously asserted his view that the Constitution embodied a “higher” law than ordinary legislation and that the Court must interpret the Constitution:

“


 The Constitution is either a superior paramount law, unchangeable by ordinary means, or it is on a level with ordinary legislative acts, and like other acts, is alterable when the legislature shall please to alter it. “If the former part of the alternative be true, then a legislative act contrary to the constitution is not law; if the latter part be true, then written constitutions are absurd attempts, on the part of the people, to limit a power in its own nature illimitable. . . . “It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is. . . . “If, then, the courts are to regard the Constitution, and the Constitution is superior to any ordinary act of the legislature, the Constitution, and not such ordinary act, must govern the case to which they are both applicable.

”


 a writ to deliver the commission to his fellow Federalist Marbury. He therefore dismissed Marbury’s suit, avoiding a direct political showdown. But the wily Marshall snatched a victory from the jaws of this judicial defeat. In explaining his ruling, Marshall said that the part of the Judiciary Act of 1789 on which Marbury tried to base his appeal was unconstitutional. The act had attempted to assign to the Supreme Court powers that the Constitution had not foreseen. In this self-denying opinion, Marshall greatly magniﬁed the authority of the Court—and slapped at the Jeffersonians. Until the case of Marbury v. Madison (1803), controversy had clouded the question of who had the ﬁ nal authority to determine the meaning of the Constitution. Jefferson in the Kentucky resolutions (1798) had tried to allot that right to the individual states. But now his cousin on the Court had cleverly promoted the contrary principle of “judicial review”— the idea that the Supreme Court alone had the last word on the question of constitutionality. In this landmark case, Marshall inserted the keystone into the arch that supports the tremendous power of the Supreme Court in American life.* Marshall’s decision regarding Marbury spurred the Jeffersonians to seek revenge. Jefferson urged the impeachment of an arrogant and tart-tongued Supreme Court justice, Samuel Chase, who was so unpopular that Republicans named vicious dogs after him. Early in 1804 impeachment charges against Chase were voted by the House of Representatives, which then passed the question of guilt or innocence on to the Senate. The indictment by the House was based on “high crimes, and misdemeanors,” as speciﬁed in the Constitution.† Yet the evidence was plain that the intemperate judge had not been guilty of “high crimes,” but only of unrestrained partisanship and a big mouth. The Senate failed to muster enough votes to convict and remove Chase. The precedent thus established was fortunate. From that day to this, no really serious attempt has been made to reshape the Supreme Court by the impeachment weapon. Jefferson’s ill-advised attempt at “judge breaking” was a reassuring victory for the independence of the judiciary and for the separation of powers among the three branches of the federal government.

 *The next invalidation of a federal law by the Supreme Court came ﬁ fty-four years later, with the explosive Dred Scott decision (see pp. 445–446). †For impeachment, see Art. I, Sec. II, para. 5; Art. I, Sec. III, paras. 6, 7; Art. II, Sec. IV in the Appendix.

War Against the Barbary States


 of Tripoli, dissatisﬁed with his share of protection money, informally declared war on the United States by cutting down the ﬂagstaff of the American consulate. A gauntlet was thus thrown squarely into the face of Jefferson—the noninterventionist, the paciﬁst, the critic of a big-ship navy, and the political foe of Federalist shippers. He reluctantly rose to the challenge by dispatching the infant navy to the “shores of Tripoli,” as related in the song of the U.S. Marine Corps. After four

Jefferson, a Reluctant Warrior
 One of Jefferson’s ﬁ rst actions as president was to reduce the military establishment to a mere police force of twenty-ﬁve hundred ofﬁcers and men. Critics called it penny-pinching, but Jefferson’s reluctance to invest in soldiers and ships was less about money than about republican ideals. Among his fondest hopes for America was that it might transcend the bloody wars and entangling alliances of Europe. The United States would set an example for the world, forswearing military force and winning friends through “peaceful coercion.” Also, the Republicans distrusted large standing armies as standing invitations to dictatorship. Navies were less to be feared, as they could not march inland and endanger liberties. Still, the farm-loving Jeffersonians saw little point in building a ﬂeet that might only embroil the Republic in costly and corrupting wars far from America’s shores. But harsh realities forced Jefferson’s principles to bend. Pirates of the North African Barbary States (see Map 11.2) had long made a national industry of blackmailing and plundering merchant ships that ventured into the Mediterranean. Preceding Federalist administrations, in fact, had been forced to buy protection. At the time of the French crisis of 1798, when Americans were shouting, “Millions for defense but not one cent for tribute,” twenty-six barrels of blackmail dollars were being shipped to piratical Algiers. War across the Atlantic was not part of the Jeffersonian vision—but neither was paying tribute to a pack of pirate states. The showdown came in 1801. The pasha

Map 11.2 The Barbary States
 of North Africa and the Burning of the Frigate Philadelphia, 1804 The Tripolitan pirates had captured the U.S. ship Philadelphia (see p. 216) and were preparing to use it against the Americans. In a daring exploit that ensured his lasting fame, twenty-four-yearold U.S. naval ofﬁcer Stephen Decatur slipped into the harbor of Tripoli and burned the frigate to the waterline, denying it to the pirates.

ATLAN TIC OCEAN

 FRANCE

40°


N


 PORTUGAL

KINGDOM OF ITALY

SPA I N

OT KINGDOM OF NAPLES

Algiers


M OROCCO A LGERI A



500 Km.


 TO

 MA

N


 EM

 PIR

E


Tunis


 TUNISIA 500 Mi.

Med
Tripoli


 iterr

 anean Sea Cairo

The Barbary States
 Major battle

30°N


EGYP T

TRI POLI 10°E

Interactive Map


AU STRI AN EM PI RE

N






20°E


30°E


40°E




Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


 years of intermittent ﬁghting, marked by spine-tingling exploits, Jefferson succeeded in extorting a treaty of peace from Tripoli in 1805. It was secured at the bargain price of only $60,000—a sum representing ransom payments for captured Americans. Small gunboats, which the navy had used with some success in the Tripolitan War, fascinated Jefferson. Pledged to tax reduction, he advocated a large number of little coastal craft—“Jeffs” or the “mosquito ﬂeet,” as they were contemptuously called. He believed these fast but frail vessels would prove valuable in guarding American shores and need not embroil the Republic in diplomatic incidents on the high seas. About two hundred tiny gunboats were constructed, democratically in small shipyards where votes could be made for Jefferson. Often mounting only one unwieldy gun, they were sometimes more of a menace to the crew than to the prospective enemy. During a hurricane and tidal wave at Savannah, Georgia, one of them was deposited eight miles inland in a cornﬁeld, to the derisive glee of the Federalists. They drank toasts to American gunboats as the best in the world—on land.

The Louisiana Godsend
 A secret pact, fraught with peril for America, was signed in 1800. Napoleon Bonaparte induced the king of Spain to cede to France, for attractive considerations, the immense trans-Mississippi region of Louisiana, which included the New Orleans area. Rumors of the transfer were partially conﬁ rmed in 1802, when the Spaniards at New Orleans withdrew the right of deposit guaranteed America by Pinckney’s Treaty of 1795 (see p. 213). Deposit (warehouse) privileges were vital to frontier farmers who ﬂoated their produce down the Mississippi to its mouth, there to await oceangoing vessels. A roar of anger rolled up the mighty river and into its tributary valleys. American pioneers talked wildly of descending upon New Orleans, riﬂes in hand. Had they done so, the nation probably would have been engulfed in war with both Spain and France. Thomas Jefferson, both paciﬁst and antientanglement, was again on the griddle. Louisiana in the senile grip of Spain posed no real threat; America could seize the territory when the time was ripe. But Louisiana in the iron ﬁst of Napoleon, the preeminent military genius of his age, foreshadowed a dark and blood-drenched future. The United States would probably have to ﬁght to dislodge him; and because it alone

 was not strong enough to defeat his armies, it would have to seek allies, contrary to the deepening antialliance policy. Hoping to quiet the clamor of the West, Jefferson moved decisively. Early in 1803 he sent James Monroe to Paris to join forces with the regular minister there, Robert R. Livingston. The two envoys were instructed to buy New Orleans and as much land to its east as they could get for a maximum of $10 million. If these proposals should fail and the situation became critical, negotiations were to be opened with Britain for an alliance. “The day that France takes possession of New Orleans,” Jefferson wrote, “we must marry ourselves to the British ﬂeet and nation.” That remark dramatically demonstrated Jefferson’s dilemma. Though a passionate hater of war and an enemy of entangling alliances, he was proposing to make an alliance with his old foe, Britain, against his old friend, France, in order to secure New Orleans. At this critical juncture, Napoleon suddenly decided to sell all of Louisiana and abandon his dream of a New World empire. Two developments prompted his change of mind. First, he had failed in his efforts to reconquer the sugar-rich island of Santo Domingo (Haiti), for which Louisiana was to serve as a source of foodstuffs. Rebellious enslaved Africans, inspired by the French Revolution’s promises of equality, and ably led by the gifted Toussaint L’Ouverture (“The Opener”), had struck for their freedom in 1791. Their revolt was ultimately broken. But then the island’s second line of defense—mosquitoes carrying yellow fever—had swept away thousands of crack French troops. Santo Domingo could not be had, except perhaps at a staggering cost; hence there was no need for Louisiana’s food supplies. “Damn sugar, damn coffee, damn colonies!” burst out Napoleon. Second, Bonaparte was about to end the twenty-month lull in his deadly conﬂ ict with Britain. Because the British controlled the seas, he feared that he might be forced to make them a gift of Louisiana. Rather than drive America into the arms of Britain by attempting to hold the area, he decided to sell the huge wilderness to the Americans and pocket the money for his schemes nearer home. Napoleon hoped that the United States, strengthened by Louisiana, would one day be a military and naval power that would thwart the ambitions of the lordly British in the New World. The predicaments of France in Europe were again paving the way for America’s diplomatic successes. Events now unrolled dizzily. The American minister, Robert Livingston, pending the arrival of Monroe, was busily negotiating in Paris for a window on the Gulf

The Louisiana Purchase




 Toussaint L’Ouverture (ca. 1743–1803) A self-educated ex-slave and military genius, L’Ouverture was ﬁnally betrayed by the French, who imprisoned him in a chilly dungeon in France, where he coughed his life away. Indirectly, he did much to set up the sale of Louisiana to the United States. His slave rebellion in Haiti also (brieﬂy) established the ﬁrst black government in the New World, striking fear into the hearts of slaveowners throughout the Western Hemisphere.

 of Mexico at New Orleans. Suddenly, out of a clear sky, the French foreign minister asked him how much he would give for all of Louisiana. Scarcely able to believe his ears (he was partially deaf anyhow), Livingston nervously entered upon the negotiations. After about a week of haggling, while the fate of North America trembled in the balance, treaties were signed on April 30, 1803, ceding Louisiana to the United States for about $15 million. When news of the bargain reached America, Jefferson was startled. He had authorized his envoys to offer not more than $10 million for New Orleans and as much to the east in the Floridas as they could get. Instead they had signed three treaties that pledged $15 million for New Orleans, plus an im mea surable tract entirely to the west—an area that would more than double the size of the United States. They had bought a wilderness to get a city.

 Once again the two Jeffersons wrestled with each other: the theorist and former strict constructionist versus the democratic visionary. Where in his beloved Constitution was the president authorized to negotiate treaties incorporating a huge new expanse into the union—an expanse containing tens of thousands of Indian, French, Spanish, and black inhabitants? There was no such clause. Yet Jefferson also perceived that the vast domain now within his reach could form a sprawling “empire of liberty” that would ensure the health and long life of America’s experiment in democracy. Conscience-stricken, Jefferson privately proposed that a constitutional amendment be passed. But his friends pointed out in alarm that in the interval Napoleon, for whom thought was action, might suddenly withdraw the offer. So Jefferson shamefacedly submitted the treaties to the Senate, while admitting to his associates that the purchase was unconstitutional. The senators were less ﬁ nicky than Jefferson. Reﬂecting enthusiastic public support, they registered their prompt approval of the transaction. Land-hungry Americans were not disposed to split constitutional hairs when confronted with perhaps the most magnificent real estate bargain in history—828,000 square miles at about three cents an acre.

 In accepting the Louisiana Purchase, Jefferson thus compromised with conscience in a private letter:

“


 It is the case of a guardian, investing the money of his ward in purchasing an important adjacent territory; and saying to him when of age, I did this for your good; I pretend to no right to bind you; you may disavow me, and I must get out of the scrape as I can; I thought it my duty to risk myself for you.

”




Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


Louisiana in the Long View
 Jefferson’s bargain with Napoleon was epochal. Overnight he had avoided a possible rupture with France and the consequent entangling alliance with Eng land. With the Louisiana Purchase, America secured at one bloodless stroke the western half of the richest river valley in the world and further laid the foundations of a future major power. The ideal of a great agrarian republic, as envisioned by Jefferson, could now be realized in the vast “Valley of Democracy.” At the same time, the transfer established valuable precedents for future expansion: the acquisition of foreign territory and peoples by purchase and their incorporation into the Union not as vassal states but on a basis of equal membership. This was imperialism with a new and democratic face, as French Louisianans learned when the Washington government agreed to accept their legal code based on French civil law, rather than Eng lish common law. To this day Louisiana state law, uniquely in the American system, retains vestiges of its French origins. Indian peoples within the purchase area would not prove so fortunate. The purchase also contributed to making operational the isolationist principles of Washington’s Farewell Address. Avoiding entangling alliances had been only an ideal to be pursued, rather than a realistic policy, so long as America had potentially hostile and powerful neighbors. By removing virtually the last remnant of signiﬁcant European power from the North American continent, the United States was now at liberty to disengage almost entirely from the ancient system of Old World rivalries. The enormous extent of the new area was more fully unveiled by a series of explorations under Jefferson’s direction. In the spring of 1804, Jefferson sent his personal secretary, Meriwether Lewis, and a young army ofﬁcer named William Clark to explore the northern part of the Louisiana Purchase. Lewis and Clark’s Corps of Discovery ascended the “Great Muddy” (Missouri River) from St. Louis and spent the winter of 1804–1805 with the Mandan Indians in present-day North Dakota. Then, aided by the Shoshone woman Sacajawea, the thirty-three adventurers (one had died from illness in Iowa, the group’s only casualty) struggled across the northern prairies and through the Rockies, ﬁ nally descending the Columbia River to the Paciﬁc coast. Lewis and Clark’s two-and-one-half-year expedition yielded a rich harvest of scientiﬁc observations,

 Meriwether Lewis Lewis is portrayed in this painting as he looked on his return from the great expedition through the Louisiana Purchase and the West.

 maps, knowledge of the Indians in the region, and hairraising wilderness adventure stories. On the Great Plains, they marveled at the “immense herds of buffalo, elk, deer, and antelope feeding in one common and boundless pasture.” Lewis was lucky to come back alive. When he and three other men left the expedition to explore the Marias River in present-day western Montana, a band of teenage Blackfoot Indians, armed with crude muskets by British fur-traders operating out of Canada, stole their horses. Lewis foolishly pursued the horse thieves on foot. He shot one marauder through the belly, but the Indian returned the ﬁ re. “Being bareheaded,” Lewis later wrote, “I felt the wind of his bullet

The Lewis and Clark Expedition




 Gifts from the Great White Chief Among the objectives of the Lewis and Clark expedition was to establish good relations with the Indians in the newly acquired Louisiana Purchase. The American explorers presented all chiefs with copies of these medals, showing President Jefferson on one side and the hands of an Indian and a white man clasped in “peace and friendship” under a crossed “peace pipe” and hatchet on the other. All chiefs also received an American ﬂag and a military uniform jacket, hat, and feather.

 Other explorers also pushed into the uncharted West. Zebulon M. Pike trekked to the headwaters of the Mississippi River in 1805–1806. The next year Pike ventured into the southern portion of Louisiana Territory, where he sighted the Colorado peak that bears his name. Chinook Indians, ca. 1805 William Clark served as the artist and cartographer of the Lewis and Clark expedition. Here he sketched the skull-molding practice that inspired Lewis and Clark to call these Indians “Flatheads.” These people were distinct from the present-day Flathead Indians of Montana, who got their name from the French.

 very distinctly.” After kill ing another Blackfoot and hanging one of the expedition’s “peace and friendship” medals around the dead man’s neck as a warning to other Indians, Lewis and his terriﬁed companions beat it out of the Marias country to rejoin the main party on the Missouri River. The explorers also demonstrated the viability of an overland trail to the Paciﬁc. Down the dusty track thousands of missionaries, fur-traders, and pioneering settlers would wend their way in the ensuing decades, bolstering America’s claim to the Oregon Country.

The Aaron Burr Conspiracies
 In the long run, the Louisiana Purchase greatly expanded the fortunes of the United States and the power of the federal government. In the short term, the vast expanse of territory and the feeble reach of the government obliged to control it raised fears of secession and foreign intrigue (see Map 11.3). Aaron Burr, Jefferson’s ﬁ rst-term vice president, played no small part in provoking—and justifying— such fears. Dropped from the cabinet in Jefferson’s second term, Burr joined with a group of Federalist extremists to plot the secession of New Eng land and New York. Alexander Hamilton, though no friend of Jefferson, exposed and foiled the conspiracy. Incensed, Burr challenged Hamilton to a duel. Hamilton deplored the practice of dueling, by that date illegal in several states, but felt his honor was at stake. He met Burr’s challenge at the appointed hour but refused to ﬁ re. Burr killed

120°W


110°W


 EA

Gila


R.


 ns

 as

R.


Red R.


 NEW

SPAIN
Ri 
R.


 an

 de



San
Antonio


6–








Gu lf o f
 M exic o

400 Km.


SPANISH FLORIDA

400 Mi.


 Map 11.3 Exploring the Louisiana Purchase and the West Seeking to avert friction with France by purchasing all of Louisiana, Jefferson bought trouble because of the vagueness of the boundaries. Among the disputants were Spain in the Floridas, Spain and Mexico in the Southwest, and Great Britain in Canada.

 Hamilton with one shot. Burr’s pistol blew the brightest brain out of the Federalist party and destroyed its one remaining hope of effective leadership. His political career as dead as Hamilton’s, Burr turned his disunionist plottings to the trans-Mississippi West. There he struck up an allegiance with General James Wilkinson, the unscrupulous military governor of Louisiana Territory and a sometime secret agent in the pay of the Spanish crown. Burr’s schemes are still shrouded in mystery, but he and Wilkinson apparently planned to separate the western part of the United States from the East and expand their new confederacy with invasions of Spanish-controlled Mexico and Florida. In the fall of 1806, Burr and sixty followers ﬂoated in ﬂatboats down the Mississippi River to meet Wilkinson’s army at Natchez. But when the general learned that Jefferson had gotten wind of the plot, he betrayed Burr and ﬂed to New Orleans. Burr was arrested and tried for treason. In what seemed to the Jeffersonians to be bias in favor of the accused, Chief Justice John Marshall, strictly hewing



N


Original United States
 by Treaty of 1783 Louisiana Purchase, 1803

New Orleans




DEL. MD.

S.C.


Nacogdoches




N.J.
Philadelphia


N.C.


 GA.

Gr


Pike


Chihuahua


 ee

 o

El Paso


 TENN.

 ss

MISS. TERR.

N
30°N


 KY.

R.


LOUISIANA PURCHASE

 ip pi

 OC

Santa
Fé


1805–180 6


 ka

Pike
Taos


 siss

 do

Mis


 ra

Ar


 IC

Colo


St.
R.
Louis Ohio


R.


Santa Barbara
San Diego


 i

Monterey


OHIO
Washington, D.C. VA. 
 OC



 ur

San Francisco


 CALIFORNIA

R.


Pikes Peak


 PA.

Baltimore


INDIANA TERR.

R.I.
 CONN.

C


–18


R.




Misso


P l at te


 MASS.

 TI



4–




 PACIF

Sacrame


N.Y.
MICH. TERR.

 AN

 ke

 EAN

VT. N.H.

 e

 e R.

Pi


 nn

 Clark’s Return



 ak

 k Clar is and

 to R.

60°W


ME. (MASS.)

Le w


Sn


 n

70°W


 TL

 Lewis’s Return

OREGON COUNTRY

40°N


80°W


Te


 bia

90°W


A


R.


C ol u


 m

100°W


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 British territory Spanish territory Oregon Country (disputed) Fort Mission

Interactive Map


 to the Constitution, insisted that a guilty verdict required proof of overt acts of treason, not merely treasonous intentions (see Art. III, Sec. III). Burr was acquitted and ﬂed to Europe, where he urged Napoleon to make peace with Britain and launch a joint invasion of America. Burr’s insurrectionary brashness demonstrated that it was one thing for the United States to purchase large expanses of western territory but quite another for it to govern them effectively.

A
Precarious Neutrality  Jefferson was triumphantly reelected in 1804, with 162 electoral votes to only 14 votes for his Federalist opponent. But the laurels of Jefferson’s ﬁ rst administration soon withered under the blasts of the new storm that broke in Europe. After unloading Louisiana in 1803, Napoleon deliberately provoked a renewal of his war with Britain—an awesome conﬂ ict that raged on for eleven long years.

America and the Napoleonic Wars




Intercourse or Impartial
 Dealings, 1809 A cartoon by “Peter Pencil” shows Jefferson being victimized by both Britain (left) and France (right).

 For two years a maritime United States—the number one neutral carrier since 1793—enjoyed juicy commercial pickings. But a setback came in 1805. At the Bat tle of Trafalgar, one-eyed Horatio Lord Nelson achieved immortality by smashing the combined French and Spanish ﬂeets off the coast of Spain, thereby ensuring Britain’s supremacy on the seas. At the Battle of Austerlitz in Austria—the Battle of the Three Emperors—Napoleon crushed the combined Austrian and Russian armies, thereby ensuring his mastery of the land. Like the tiger and the shark, France and Britain now reigned supreme in their chosen elements. Unable to hurt each other directly, the two antagonists were forced to strike indirect blows. Britain ruled the waves and waived the rules. The London government, beginning in 1806, issued a series of Orders in Council. These edicts closed the European ports under French control to foreign shipping, including American, unless the vessels ﬁ rst stopped at a British port. Napoleon struck back, ordering the seizure of all merchant ships, including American, that entered British ports. There was no way to trade with either nation without facing the other’s guns. American vessels were,

 quite literally, caught between the Devil and the deep blue sea. Even more galling to American pride than the seizure of wooden ships was the seizure of ﬂesh-andblood American seamen. Impressment—the forcible enlistment of sailors—was a crude form of conscription that the British, among others, had employed for over four centuries. Clubs and stretchers (for men knocked unconscious) were standard equipment of press gangs from His Majesty’s man-hungry ships. Some six thousand bona ﬁde U.S. citizens were impressed by the “piratical man-stealers” of Britain from 1808 to 1811 alone. A number of these luckless souls died or were killed in His Majesty’s ser vice, leaving their kinfolk and friends bereaved and embittered. Britain’s determination was spectacularly highlighted in 1807, in what came to be known as the Chesapeake affair. A royal frigate overhauled a U.S. frigate, the Chesapeake, about ten miles off the coast of Virginia. The British captain bluntly demanded the surrender of four alleged deserters. London had never claimed the right to seize sailors from a foreign warship, and the American commander, though totally



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


 unprepared to ﬁght, refused the request. The British warship thereupon ﬁ red three devastating broadsides at close range, kill ing three Americans and wounding eighteen. Four deserters were dragged away, and the bloody hulk called the Chesapeake limped back to port. Britain was clearly in the wrong, as the London Foreign Ofﬁce admitted. But London’s contrition availed little; a roar of national wrath went up from infuriated Americans. Jefferson, the peace lover, could easily have had war if he had wanted it.

The Hated Embargo
 National honor would not permit a slavish submission to British and French mistreatment. Yet a large-scale foreign war was contrary to the settled policy of the new Republic—and in addition it would be futile. The navy was weak, thanks largely to Jefferson’s antinavalism, and the army was even weaker. A disastrous defeat would not improve America’s plight.

 The warring nations in Europe depended heavily upon the United States for raw materials and foodstuffs. In his eager search for an alternative to war, Jefferson seized upon this essential fact. He reasoned that if America voluntarily cut off its exports, the offending powers would be forced to bow, hat in hand, and agree to respect its rights. Responding to the presidential lash, Congress hastily passed the Embargo Act late in 1807. This rigorous law forbade the export of all goods from the United States, whether in American or foreign ships. More than just a compromise between submission and shooting, the embargo embodied Jefferson’s idea of “peaceful coercion.” If it worked, the embargo would vindicate the rights of neutral nations and point to a new way of conducting foreign affairs. If it failed, Jefferson feared the Republic would perish, subjugated to the European powers or sucked into their ferocious war. The American economy staggered under the effect of the embargo long before Britain or France began to bend. Forests of dead masts gradually ﬁ lled New Eng-

 The Prairie Dog Sickened at the Sting of the Hornet, 1806 In this anti-Jefferson satire criticizing his negotiations for the purchase of West Florida in 1804, Napoleon, in the form of a hornet, stings Jefferson and makes him “cough up” $2 million in gold coins— the amount of the secret appropriation that Jefferson sought from Congress. The negotiations eventually failed.

The Embargo


Launching of the Ship Fame, by George Ropes, Jr., 1802
 shipyards like this one, stirring bitter resentment.

 land’s once-bustling harbors; docks that had once rumbled were deserted (except for illegal trade); and soup kitchens cared for some of the hungry unemployed. Jeffersonian Republicans probably hurt the commerce of New Eng land, which they avowedly were trying to protect, far more than Britain and France together were doing. Farmers of the South and West, the strongholds of Jefferson, suffered no less disastrously than New Eng land. They were alarmed by the mounting piles of unexportable cotton, grain, and tobacco. Jefferson seemed to be waging war on his fellow citizens rather than on the offending foreign powers.

A
Federalist circular in Massachusetts against the embargo cried out, 
“


 Let every man who holds the name of America dear to him, stretch forth his hands and put this accursed thing, this Embargo from him. Be resolute, act like sons of liberty, of God, and your country; nerve your arm with vengeance against the Despot [Jefferson] who would wrest the inestimable germ of your Independence from you—and you shall be Conquerors!!!

”




 Jefferson’s embargo throttled thriving New England

 An enormous illicit trade mushroomed in 1808, especially along the Canadian border, where bands of armed Americans on loaded rafts overawed or overpowered federal agents. Irate citizens cynically transposed the letters of “Embargo” to read “O Grab Me,” “Go Bar ’Em,” and “Mobrage,” while heartily cursing the “Dambargo.” Jefferson nonetheless induced Congress to pass iron-toothed enforcing legislation. It was so inquisitorial and tyrannical as to cause some Americans to think more kindly of George III, whom Jefferson had berated in the Declaration of Independence. One indignant New Hampshirite denounced the president with this ditty: Our ships all in motion, Once whiten’d the ocean; They sail’d and return’d with a Cargo; Now doom’d to decay They are fallen a prey, To Jefferson, worms, and EMBARGO. The embargo even had the effect of reviving the moribund Federalist party. Gaining new converts, its leaders hurled their nulliﬁcation of the embargo into the teeth of the “Virginia lordlings” in Washington. In 1804 the discredited Federalists had polled only 14 electoral votes out of 176; in 1808, the embargo year, the ﬁgure rose to 47 out of 175. New Eng land seethed with



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


 Rivals for the presidency, and for the soul of the young Republic, Thomas Jefferson and John Adams died on the same day—the Fourth of July, 1826— ﬁfty years to the day after both men had signed the Declaration of Independence. Adams’s last words were

“


”


 Thomas Jefferson still survives.

 But he was wrong, for three hours earlier, Jefferson had drawn his last breath.

 talk of secession, and Jefferson later admitted that he felt the foundations of government tremble under his feet. An alarmed Congress, yielding to the storm of public anger, ﬁ nally repealed the embargo on March 1, 1809, three days before Jefferson’s retirement. A halfloaf substitute was provided by the Non-Intercourse Act. This measure formally reopened trade with all the nations of the world, except the two most important, Britain and France. Though thus watered down, economic coercion continued to be the policy of the Jeffersonians from 1809 to 1812, when the nation ﬁ nally plunged into war. Why did the embargo, Jefferson’s most daring act of statesmanship, collapse after ﬁ fteen dismal months? First of all, he underestimated the bulldog determination of the British, as others have, and overestimated the dependence of both belligerents on America’s trade. Bumper grain crops blessed the British Isles during these years, and the revolutionary Latin American republics unexpectedly threw open their ports for compensating commerce. With most of Europe under his control, Napoleon could afford to tighten his belt and go without American trade. The French continued to seize American ships and steal their cargoes, while their emperor mocked the United States by claiming that he was simply helping them enforce the embargo. More critically, perhaps, Jefferson miscalculated the unpopularity of such a self-crucifying weapon and the difﬁculty of enforcing it. The hated embargo was not continued long enough or tightly enough to achieve the desired results—and a leaky embargo was perhaps more costly than none at all. Curiously enough, New Eng land plucked a new prosperity from the ugly jaws of the embargo. With shipping tied up and imported goods scarce, the resourceful Yankees reopened old factories and erected new ones. The real foundations of modern America’s

 industrial might were laid behind the protective wall of the embargo, followed by nonintercourse and the War of 1812. Jefferson, the avowed critic of factories, may have unwittingly done more for American manufacturing than Alexander Hamilton, industry’s outspoken friend.

 Madison’s Gamble Following Washington’s precedent, Jefferson left the presidency after two terms, happy to escape what he called the “splendid misery” of the highest ofﬁce in the land. He strongly favored the nomination and election of a kindred spirit as his successor—his friend and fellow Virginian, the quiet, intellectual, and unassuming James Madison. Madison took the presidential oath on March 4, 1809, as the awesome conﬂict in Europe was roaring to its climax. The scholarly Madison was small of stature, light of weight, bald of head, and weak of voice. Despite a distinguished career as a legislator, he was crippled as president by factions within his party and his cabinet. Unable to dominate Congress as Jefferson had done, Madison often found himself holding the bag for risky foreign policies not of his own making. The Non-Intercourse Act of 1809—a watered-down version of Jefferson’s embargo aimed solely at Britain and France—was due to expire in 1810. To Madison’s dismay, Congress dismantled the embargo completely with a bargaining mea sure known as Macon’s Bill No. 2. While reopening American trade with all the world, Macon’s Bill dangled what Congress hoped was an attractive lure. If either Britain or France repealed its commercial restrictions, America would restore its embargo against the nonrepealing nation. To Madison the bill was a shameful capitulation. It practically admitted that the United States could not survive without one of the belligerents as a commercial ally, but it left determination of who that ally would be to the potentates of London and Paris. The crafty Napoleon saw his chance. Since 1806 Britain had justiﬁed its Orders in Council as retaliation for Napoleon’s actions—implying, without promising outright, that trade restrictions would be lifted if the French decrees disappeared. Now the French held out the same half-promise. In August 1810 word came from Napoleon’s foreign minister that the French decrees might be repealed if Britain also lifted its Orders in Council. The minister’s message was deliberately ambiguous. Napoleon had no intention of permitting unrestricted trade between America and Britain. Rather,

President James Madison




 Britain and France Divide Up the World, 1805 The great-power rivalry symbolized here by British prime minister William Pitt and French emperor Napoleon wreathed the planet in years of warfare. When it ended with Napoleon’s ﬁnal defeat in 1815, Britain was the unchallenged mistress of the world’s oceans.

 he hoped to maneuver the United States into resuming its embargo against the British, thus creating a partial blockade against his enemy that he would not have to raise a ﬁ nger to enforce. Madison knew better than to trust Napoleon, but he gambled that the threat of seeing the United States trade exclusively with France would lead the British to repeal their restrictions—and vice versa. Closing his

 Insisted the editor of Niles’ Weekly Register (June 27, 1812),

“


 The injuries received from France do not lessen the enormity of those heaped upon us by England. . . . In this ‘straight betwixt two’ we had an unquestionable right to select our enemy. We have given the preference to Great Britain . . . on account of her more ﬂagrant wrongs.

”


 eyes to the emperor’s obvious subterfuge, he accepted the French offer as evidence of repeal. The terms of Macon’s Bill gave the British three months to live up to their implied promise by revoking the Orders in Council and reopening the Atlantic to neutral trade. They did not. In ﬁ rm control of the seas, London saw little need to bargain. As long as the war with Napoleon went on, they decided, America could trade exclusively with the British Empire—or with nobody at all. Madison’s gamble failed. The president saw no choice but to reestablish the embargo against Britain alone—a decision that he knew meant the end of American neutrality and that he feared was the ﬁ nal step toward war.

Tecumseh and the Prophet
 Not all of Madison’s party was reluctant to ﬁght. The complexion of the Twelfth Congress, which met late in 1811, differed markedly from that of its predecessor. Recent elections had swept away many of the older



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


The Battle of the Thames,
1813 Here the Shawnee
 leader Tecumseh stood his ground against the superior American force and died. A gifted organizer and military chieftain, he had denounced the tribal custom of torturing prisoners and opposed the practice of allowing any one tribe to sell land that, he believed, belonged to all Indians.

 “submission men” and replaced them with young hotheads, many from the South and West. Dubbed war hawks by their Federalist opponents, the newcomers were indeed on ﬁ re for a new war with the old enemy. The war hawks were weary of hearing how their fathers had “whipped” the British single-handedly, and they detested the manhandling of American sailors and the British Orders in Council that dammed the ﬂow of American trade, especially western farm products headed for Europe. Western war hawks also yearned to wipe out a renewed Indian threat to the pioneer settlers who were streaming into the trans-Allegheny wilderness. As this

 When the war hawks won control of the House of Representatives, they elevated to the Speakership thirty-four-year-old Henry Clay of Kentucky (1777– 1852), the eloquent and magnetic “Harry of the West.” Clamoring for war, he thundered,

“


 I prefer the troubled sea of war, demanded by the honor and independence of this country, with all its calamities and desolation, to the tranquil and putrescent pool of ignominious peace.

”


 white ﬂood washed through the green forests, more and more Indians were pushed toward the setting sun. Two remarkable Shawnee brothers, Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa, known to non-Indians as “the Prophet,” concluded that the time had come to stem this onrushing tide. They began to weld together a far-ﬂung confederacy of all the tribes east of the Mississippi, inspiring a vibrant movement of Indian unity and cultural renewal. Their followers gave up textile clothing for traditional buckskin garments. Their warriors forswore alcohol, the better to ﬁght a last-ditch battle with the “paleface” invaders. Rejecting whites’ concept of “ownership,” Tecumseh urged his supporters never to cede land to whites unless all Indians agreed. Meanwhile, frontiersmen and their war-hawk spokesmen in Congress became convinced that British “scalp buyers” in Canada were nourishing the Indians’ growing strength. In the fall of 1811, William Henry

 In a speech at Vincennes, Indiana Territory, Tecumseh (1768?–1813) said,

“


 Sell a country! Why not sell the air, the clouds, and the great sea, as well as the earth? Did not the Great Spirit make them all for the use of his children?

”


Crushing the Indians in the Old Northwest


 William Henry Harrison (1773–1841), Indian ﬁghter and later president, called Tecumseh

“


 one of those uncommon geniuses who spring up occasionally to produce revolutions and overturn the established order of things. If it were not for the vicinity of the United States, he would perhaps be founder of an Empire that would rival in glory that of Mexico or Peru.

”


 Harrison, governor of Indiana Territory, gathered an army and advanced on Tecumseh’s headquarters at the junction of the Wabash and Tippecanoe Rivers in present-day Indiana. Tecumseh was absent, recruiting supporters in the South, but the Prophet attacked Harrison’s army—foolishly, in Tecumseh’s eyes—with a small force of Shawnees. The Shawnees were routed and their settlement burned. The Battle of Tippecanoe made Harrison a national hero. It also discredited the Prophet and drove Tecumseh into an alliance with the British. When America’s war with Britain came, Tecumseh fought ﬁercely for the redcoats until his death in 1813 at the Battle of the Thames. With him perished the dream of an Indian confederacy.



 Mr. Madison’s War By the spring of 1812, Madison believed war with Britain to be inevitable. The British arming of hostile Indians pushed him toward this decision, as did the whoops of the war hawks in his own party. People like Representative Felix Grundy of Tennessee, three of whose brothers had been killed in clashes with Indians, cried that there was only one way to remove the menace of the Indians: wipe out their Canadian base. “On to Canada, on to Canada” was the war hawks’ chant. Southern expansionists, less vocal, cast a covetous eye on Florida, then weakly held by Britain’s ally Spain. Above all, Madison turned to war to restore conﬁdence in the republican experiment. For ﬁve years the Republicans had tried to steer between the warring European powers, to set a course between submission and battle. Theirs had been a noble vision, but it had brought them only international derision and internal strife. Madison and the Republicans came to believe that only a vigorous assertion of American rights could demonstrate the viability of American nationhood— and of democracy as a form of government. If America could not ﬁght to protect itself, its experiment in republicanism would be discredited in the eyes of a scofﬁ ng world. One prominent Republican called the war a test “to determine whether the republican system adopted by the people is imbecile and transient, or whether it

The Present State of Our Country
 Partisan disunity over the War of 1812 threatened the nation’s very existence. The prowar Jeffersonian at the left is attacking the pillar of federalism; the antiwar Federalist at the right is trying to pull down democracy. The spirit of Washington warns that the country’s welfare depends on all three pillars, including republicanism.



Chapter 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 1800–1812


 has force and duration worthy of the enterprise.” Thus, not for the last time, did war fever and democratic idealism make common cause. Madison asked Congress to declare war on June 1, 1812. Congress obliged him two weeks later—the ﬁ rst of just ﬁve times in all of American history that Congress has formally exercised its constitutional power to declare war (see Art. I, Sec. VIII, para. 11). The vote in the House was 79 to 49 for war, in the Senate 19 to 13. The close tally revealed deep divisions over the wisdom of ﬁghting. The split was both sectional and partisan. Support for war came from the South and West, but also from Republicans in populous middle states such as Pennsylvania and Virginia. Federalists in both North and South damned the conﬂ ict, but their stronghold was New Eng land, which greeted the declaration of war with mufﬂed bells, ﬂags at half-mast, and public fasting. Why should seafaring New Eng land oppose the war for a free sea? The answer is that pro-British Federalists in the Northeast sympathized with Britain and resented the Republicans’ sympathy with Napoleon, whom they regarded as the “Corsican butcher” and the “anti-Christ of the age.” The Federalists also opposed

 the acquisition of Canada, which would merely add more agrarian states from the wild Northwest. This, in turn, would increase the voting strength of the Jeffersonian Republicans. The bitterness of New Eng land Federalists against “Mr. Madison’s War” led them to treason or near-treason. They were determined, wrote one Republican versiﬁer, To rule the nation if they could, But see it damned if others should. New Eng land gold holders probably lent more dollars to the British Exchequer than to the federal Treasury. Federalist farmers sent huge quantities of supplies and foodstuffs to Canada, enabling British armies to invade New York. New Eng land governors stubbornly refused to permit their militias to serve outside their own states. In a sense America had to ﬁght two enemies simultaneously: old Eng land and New Eng land. Thus perilously divided, the barely United States plunged into armed conﬂ ict against Britain, then the world’s most powerful empire. No sober American could have much reasonable hope of victory, but by 1812 the Jeffersonian Republicans saw no other choice.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Peace treaty with Tripoli Battle of Trafalgar Battle of Austerlitz

1805–


 Pike’s explorations

Judiciary Act of 1801


1801–


 Naval war with Tripoli



 Burr treason trial



 Revised naturalization law Judiciary Act of 1801 repealed

 Chesapeake affair Embargo Act





 Madison elected president

Marbury v. Madison
Louisiana Purchase




 Non-Intercourse Act replaces Embargo Act



 Macon’s Bill No. 2 Napoleon announces (falsely) repeal of blockade decrees Madison reestablishes nonimportation against Britain



Battle of Tippecanoe




 United States declares war on Britain



 Toussaint L’Ouverture launches Haitian Revolution



 Jefferson defeats Adams for presidency





 Haiti emerges as ﬁ rst independent black republic Jefferson reelected president Impeachment of Justice Chase

1804–


 Lewis and Clark expedition

To Learn More


KEY TERMS
Revolution of 1800 (226) patronage (230) Judiciary Act of 1801 (231) midnight judges (231) Marbury v. Madison (232) Tripolitan War (234) Louisiana Purchase (236) Corps of Discovery (236) 


PEOPLE TO KNOW
Orders in Council (239) impressment (239) Chesapeake affair (239) Embargo Act (240) Non-Intercourse Act (242) Macon’s Bill No. 2 (242) war hawks (244) Tippecanoe, Battle of (244) 
Thomas Jefferson
Sally Hemings
Albert Gallatin
John Marshall
Samuel Chase
Napoleon Bonaparte
Robert R. Livingston
Toussaint L’Ouverture


Meriwether Lewis
William Clark
Aaron Burr
James Madison
Tecumseh
 Tenskwatawa (“the Prophet”)

To Learn More
Catherine Allgor, Parlor Politics (2000)
Stephen E. Ambrose, Undaunted Courage (1996)
Joseph Ellis, American Sphinx: The Character of Thomas
Jefferson (1997)
John Ferling, Adams vs. Jefferson: The Tumultuous Election
 of 1800 (2004) Thomas Fleming, The Louisiana Purchase (2003) Donald R. Hickey, Don’t Give Up the Ship! Myths of the War of 1812 (2006) Peter P. Hill, Napoleon’s Troublesome Americans: FrancoAmerican Relations, 1804–1815 (2005) Donald Jackson, Thomas Jefferson and the Stony Mountain: Exploring the West from Monticello (1981)

Jon Kukla, A Wilderness So Immense (2003)
Marshall Smelser, The Democratic Republic, 1801–1815
(1968)
Anthony Wallace, Jefferson and the Indians (1999)
Gary Wills, Negro President: Thomas Jefferson and the Slave
Power (2003)


 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Second War
 for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism




1812–1824
 The American continents . . . are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European powers.

T


 he War of 1812 was an especially divisive and illfought war. There was no burning national anger, as there had been in 1807 following the Chesapeake outrage. The supreme lesson of the conﬂ ict was the folly of leading a divided and apathetic people into war. And yet, despite the unimpressive military outcome and even less decisive negotiated peace, Americans came out of the war with a renewed sense of nationhood. For the next dozen years, an awakened spirit of nationalism would inspire activities ranging from protecting manufacturing to building roads to defending the authority of the federal government over the states.

 On to Canada over Land and Lakes On the eve of the War of 1812, the regular army was ill-trained, ill-disciplined, and widely scattered. It had to be supplemented by the even more poorly trained militias, which were sometimes distinguished by their speed of foot in leaving the battleﬁeld. Some of the ranking generals were semisenile heirlooms from the Revolutionary War, rusting on their laurels and lacking in vigor and vision.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



 The Contest over Canada



 Constitution and Guerrière, 1812 The Guerrière was heavily outweighed and outgunned, yet its British captain eagerly—and foolishly—sought combat. His ship was destroyed. Historian Henry Adams later concluded that this duel “raised the United States in one half hour to the rank of a ﬁrst-class Power in the world.” The buckler on the sword from the USS Constitution commemorates the famous battle. Today the Constitution, berthed in Boston harbor, remains the oldest actively commissioned ship in the U.S. Navy.

 Canada became an important battleground in the War of 1812 because British forces were weakest there (see Map 12.1). A successful American offensive might have quashed British inﬂuence among the Indians and garnered new land for settlers. But the Americans’ offensive strategy was poorly conceived. Had the Americans captured Montreal, the center of population and transportation, every thing to the west might have died, just as the leaves of a tree wither when the trunk is girdled. But instead of laying ax to the trunk, the Americans frittered away their strength in the three-pronged invasion of 1812. The trio of invading forces that set out from Detroit, Niagara, and Lake Champlain were all beaten back shortly after they had crossed the Canadian border. By contrast, the British and Canadians displayed energy from the outset. Early in the war, they captured the American fort of Michilimackinac, which commanded the upper Great Lakes and the Indianinhabited area to the south and west. Their brilliant defensive operations were led by the inspired British general Isaac Brock and assisted (in the American camp) by “General Mud” and “General Confusion.” When several American land invasions of Canada were again hurled back in 1813, Americans looked for

 success on the water. Man for man and ship for ship, the American navy did much better than the army. In comparison to British ships, American craft on the whole were more skillfully handled, had better gunners, and were manned by non-press-gang crews who were burning to avenge numerous indignities. Similarly, the American frigates, notably the Constitution (“Old Ironsides”), had thicker sides, heavier ﬁ repower, and larger crews, of which one sailor in six was a free black. Control of the Great Lakes was vital, and an energetic American naval ofﬁcer, Oliver Hazard Perry, managed to build a ﬂeet of green-timbered ships on the shores of Lake Erie, manned by even greener seamen. When he captured a British ﬂeet in a furious engagement on the lake, he reported to his superior, “We have met the enemy and they are ours.” Perry’s victory and his slogan infused new life into the drooping American cause. Forced to withdraw from Detroit and Fort Malden, the retreating redcoats were overtaken by General Harrison’s army and beaten at the Battle of the Thames in October 1813. Despite these successes, the Americans by late 1814, far from invading Canada, were grimly defending their own soil against the invading British. Napoleon’s



Chapter 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 1812–1824


90°W


80°W


L.
Superior 

 American advances, 1812

INDIANA TERR.

 American advances, 1813

 hig

Lake
Huron


Mic


 British advances, 1814 American victory

 Tecumseh killed in battle; pan-Indian alliance collapses.

 British victory Annexed from Spain, 1812

Thames River
Oct. 5, 1813


Fort Niagara


Plattsburgh


L.
Ontario NEW YORK

VT. N.H. MASS.

M I C H I GA N
 TERR.

Lake


Fort


MAINE (MASS.)

 Montréal Dearborn approaches Montreal but then retreats, Nov. 1812.

 an

 American advances, 1814

Michilimackinac
July 17, 1812


70°W


B R IT IS H N O R T H A M E R IC A
Sorel
C A N A DA )


Detroit
Aug. 16, 1812


Per


81 3
 ry 1

L.
Erie 

 CONN.

R.I.


 no

 is

W


Illi


40°N
Missouri R.


 a sh ab

R.


I N D IA N A
T ER R .


ILLINOIS T ER R .

Fort Meigs


Har
 rison 1813

R.


 Put-in-Bay Sept. 10, 1813 Baltimore Sept. 13, 1814

N.J.


OHIO
Washington, D.C. Aug. 24–25, 1814 
 KENTUCKY

 s 1814

 VIRGINIA

R os


Ohio R.


U NORGAN IZED TER R ITORY

 The American capital falls to a British amphibious force. The government escapes, but the British occupation force plunders and then burns Washington, D.C.

DELAWARE MARYLAND

 iR

.


NORTH CAROLINA TENNESSEE

 ssi

 pp

Ark
 an sa

 PENNSYLVANIA

 ss i

R.


Mi


 s

Ten


R ed R
.


 ness

 Andrew Jackson‘s combined Cherokee Indian and Tennessee militia massacre the Red Stick Creeks at Horseshoe Bend, March 27, 1814.

 ee R .

M I SSI SSI P P I
T ER R ITO R Y


 GEORGIA

SOUTH CAROLINA

 British naval blockade 1814–1815

N


Fort Jackson


ATLANTIC OCEAN

 LOUISIANA

30°N


New Orleans
Jan. 8, 1815


Mobile


Pensacola


SPAN I SH F LOR I DA

Gulf of Mexico






300 Km.


300 Mi.


Map 12.1 Battles in the War of 1812
Interactive Map


 European adversaries had vanquished him—temporarily, as it turned out—in mid-1814 and had exiled the dangerous despot to the Mediterranean isle of Elba. The United States, which had so brashly provoked war behind the protective skirts of Napoleon, was now left to face the music alone. Thousands of Britain’s victori-

 ous veteran redcoats began to pour into Canada from the Continent. Assembling some ten thousand crack troops, the British prepared in 1814 for a crushing blow into New York along the familiar lake-river route. In the absence of roads, the invader was forced to bring supplies over

 The Contest over Canada

 the Lake Champlain waterway. A weaker American ﬂeet, commanded by the thirty-year-old Thomas Macdonough, challenged the British. The ensuing battle was desperately fought near Plattsburgh on September 11, 1814, on ﬂoating slaughterhouses. The American ﬂagship at one point was in grave trouble. But Macdonough, unexpectedly turning his ship about with cables, confronted the enemy with a fresh broadside and snatched victory from the fangs of defeat. The results of this heroic naval battle were momentous. The invading British army was forced to retreat. Macdonough thus saved at least upper New York from conquest, New Eng land from further disaffection, and the Union from possible dissolution. He also profoundly affected the concurrent negotiations of the Anglo-American peace treaty in Europe.

Washington Burned and
New Orleans Defended
 A second formidable British force, numbering about four thousand, landed in the Chesapeake Bay area in August 1814. Advancing rapidly on Washington, it easily dispersed some six thousand panicky militiamen at Bladensburg (“the Bladensburg races”). The invaders then entered the capital and set ﬁ re to most of the public buildings, including the Capitol and the White House.



 But while Washington burned, the Americans at Baltimore held ﬁ rm. The British ﬂeet hammered Fort McHenry with their cannon but could not capture the city. Francis Scott Key, a detained American anxiously watching the bombardment from a British ship, was inspired by the doughty defenders to write the words of “The Star-Spangled Banner.” Set to the tune of a saucy English tavern refrain, the song quickly attained popularity. A third British blow of 1814, aimed at New Orleans, menaced the entire Mississippi Valley. Gaunt and hawk-faced Andrew Jackson, fresh from crushing the southwest Indians at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend, was placed in command (see Map 12.5 on p. 266). His hodgepodge force consisted of seven thousand sailors, regulars, pirates, and Frenchmen, as well as militiamen from Louisiana, Kentucky, and Tennessee. Among the defenders were two Louisiana regiments of free black volunteers, numbering about four hundred men. The Americans threw up their entrenchment, and in the words of a popular song, Behind it stood our little force— None wished it to be greater; For ev’ry man was half a horse, And half an alligator. The overconﬁdent British, numbering some eight thousand battle-seasoned veterans, blundered badly. They made the mistake of launching a frontal assault,

The Fall of Washington,
 or Maddy in Full Flight President Madison (“Maddy”) was forced into humiliating withdrawal from the capital in 1814, when British forces put the torch to Washington, D.C.



Chapter 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 1812–1824


 Andrew Jackson (1767–1845) appealed to the governor of Louisiana for help recruiting free blacks to defend New Orleans in 1814:

“


 The free men of colour in [your] city are inured to the Southern climate and would make excellent Soldiers. . . . They must be for or against us—distrust them, and you make them your enemies, place conﬁdence in them, and you engage them by every dear and honorable tie to the interest of the country, who extends to them equal rights and [privileges] with white men.

”


 on January 8, 1815, on the entrenched American riﬂemen and cannoneers. The attackers suffered the most devastating defeat of the entire war, losing over two thousand, killed and wounded, in half an hour, as compared with some seventy for the Americans. It was an astonishing victory for Jackson and his men. News of the American victory in the Battle of New Orleans struck the country “like a clap of thunder,” according to one contemporary. Andrew Jackson became a national hero as poets and politicians lined up to sing the praises of the defenders of New Orleans. It hardly mattered when word arrived that a peace treaty had been signed at Ghent, Belgium, ending the war two weeks before the battle. The United States had fought for honor as much as material gain. The Battle of New Orleans restored that honor, at least in American eyes, and unleashed a wave of nationalism and self-conﬁdence. Its wrath aroused, the Royal Navy had ﬁ nally retaliated by throwing a ruinous naval blockade along America’s coast and by landing raiding parties almost at will. American economic life, including ﬁshing, was crippled. Customs revenues were choked off, and near the end of the war, the bankrupt Treasury was unable to meet its maturing obligations.

The Treaty of Ghent
 Tsar Alexander I of Russia, feeling hard-pressed by Napoleon’s army and not wanting his British ally to fritter away its strength in America, had proposed mediation between the clashing Anglo-Saxon cousins as early as 1812. The tsar’s feeler eventually set in motion the

 machinery that brought ﬁve American peacemakers to the quaint Belgian city of Ghent in 1814. The bickering group was headed by early-rising, puritanical John Quincy Adams, son of John Adams, who deplored the late-hour card playing of his high-living colleague Henry Clay. Conﬁdent after their military successes, the British envoys made sweeping demands for a neutralized Indian buffer state in the Great Lakes region, control of the Great Lakes, and a substantial part of conquered Maine. The Americans ﬂatly rejected these terms, and the talks appeared stalemated. But news of British reverses in upper New York and at Baltimore, and increasing war-weariness in Britain, made London more willing to compromise. Preoccupied with redrafting Napoleon’s map of Europe at the Congress of Vienna (1814–1815) and eyeing still-dangerous France, the British lion resigned itself to licking its wounds. The Treaty of Ghent, signed on Christmas Eve, 1814, was essentially an armistice. Both sides simply agreed to stop ﬁghting and to restore conquered territory. No mention was made of those grievances for which America had ostensibly fought: the Indian menace, search and seizure, Orders in Council, impressment, and conﬁscations. These discreet omissions have often been cited as further evidence of the insincerity of the war hawks. Rather, they are proof that the Americans had not managed to defeat the British. With neither side able to impose its will, the treaty negotiations—like the war itself—ended as a virtual draw. Relieved Americans boasted “Not One Inch of Territory Ceded or Lost”—a phrase that contrasted strangely with the “On to Canada” rallying cry at the war’s outset.

Federalist Grievances and
 the Hartford Convention Deﬁant New Eng land remained a problem. It prospered during the conﬂ ict, owing largely to illicit trade with the enemy in Canada and to the absence of a British blockade until 1814. But the embittered opposition of the Federalists to the war continued unabated. As the war dragged on, New Eng land extremists became more vocal. A small minority of them proposed secession from the Union, or at least a separate peace with Britain. Ugly rumors were aﬂoat about “Blue Light” Federalists—treacherous New Eng landers who supposedly ﬂashed lanterns on the shore so that blockading British cruisers would be alerted to the attempted escape of American ships.

The Treaty of Ghent


 In a letter to her friend Mercy Otis Warren, Abigail Adams (1744–1818) fretted that the British were taking advantage of Americans’ disagreement over the War of 1812:

“


 We have our ﬁresides, our comfortable habitations, our cities, our churches and our country to defend, our rights, privileges and independence to preserve. And for these are we not justly contending? Thus it appears to me. Yet I hear from our pulpits, and read from our presses, that it is an unjust, a wicked, a ruinous, and unnecessary war. . . . A house divided upon itself—and upon that foundation do our enemies build their hopes of subduing us.

”


 The most spectacular manifestation of Federalist discontent was the ill-omened Hartford Convention. Late in 1814, when the capture of New Orleans seemed imminent, Massachusetts issued a call for a convention at Hartford, Connecticut. The states of Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island dispatched full



 delegations; neighboring New Hampshire and Vermont sent partial representation. This group of prominent men, twenty-six in all, met in complete secrecy for about three weeks—December 15, 1814, to January 5, 1815—to discuss their grievances and to seek redress for their wrongs. In truth, the Hartford Convention was actually less radical than the alarmists supposed. Though a minority of delegates gave vent to wild talk of secession, the convention’s ﬁ nal report was quite moderate. It demanded ﬁ nancial assistance from Washington to compensate for lost trade and proposed constitutional amendments requiring a two-thirds vote in Congress before an embargo could be imposed, new states admitted, or war declared. Most of the demands reﬂected Federalist fears that a once-proud New Eng land was falling subservient to an agrarian South and West. Delegates sought to abolish the three-ﬁ fths clause of the Constitution (which allowed the South to count a portion of its slaves in calculating proportional representation), to limit presidents to a single term, and to prohibit the election of two successive presidents from the same state. This last clause was aimed at the muchresented “Virginia dynasty”—by 1814 a Virginian had been president for all but four years in the Republic’s quarter-century of life.

Massachusetts,
Connecticut, and Rhode
Island Contemplate
Abandoning the Union,
 engraving by William Charles, 1814 This anti-Federalist cartoon shows Great Britain welcoming back its “Yankee boys” with open arms, promising them “plenty molasses and codﬁsh, plenty of goods to smuggle, honours, titles, and nobility into the bargain.”



Chapter 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 1812–1824


NY MICH. TERR.

ILL. TERR.

 VT 8 NH

MA RI CT 4

 NJ

 OHIO

IND. TERR.

MISSOURI TERR.

 PA

 The War of 1812 won a new respect for America among many Britons. Michael Scott, a young lieutenant in the British navy, wrote,

DE VA

 KY

MD DR-6/F-5

SC MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

 GA

 there was far more talk of nulliﬁcation and secession in New Eng land than in any other section, including the South. The outright ﬂouting of the Jeffersonian embargo and the later crippling of the war effort were the two most damaging acts of nulliﬁcation in America prior to the events leading to the Civil War.

 LA

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Madison (Democratic–Republican)




59%




41%


Clinton (Federalist)


 I don’t like Americans; I never did, and never shall like them. . . . I have no wish to eat with them, drink with them, deal with, or consort with them in any way; but let me tell the whole truth, nor ﬁght with them, were it not for the laurels to be acquired, by overcoming an enemy so brave, determined, and alert, and in every way so worthy of one’s steel, as they have always proved.

”


 NC

 TN

“


 Map 12.2 Presidential Election of 1812 (with electoral vote by state) The Federalists showed impressive strength in the North, and their presidential candidate, DeWitt Clinton, the future “Father of the Erie Canal,” almost won. If the 25 electoral votes of Pennsylvania had gone to the New Yorker, he would have won, 114 to 103. Interactive Map

 Three special envoys from Massachusetts carried these demands to the burned-out capital of Washington. The trio arrived just in time to be overwhelmed by the glorious news from New Orleans, followed by that from Ghent. As the rest of the nation congratulated itself on a glorious victory, New Eng land’s wartime complaints seemed petty at best and treasonous at worst. Pursued by the sneers and jeers of the press, the envoys sank away in disgrace and into obscurity. The Hartford resolutions, as it turned out, were the death dirge of the Federalist party. The Federalists were never again to mount a successful presidential campaign (see Map 12.2). Federalist doctrines of disunity, which long survived the party, blazed a portentous trail. Until 1815

The Second War for
American Independence
 The War of 1812 was a small war, involving about 6,000 Americans killed or wounded. It was but a footnote to the mighty European conﬂagration that had been ignited by the French Revolution and Napoleon’s imperial ambitions. In 1812, when Napoleon invaded Russia with about 500,000 men, Madison tried to invade Canada with about 5,000 men. But if the American conﬂ ict was globally unimportant, it had huge consequences for the United States. The Republic had shown that it would take sword in hand to resist what it regarded as grievous wrongs. Other nations developed a new respect for America’s ﬁghting prowess. Naval ofﬁcers like Perry and Macdonough were the most effective type of negotiators; the hot breath of their broadsides spoke the most eloquent diplomatic language. America’s emissaries abroad were henceforth treated with less scorn. In a diplomatic sense, if not in a military sense, the conﬂ ict could be called the Second War for American Independence. A new nation, moreover, was welded in the roaring furnace of armed conﬂict. Sectionalism, now identiﬁed with discredited New Eng land Federalists, was dealt a black eye. The painful events of the war glaringly revealed, as perhaps nothing else could have done, the

Legacies of the War of 1812


 folly of sectional disunity. In a sense the most conspicuous casualty of the war was the Federalist party. War heroes emerged, especially the two Indianﬁghters Andrew Jackson and William Henry Harrison. Both of them were to become president. Left in the lurch by their British friends at Ghent, the Indians were forced to make such terms as they could. They reluctantly consented, in a series of treaties, to relinquish vast areas of forested land north of the Ohio River. Manufacturing prospered behind the wooden wall of the British blockade. In both an economic and a diplomatic sense, the War of 1812 bred greater American independence. The industries that were thus stimulated by the ﬁghting rendered America less dependent on Europe’s workshops. Canadian patriotism and nationalism also received a powerful stimulus from the clash. Many Canadians felt betrayed by the Treaty of Ghent. They were especially aggrieved by the failure to secure an Indian buffer state or even mastery of the Great Lakes. Canadians fully expected the frustrated Yankees to return, and for a time the Americans and British engaged in a ﬂoating arms race on the Great Lakes. But in 1817 the RushBagot agreement between Britain and the United States severely limited naval armament on the lakes.



 Better relations brought the last border fortiﬁcations down in the 1870s, with the happy result that the United States and Canada came to share the world’s longest unfortiﬁed boundary—5,527 miles long. After Napoleon’s ﬁ nal defeat at Waterloo in June 1815, Europe slumped into a peace of exhaustion. Deposed monarchs returned to battered thrones, as the Old World took the rutted road back to conservatism, illiberalism, and reaction. But the American people were largely unaffected by these European developments. Turning their backs on the Old World, they faced resolutely toward the untamed West—and toward the task of building their democracy.

Nascent Nationalism
 The most impressive by-product of the War of 1812 was a heightened nationalism—the spirit of nationconsciousness or national oneness. America may not have fought the war as one nation, but it emerged as one nation. The changed mood even manifested itself in the birth of a distinctively national literature. Washington Irving and James Fenimore Cooper attained international recognition in the 1820s, signiﬁcantly as

 View of the Capitol, by Charles Burton, 1824 This painting of the Capitol building, much smaller than it is today, reveals the rustic conditions of the early days in the nation’s capital. A series of architects worked on the Capitol, following William Thornton’s original design along neoclassical, or “Greek Revival,” lines. After the British burned the building in 1814, Boston’s Charles Bulﬁnch oversaw the reconstruction of the Capitol, ﬁnally completed in 1830.



Chapter 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 1812–1824


 the nation’s ﬁ rst writers of importance to use American scenes and themes. School textbooks, often British in an earlier era, were now being written by Americans for Americans. In the world of magazines, the highly intellectual North American Review began publication in 1815—the year of the triumph at New Orleans. Even American painters increasingly celebrated their native landscapes on their canvases. A fresh nationalistic spirit could be recognized in many other areas as well. The rising tide of nationconsciousness even touched ﬁ nance. A revived Bank of the United States was voted by Congress in 1816. A more handsome national capital began to rise from the ashes of Washington. The army was expanded to ten thousand men. The navy further covered itself with glory in 1815 when it administered a thorough beating to the piratical plunderers of North Africa. Stephen Decatur, naval hero of the War of 1812 and of the Barbary Coast expeditions, pungently captured the country’s nationalist mood in a famous toast made on his return from the Mediterranean campaigns: “Our country! In her intercourse with foreign nations may she always be in the right; but our country, right or wrong!”

“The American System”
 Nationalism likewise manifested itself in manufacturing. Patriotic Americans took pride in the factories that had recently mushroomed forth, largely as a result of the self-imposed embargoes and the war. When hostilities ended in 1815, British competitors undertook to recover lost ground. They began to dump the contents of their bulging warehouses on the United States, often cutting their prices below cost in an effort to strangle the American war-baby factories in the cradle. The infant industries bawled lustily for protection. To many red-blooded Americans, it seemed as though the British, having failed to crush Yankee ﬁghters on the battleﬁeld, were now seeking to crush Yankee factories in the marketplace. A nationalist Congress, out-Federalizing the old Federalists, responded by passing the path-breaking Tariff of 1816—the ﬁ rst tariff in American history instituted primarily for protection, not revenue. Its rates— roughly 20 to 25 percent on the value of dutiable imports—were not high enough to provide completely adequate safeguards, but the law was a bold beginning. A strongly protective trend was started that stimulated the appetites of the protected for more protection. Nationalism was further highlighted by a grandiose plan of Henry Clay for developing a proﬁtable home

Henry Clay (1777–1852), by John Neagle, 1843
 This painting hangs in the corridors of the House of Representatives, where Clay worked as a glamorous, eloquent, and ambitious congressman for many years. Best known for promoting his nationalistic “American System” of protective tariffs for eastern manufactures and federally ﬁnanced canals and highways to beneﬁt the West, Clay is surrounded here by symbols of ﬂourishing agriculture and burgeoning industries in the new nation.

 market. Still radiating the nationalism of war-hawk days, he threw himself behind an elaborate scheme known by 1824 as the American System. This system had three main parts. It began with a strong banking system, which would provide easy and abundant credit. Clay also advocated a protective tariff, behind which eastern manufacturing would ﬂourish. Revenues gushing from the tariff would provide funds for the third component of the American System—a network of roads and canals, especially in the burgeoning Ohio Valley. Through these new arteries of transportation would ﬂow foodstuffs and raw materials from the South and West to the North and East. In exchange, a stream

Legacies of the War of 1812


 of manufactured goods would ﬂow in the return direction, knitting the country together economically and politically. Persistent and eloquent demands by Henry Clay and others for better transportation struck a responsive chord with the public. The recent attempts to invade Canada had all failed partly because of oath-provoking roads—or no roads at all. People who have dug wagons out of hub-deep mud do not quickly forget their blisters and backaches. An outcry for better transportation, rising most noisily in the road-poor West, was one of the most striking aspects of the nationalism inspired by the War of 1812. But attempts to secure federal funding for roads and canals stumbled on Republican constitutional scruples. Congress voted in 1817 to distribute $1.5 million to the states for internal improvements, but President Madison sternly vetoed this handout mea sure as unconstitutional. The individual states were thus forced to venture ahead with construction programs of their own, including the Erie Canal, triumphantly completed by New York in 1825. Jeffersonian Republicans, who had gulped down Hamiltonian loose constructionism on other important problems, choked on the idea of direct federal support of intrastate internal improvements. New Eng land, in particular, strongly opposed federally constructed roads and canals, because such outlets would further drain away population and create competing states beyond the mountains.

The So-Called Era
 of Good Feelings James Monroe—six feet tall, somewhat stooped, courtly, and mild-mannered—was nominated for the presidency in 1816 by the Republicans. They thus undertook to continue the so-called Virginia dynasty of Washington, Jefferson, and Madison. The fading Federalists ran a candidate for the last time in their checkered history, and he was crushed by 183 electoral votes to 34. The vanquished Federalist party was gasping its dying breaths, leaving the ﬁeld to the triumphant Republicans and one-party rule. In James Monroe, the man and the times auspiciously met. As the last president to wear an old-style cocked hat, he straddled two generations: the bygone age of the Founding Fathers and the emergent age of nationalism. Never brilliant, and perhaps not great, the serene Virginian with gray-blue eyes was in intellect and personal force the least distinguished of the ﬁ rst eight presidents. But the times called for sober admin-



 Nationalist Pride, ca. 1820 Nationalist sentiments swelled in the wake of the War of 1812, as Americans deﬁned their country’s very identity with reference to its antimonarchical origins.

 istration, not dashing heroics. And Monroe was an experienced, levelheaded executive, with an ear-tothe-ground talent for interpreting popular rumblings. Emerging nationalism was further cemented by a goodwill tour Monroe undertook early in 1817, ostensibly to inspect military defenses. He pushed northward deep into New Eng land and then westward to Detroit, viewing en route Niagara Falls. Even in Federalist New Eng land, “the enemy’s country,” he received a heartwarming welcome; a Boston newspaper was so

 Boston’s Columbian Centinel was not the only newspaper to regard President Monroe’s early months as the Era of Good Feelings. Washington’s National Intelligencer observed in July 1817,

“


 Never before, perhaps, since the institution of civil government, did the same harmony, the same absence of party spirit, the same national feeling, pervade a community. The result is too consoling to dispute too nicely about the cause.

”




Chapter 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 1812–1824


 far carried away as to announce that an “Era of Good Feelings” had been ushered in. This happy phrase has been commonly used since then to describe the administrations of Monroe. The Era of Good Feelings, unfortunately, was something of a misnomer. Considerable tranquility and prosperity did in fact smile upon the early years of Monroe, but the period was a troubled one. The acute issues of the tariff, the bank, internal improvements, and the sale of public lands were being hotly contested. Sectionalism was crystallizing, and the conﬂ ict over slavery was beginning to raise its hideous head.

The Panic of 1819 and the
Curse of Hard Times
 Much of the goodness went out of the good feelings in 1819, when a paralyzing economic panic descended. It brought deﬂation, depression, bankruptcies, bank failures, unemployment, soup kitchens, and overcrowded pesthouses known as debtors’ prisons. This was the ﬁ rst national ﬁ nancial panic since President Washington took ofﬁce. Many factors contributed to the catastrophe of 1819, but looming large was overspeculation in frontier lands. The Bank of the United States, through its western branches, had become deeply involved in this popular type of outdoor gambling. Financial paralysis from the panic, which lasted in some degree for several years, gave a rude setback to

 the nationalistic ardor. The West was especially hard hit. When the pinch came, the Bank of the United States forced the speculative (“wildcat”) western banks to the wall and foreclosed mortgages on countless farms. All this was technically legal but politically unwise. In the eyes of the western debtor, the nationalist Bank of the United States soon became a kind of ﬁ nancial devil. The panic of 1819 also created backwashes in the political and social world. The poorer classes—the onesuspender men and their families—were severely strapped, and in their troubles was sown the seed of Jacksonian democracy. Hard times also directed attention to the inhumanity of imprisoning debtors. In extreme cases, often overplayed, mothers were torn from their infants for owing a few dollars. Mounting agitation against imprisonment for debt bore fruit in remedial legislation in an increasing number of states.

Growing Pains of the West
 The onward march of the West continued; nine frontier states had joined the original thirteen between 1791 and 1819. With an eye to preserving the North-South sectional balance, most of these commonwealths had been admitted alternately, free or slave. (See Admission of States in the Appendix.) Why this explosive expansion? In part it was simply a continuation of the generations-old westward movement, which had been going on since early colonial days. In addition, the siren song of cheap land—“the

Fairview Inn or Three Mile House on Old Frederick Road, by Thomas Coke Ruckle, ca. 1829
 This busy scene on the Frederick Road, leading westward from Baltimore, was typical as pioneers ﬂooded into the newly secured West in the early 1800s.

Economic Strains


 Ohio fever”—had a special appeal to European immigrants. Eager newcomers from abroad were beginning to stream down the gangplanks in impressive numbers, especially after the war of boycotts and bullets. Land exhaustion in the older tobacco states, where the soil was “mined” rather than cultivated, likewise drove people westward. Glib speculators accepted small down payments, making it easier to buy new holdings. The western boom was stimulated by additional developments. Acute economic distress during the embargo years turned many pinched faces toward the setting sun. The crushing of the Indians in the Northwest and South by Generals Harrison and Jackson paciﬁed the frontier and opened up vast virgin tracts of land. The building of highways improved the land routes to the Ohio Valley. Noteworthy was the Cumberland Road, begun in 1811, which ran ultimately from western Maryland to Illinois. The use of the ﬁ rst steamboat on western waters, also in 1811, heralded a new era of upstream navigation. But the West, despite the inﬂow of settlers, was still weak in population and inﬂuence. Not potent enough politically to make its voice heard, it was forced to ally itself with other sections. Thus strengthened, it demanded cheap acreage and partially achieved its goal in the Land Act of 1820, which authorized a buyer to purchase eighty virgin acres at a minimum of $1.25 an acre in cash. The West also demanded cheap transportation and slowly got it, despite the constitutional qualms of the presidents and the hostility of easterners. Finally, the West demanded cheap money, issued by its own “wildcat” banks, and fought the powerful Bank of the United States to attain its goal (see “Makers of America: Settlers of the Old Northwest,” pp. 260–261).

Slavery and the
Sectional Balance
 Sectional tensions, involving rivalry between the slave South and the free North over control of the beckoning West, were stunningly revealed in 1819. In that year the territory of Missouri knocked on the doors of Congress for admission as a slave state. This fertile and wellwatered area contained sufﬁcient population to warrant statehood. But the House of Representatives stymied the plans of the Missourians by passing the incendiary Tallmadge amendment. It stipulated that no more slaves should be brought into Missouri and also provided for the gradual emancipation of children born to slave parents already there. A roar of anger burst



 Antislavery Propaganda in the 1820s These drawstring bags are made of silk and transferprinted with “before” and “after” scenes of slavery. On the left bag, an African woman cradles her baby; on the right one, the grieving mother is childless and in chains, while slaves are being whipped in the background. These bags were purchased at an abolitionist fair, held to raise money for the antislavery movement. Purses and the like sold well at these events because women were prominent in the movement.

 from slaveholding southerners. They were joined by many depression-cursed pioneers who favored unhampered expansion of the West and by many northerners, especially diehard Federalists, who were eager to use the issue to break the back of the “Virginia dynasty.” Southerners saw in the Tallmadge amendment, which they eventually managed to defeat in the Senate, an ominous threat to sectional balance. When the Constitution was adopted in 1788, the North and South were running neck and neck in wealth and population. But with every passing decade, the North was becoming wealthier and also more thickly settled—an advantage reﬂected in an increasing northern majority in the House of Representatives. Yet in the Senate, each state had two votes, regardless of size. With eleven states free and eleven slave, the southerners had maintained equality. They were therefore in a good position to thwart any northern effort to interfere with the expansion of slavery, and they did not want to lose this veto. The future of the slave system caused southerners profound concern. Missouri was the ﬁ rst state entirely west of the Mississippi River to be carved out of the Louisiana Purchase, and the Missouri emancipation amendment might set a damaging precedent for all the

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
Settlers of the Old The Great AfricanNorthwest American Migration 
T


 he Old Northwest beckoned to settlers after the War of 1812. The withdrawal of the British protector weakened the Indians’ grip on the territory. Then the transportation boom of the 1820s—steamboats on the Ohio, the National Highway stretching from Pennsylvania, the Erie Canal—opened broad arteries along which the westward movement ﬂowed. The ﬁ rst wave of newcomers came mainly from Kentucky, Tennessee, and the upland regions of Virginia and the Carolinas. Most migrants were roughhewn white farmers who had been pushed from good land to bad by an expanding plantation economy. Like Joseph Cress of North Carolina, they were relieved to relinquish “them old red ﬁ lds” where you “get nothing,” in return for acres of new soil that “is as black and rich you wold want it.” Some settlers acquired land for the ﬁ rst time. John Palmer, whose family left Kentucky for Illinois in 1831, recalled his father telling him “of land so cheap that we could all be landholders, where men were all equal.” Migrants from the South settled mainly in the southern portions of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois.

Newcom Tavern, Dayton, Ohio
Built in 1796, Newcom Tavern
 was a typical way station for the pioneers ﬂowing into the newly secured Old Northwest in the early 1800s. Today it is Dayton’s oldest building.



 As Palmer testiﬁed, the Old Northwest offered southern farmers an escape from the lowly social position they had endured as nonslaveholders in a slave society. Not that they objected to slavery or sympathized with blacks. Far from it: by enacting Black Codes in their new territories, they tried to prevent blacks from following them to paradise. They wanted their own democratic community, free of rich planters and African Americans alike. If southern “Butternuts,” as these settlers were called, dominated settlement in the 1820s, the next decade brought Yankees from the Northeast. They were as land-starved as their southern counterparts. A growing population had gobbled up most of the good land east of the Appalachians. Yankee settlers came to the Old Northwest, especially to the northern parts of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, eager to make the region a proﬁtable breadbasket for the Atlantic seaboard. Unlike the Butternuts, who wanted to quit forever the imposing framework of southern society, northerners hoped to re-create the world they had left behind.

Building the Erie Canal
 A major engineering feat, the Erie Canal created an artiﬁcial waterway through upstate New York from the Hudson River to the Great Lakes, allowing people and goods to move to and from the Old Northwest more quickly and cheaply.

 Conﬂict soon emerged between Yankees and southerners. As self-sufﬁcient farmers with little interest in producing for the market, the southerners viewed the northern newcomers as inhospitable, greedy, and excessively ambitious. “Yankee” became a term of reproach; a person who was cheated was said to have been “Yankeed.” Northerners, in turn, viewed the southerners as uncivilized, a “coon dog and butcher knife tribe” with no interest in education, self-improvement, or agricultural innovation. Yankees, eager to tame both the land and its people, wanted to establish public schools and build roads, canals, and railroads—and they advocated taxes to fund such progress. Southerners opposed all these reforms, especially public schooling, which they regarded as an attempt to northernize their children. Religion divided settlers as well. Northerners, typically Congregationalists and Presbyterians, wanted their ministers to be educated in seminaries. Southerners embraced the more revivalist Baptist and Methodist denominations. They preferred poor, humble preacher-farmers to professionally trained preachers, whom they viewed as too distant from the Lord and the people. As the Baptist preacher Alexander Campbell put it, “The scheme of a learned priesthood . . . has long since proved itself to be a grand device to keep men in ignorance and bondage.” Not everyone, of course, ﬁtted neatly into these molds. Abraham Lincoln, with roots in Kentucky, came

 to adopt views more akin to those of the Yankees than the southerners, whereas his New Eng land–born archrival, Stephen Douglas, carefully cultivated the Butternut vote for the Illinois Democratic party. As the population swelled and the region acquired its own character, the stark contrasts between northerners and southerners started to fade. By the 1850s northerners dominated numerically, and they succeeded in establishing public schools and fashioning internal improvements. Railroads and Great Lakes shipping tied the region ever more tightly to the Northeast. Yankees and southerners sometimes allied as new kinds of cleavages emerged—between rich and poor, between city dwellers and farmers, and, once Irish and German immigrants started pouring into the region, between native Protestants and newcomer Catholics. Still, echoes of the clash between Yankees and Butternuts persisted. During the Civil War, the southern counties of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, where southerners had ﬁ rst settled, harbored sympathizers with the South and served as a key area for Confederate military inﬁ ltration into the North. Decades later these same counties became a stronghold of the Ku Klux Klan. The Old Northwest may have become ﬁ rmly anchored economically to the Northeast, but vestiges of its early dual personality persisted.



90°W


70°W


 or

 nc re

 TER

L. O


R.


N.H.
 MASS.

NEW YORK

 e

 PA.

Washington, D.C.


R.I.
CONN. N.J. DEL. MD.

N


 KENTUCKY

 an

N. CAROLINA

 s

 AN

MEX I C O

 VT.

VIRGINIA MISSOURI

 as

Eri


 io ntar

 OHIO

 IND.

 ILL.

Ark


E
OC IC PACIF

 l Co

 o ad

 k

L.


Missouri Compromise
Line, 36˚30’


R.


La


 ron

 AN

 Admitted as slave state, 1821 Adams-Onís Treaty Line, 1819

 e

R.


 HIG

Hu


 ip

 MAINE

 e

 lel

 MIC ss

R.


Pa r a l


 ssi

 pi

 42nd

Mi


UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

Su per ior


R.


OCE AN

.
 ri R

OREGON COUNTRY

 ke

 aw

 ou

La


.L


 ss

St


Mi


60°W


 Admitted as free state, 1820

Lake of
 the Woods

 an

 Disputed territory occupied jointly by Great Britain and United States

40°N


80°W


 IC

100°W


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 NT

110°W


 LA

120°W


 AT

50°N


La k e M i c h i g


130°W


 TENNESSEE

ARKANSAS TERRITORY

S. CAROLINA

Red R.


 MISS.

30°N


 ALA.

 GEORGIA

R


 io

 LA.

Gr
 an

FLORIDA TERRITORY

 de

 Closed to slavery by Missouri Compromise Open to slavery by Missouri Compromise Free states and territories Slave states and territories

Gu l f of M e x i c o




Ceded by
Spain, 1819


400 Km.


400 Mi.


Map 12.3 The Missouri Compromise and Slavery, 1820–1821 Note the 36° 30'
 line. In the 1780s Thomas Jefferson had written of slavery in America, “Indeed I tremble for my country when I reﬂect that God is just; that his justice cannot sleep forever; that . . . the Almighty has no attribute which can take side with us in such a contest.” Now, at the time of the Missouri Compromise, Jefferson feared that his worst forebodings were coming to pass. “I considered it at once,” he said of the Missouri question, “as the knell of the Union.”

 rest of the area. Even more disquieting was another possibility. If Congress could abolish the peculiar institution in Missouri, might it not attempt to do likewise in the older states of the South? The wounds of the Constitutional Convention of 1787 were once more ripped open. Burning moral questions also protruded, even though the main issue was political and economic balance. A small but growing group of antislavery agitators in the North seized the occasion to raise an outcry against the evils of slavery. They were determined that the plague of human bondage should not spread further into the untainted territories.

The Uneasy Missouri
Compromise
 Deadlock in Washington was at length broken in 1820 by the time-honored American solution of compromise—actually a bundle of three compromises. Courtly

Interactive Map


 Henry Clay of Kentucky, gifted conciliator, played a leading role. Congress, despite abolitionist pleas, agreed to admit Missouri as a slave state. But at the same time, free-soil Maine, which until then had been a part of Massachusetts, was admitted as a separate state. The balance between North and South was thus kept at twelve states each and remained there for ﬁ fteen years. Although Missouri was permitted to retain slaves, all future bondage was prohibited in the remainder of the Louisiana Purchase north of the line of 36° 30'—the southern boundary of Missouri (see Map 12.3). This horse-trading adjustment was politically evenhanded, though denounced by extremists on each side as a “dirty bargain.” Both North and South yielded something; both gained something. The South won the prize of Missouri as an unrestricted slave state. The North won the concession that Congress could forbid slavery in the remaining territories. More gratifying to many northerners was the fact that the immense area north of 36° 30', except Missouri, was forever closed to the blight of slavery. Yet the restriction on future

The Missouri Compromise


 While the debate over Missouri was raging, Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826) wrote to a correspondent,

“


 The Missouri question . . . is the most portentous one which ever yet threatened our Union. In the gloomiest moment of the revolutionary war I never had any apprehensions equal to what I feel from this source. . . . [The] question, like a ﬁrebell in the night, awakened and ﬁlled me with terror. . . . [With slavery] we have a wolf by the ears, and we can neither hold him nor safely let him go.

”


 John Quincy Adams (1767–1848) conﬁded to his diary,

“


 I take it for granted that the present question is a mere preamble—a title-page to a great, tragic volume.

”


 slavery in the territories was not unduly offensive to the slaveowners, partly because the northern prairie land did not seem suited to slave labor. Even so, a majority of southern congressmen still voted against the compromise. Neither North nor South was acutely displeased, although neither was completely happy. The Missouri Compromise lasted thirty-four years—a vital formative period in the life of the young Republic—and during that time it preserved the shaky compact of the states. Yet the embittered dispute over slavery heralded the future breakup of the Union. Ever after, the morality of the South’s “peculiar institution” was an issue that could not be swept under the rug. The Missouri Compromise only ducked the question—it did not resolve it. Sooner or later, Thomas Jefferson predicted, it will “burst on us as a tornado.” The Missouri Compromise and the concurrent panic of 1819 should have dimmed the political star of President Monroe. Certainly both unhappy events had a dampening effect on the Era of Good Feelings. But smooth-spoken James Monroe was so popular, and the Federalist opposition so weak, that in the presidential election of 1820, he received every electoral vote except one. Unanimity was an honor reserved for George Washington. Monroe, as it turned out, was the only president in American history to be reelected after a term in which a major ﬁ nancial panic began.



John Marshall and
Judicial Nationalism
 The upsurging nationalism of the post-Ghent years, despite the ominous setbacks concerning slavery, was further reﬂected and reinforced by the Supreme Court. The high tribunal continued to be dominated by the tall, thin, and aggressive Chief Justice John Marshall. One group of his decisions—perhaps the most famous—bolstered the power of the federal government at the expense of the states. A notable case in this category was McCulloch v. Maryland (1819). The suit involved an attempt by the State of Maryland to destroy a branch of the Bank of the United States by imposing a tax on its notes. John Marshall, speaking for the Court, declared the bank constitutional by invoking the Hamiltonian doctrine of implied powers (see p. 204). At the same time, he strengthened federal authority and slapped at state infringements when he denied the right of Maryland to tax the bank. With ringing emphasis, he afﬁ rmed “that the power to tax involves the power to destroy” and “that a power to create implies a power to preserve.” Marshall’s ruling in this case gave the doctrine of loose construction its most famous formulation. The Constitution, he said, derived from the consent of the people and thus permitted the government to act for their beneﬁt. He further argued that the Constitution was “intended to endure for ages to come and, consequently, to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs.” Finally, he declared, “Let the end be legitimate, let it be within the scope of the Constitution, and all means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the Constitution, are constitutional.” Two years later (1821) the case of Cohens v. Virginia gave Marshall one of his greatest opportunities to defend the federal power. The Cohen brothers, found guilty by the Virginia courts of illegally selling lottery tickets, appealed to the highest tribunal. Virginia “won,” in the sense that the conviction of the Cohens was upheld. But in fact Virginia and all the individual states lost, because Marshall resoundingly asserted the right of the Supreme Court to review the decisions of the state supreme courts in all questions involving powers of the federal government. The states’ rights proponents were aghast. Hardly less signiﬁcant was the celebrated “steamboat case,” Gibbons v. Ogden (1824). The suit grew out of an attempt by the State of New York to grant to a



Chapter 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 1812–1824


 private concern a monopoly of waterborne commerce between New York and New Jersey. Marshall sternly reminded the upstart state that the Constitution conferred on Congress alone the control of interstate commerce (see Art. I, Sec. VIII, para. 3). He thus struck with one hand another blow at states’ rights, while upholding with the other the sovereign powers of the federal government. Interstate streams were cleared of this judicial snag; the departed spirit of Hamilton may well have applauded.

Judicial Dikes Against
Democratic Excesses
 Another sheaf of Marshall’s decisions bolstered judicial barriers against democratic or demagogic attacks on property rights. The notorious case of Fletcher v. Peck (1810) arose when a Georgia legislature, swayed by bribery, granted 35 million acres in the Yazoo River country (Mississippi) to private speculators. The next legislature, yielding to an angry public outcry, canceled the crooked transaction. But the Supreme Court, with Marshall presiding, decreed that the legislative grant was a contract (even though fraudulently secured) and that the Constitution forbids state laws “impairing” contracts (Art. I, Sec. X, para. 1). The decision was perhaps most noteworthy as further protecting property rights against popular pressures. It was also one of the earliest clear assertions of the right of the Supreme Court to invalidate state laws conﬂ icting with the federal Constitution. A similar principle was upheld in the case of Dartmouth College v. Woodward (1819), perhaps the best remembered of Marshall’s decisions. The college had been granted a charter by King George III in 1769, but the democratic New Hampshire state legislature had seen ﬁt to change it. Dartmouth appealed the case, employing as counsel its most distinguished alumnus,

 When Supreme Court chief justice John Marshall died, a New York newspaper rejoiced:

“


 The chief place in the supreme tribunal of the Union will no longer be ﬁlled by a man whose political doctrines led him always . . . to strengthen government at the expense of the people.

”


 Daniel Webster (’01). The “Godlike Daniel” reportedly pulled out all the stops of his tear-inducing eloquence when he declaimed, “It is, sir, as I have said, a small college. And yet there are those who love it.” Marshall needed no dramatics in the Dartmouth case. He put the states ﬁ rmly in their place when he ruled that the original charter must stand. It was a contract—and the Constitution protected contracts against state encroachments. The Dartmouth decision had the fortunate effect of safeguarding business enterprise from domination by the state governments. But it had the unfortunate effect of creating a precedent that enabled chartered corporations, in later years, to escape the handcuffs of needed public control. If John Marshall was a Molding Father of the Constitution, Daniel Webster was an Expounding Father. Time and again he left his seat in the Senate, stepped downstairs to the Supreme Court chamber (then located in the Capitol building), and there expounded his Federalistic and nationalistic philosophy before the

Daguerreotype of Daniel Webster (1782–1852), by
 Southworth and Hawes Premier orator and statesman, Webster served many years in both houses of Congress and also as secretary of state. Often regarded as presidential timber, he was somewhat handicapped by an overfondness for good food and drink and was frequently in ﬁnancial difﬁculties. His devotion to the Union was inﬂexible. “One country, one constitution, and one destiny,” he proclaimed in 1837.

The Marshall Court


R


 e nt L. O

 ron

 i

N. MAINE

 EAN

 k

Hu


 ss

 i R.

LOUISIANA M PURCHASE

La


L.


Eri


 ario

 e

R.


 LA

 ouri

 NT

 is s

IC PACIF

 s Trea t y Line, 1 8 19

 or

 e

 ssi

 pp

 s- Oní

Mi


.


 OC

 bi a R.

OREGON COUNTRY

60°W


 nc

La k e S u p e r i


Ad a m
40°N


 h Treat y Line, 1818

 an

 lum

70°W
 Disputed with Britain

La k e M i c h i g


Co


80°W


 re

 U.S.-Br itis

90°W


 aw

 Joint occupation with Britain, 1818–1846

100°W


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 IC

110°W


.L


120°W


St


50°N


130°W


N


Gi l a


R.


 e Te n n ess

Red R.


United States, 1783


 io

 OLD

Louisiana Purchase,


R
 TEJAS

Gr


 CA

 UIL

 AH

N IA


 CO

 de

 OR

 FLORIDA

A


 an

 LIF

 DURANGO

N


 AT

UNITED STATES

.


NEW MEXICO

R.


 ARIZPE

R.


 sR

N EW SP AI N
( Mexic o af t er 1 8 2 1 )


 io

 e

 r

 sa

EA 30°N

Colo


 o ad

Oh


 an

 OC

NEW CALIFORNIA

Ark


R.




NUEVO SANTANDER NUEVO LEON





400 Km.


Gulf of
Mexico
400 Mi.


 Map 12.4 U.S.-British Boundary Settlement, 1818 Note that the United States gained considerable territory by securing a treaty boundary rather than the natural boundary of the Missouri River watershed. The line of 49° was extended westward to the Paciﬁc Ocean under the Treaty of 1846 with Britain (see p. 405).

 supreme bench. The eminent chief justice, so Webster reported, approvingly drank in the familiar arguments as a baby sucks in its mother’s milk. The two men dovetailed strikingly with each other. Webster’s classic speeches in the Senate, challenging states’ rights and nulliﬁcation, were largely repetitious of the arguments that he had earlier presented before a sympathetic Supreme Court. Marshall’s decisions are felt even today. In this sense his nationalism was the most tenaciously enduring of the era. He buttressed the federal Union and helped to create a stable, nationally uniform environment for business. At the same time, Marshall checked the excesses of popularly elected state legislatures. In an age when white manhood suffrage was ﬂowering and America was veering toward stronger popular control, Marshall almost single-handedly shaped the Constitution along conser vative, centralizing lines that ran somewhat counter to the dominant spirit of the new country. Through him the conser vative Hamiltonians partly triumphed from the tomb.

Spanish Florida,
 occupied by U.S. Ceded to U.S. by Spain, 1819

Interactive Map


Sharing Oregon and
Acquiring Florida
 The robust nationalism of the years after the War of 1812 was likewise reﬂected in the shaping of foreign policy. To this end, the nationalistic President Monroe teamed with his nationalistic secretary of state, John Quincy Adams, the cold and scholarly son of the frosty and bookish ex-president. The younger Adams, a statesman of the ﬁ rst rank, happily rose above the ingrown Federalist sectionalism of his native New Eng land and proved to be one of the great secretaries of state. To its credit, the Monroe administration negotiated the much-underrated Anglo-American Convention of 1818 with Britain. This pact permitted Americans to share the coveted Newfoundland ﬁ sheries with their Canadian cousins. This multisided agreement also ﬁ xed the vague northern limits of Louisiana along the forty-ninth parallel from the Lake of the Woods (Minnesota) to the Rocky Mountains (see Map 12.4). The



Chapter 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 1812–1824


 LA.

Mississippi R.


 treaty further provided for a ten-year joint occupation of the untamed Oregon Country, without a surrender of the rights or claims of either America or Britain. To the south lay semitropical Spanish Florida, which many Americans believed geography and providence had destined to become part of the United States. Americans already claimed West Florida, where uninvited American settlers had torn down the hated Spanish ﬂag in 1810. Congress ratiﬁed this grab in 1812, and during the War of 1812 against Spain’s ally, Britain, a small American army seized the Mobile region. But the bulk of Florida remained, tauntingly, under Spanish rule (see Map 12.5). An epidemic of revolutions now broke out in South America, notably in Chile (1810), Venezuela (1811), and Argentina (1816), and Americans instinctively cheered the birth of these sister republics, though the checkered histories of the Latin democracies soon provided grounds for disappointment. But the upheavals in the southern continent forced Spain to denude Florida of troops in a vain effort to squelch the rebels. General Andrew Jackson, idol of the West and scourge of the Indians, saw opportunity in the undefended swamplands. On the pretext that hostile Seminole Indians and

Horseshoe Bend
March 27, 1814


M I SSI SSI P P I
TER R ITO R Y

 GEORGIA

S.C.


WEST F LO R I DA
Baton Rouge 
90°W




80°W


Mobile
New Orleans
Jan. 8, 1815




 fugitive slaves were using Florida as a refuge, Jackson secured a commission to enter Spanish territory, punish the Indians, and recapture the runaways. But he was to respect all posts under the Spanish ﬂag. Early in 1818 Jackson swept across the Florida border with all the fury of an avenging angel. He hanged two Indian chiefs without ceremony and, after hasty military trials, executed two British subjects for assisting the Indians. He also seized the two most important Spanish posts in the area, St. Marks and then Pensacola, where he deposed the Spanish governor, who was lucky enough to escape Jackson’s jerking noose. Jackson had clearly exceeded his instructions from Washington. Alarmed, President Monroe consulted his cabinet. Its members were for disavowing or disciplining the overzealous Jackson—all except the lone wolf John Quincy Adams, who refused to howl with the pack. An ardent patriot and nationalist, the ﬂ inty New



Pensacola


St. Marks


Gulf of Mexico


30°N


EAST F LOR I DA

200 Km.


200 Mi.


To U.S. 1810
To U.S. 1812–1813
To U.S. 1819
 Jackson’s route, 1814

N


 Jackson’s route, 1818 Major battle

Map 12.5 The Southeast, 1810–1819
Interactive Map


 Andrew Jackson (1767–1845), by Jean François de Vallée, 1815 This portrait of Jackson as a major general in the U.S. Army was painted by a French artist living in New Orleans. It is one of the earliest surviving portraits of Jackson and depicts him at a time when he was known for his stern discipline, iron will (“Old Hickory”), and good luck.

Oregon and Florida


 Eng lander took the offensive and demanded huge concessions from Spain. In the mislabeled Florida Purchase Treaty of 1819 (also known as the Adams-Onís Treaty), Spain ceded Florida, as well as shadowy Spanish claims to Oregon, in exchange for America’s abandonment of equally murky claims to Texas, soon to become part of independent Mexico. The hitherto vague western boundary of Louisiana was made to zigzag northwesterly toward the Rockies to the forty-second parallel and then to turn due west to the Paciﬁc, dividing Oregon from Spanish holdings.

The Menace of Monarchy
 in America After the Napoleonic nightmare, the rethroned autocrats of Europe banded together in a kind of monarchical protective association. Determined to restore the good old days, they undertook to stamp out the democratic tendencies that had sprouted from soil they considered richly manured by the ideals of the French Revolution. The world must be made safe from democracy. The crowned despots acted promptly. With complete ruthlessness they smothered the embers of popular rebellions in Italy (1821) and in Spain (1823). According to the European rumor factory, they were also gazing across the Atlantic. Russia, Austria, Prussia, and France, acting in partnership, would presumably send powerful ﬂeets and armies to the revolted colonies of Spanish America and there restore the autocratic Spanish king to his ancestral domains. Many Americans were alarmed. Naturally sympathetic to democratic revolutions, they had cheered when the Latin American republics rose from the ruins of monarchy. Americans feared that if the European powers intervened in the New World, the cause of republicanism would suffer irreparable harm. The physical security of the United States—the mother lode of democracy—would be endangered by the proximity of powerful and unfriendly forces. The southward push of the Russian bear, from the chill region now known as Alaska, had already publicized the menace of monarchy to North America. In 1821 the tsar of Russia issued a decree extending Russian jurisdiction over one hundred miles of the open sea down to the line of 51°, an area that embraced most of the coast of present-day British Columbia. The energetic Russians had already established trading posts almost as far south as the entrance to San Francisco



 Bay. (Fort Ross—“Ross” is a corruption of “Russian”— still stands today on the coast of Sonoma County, Cal ifornia.) The fear prevailed in the United States that the Russians were planning to cut the Republic off from Cal i fornia, its prospective window on the Paciﬁc. Great Britain, still Ruler of the Seas, was now beginning to play a lone-hand role on the complicated international stage. In particular, it recoiled from joining hands with the continental European powers in crushing the newly won liberties of the Spanish Americans. These revolutionaries had thrown open their monopoly-bound ports to outside trade, and British shippers, as well as Americans, had found the proﬁts sweet. Accordingly, in August 1823 George Canning, the haughty British foreign secretary, approached the American minister in London with a startling proposition. Would the United States combine with Britain in a joint declaration renouncing any interest in acquiring Latin American territory, and speciﬁcally warning the European despots to keep their harsh hands off the Latin American republics? The American minister, lacking instructions, referred this fateful scheme to his superiors in Washington.

Monroe and His Doctrine
 The tenacious nationalist, Secretary Adams, was hardheaded enough to be wary of Britons bearing gifts. Why should the lordly British, with the mightiest navy aﬂoat, need America as an ally—an America that had neither naval nor military strength? Such a union, argued Adams, was undigniﬁed—like a tiny American “cockboat” sailing “in the wake of the British man-of-war.” Adams, ever alert, thought that he detected the joker in the Canning proposal. The British feared that the aggressive Yankees would one day seize Spanish territory in the Americas—perhaps Cuba—which would jeopardize Britain’s possessions in the Caribbean. If Canning could seduce the United States into joining with him in support of the territorial integrity of the New World, America’s own hands would be morally tied. A self-denying alliance with Britain would not only hamper American expansion, concluded Adams, but it was unnecessary. He suspected—correctly—that the European powers had not hatched any deﬁ nite plans for invading the Americas. In any event the British navy would prevent the approach of hostile ﬂeets because the South American markets had to be kept open at all costs for British merchants. It was presumably safe for



Chapter 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 1812–1824


 President Monroe Thinking Globally Surrounded by his cabinet, the president is depicted explaining the Monroe Doctrine. Secretary of State John Quincy Adams is the ﬁrst on the left; Secretary of War John C. Calhoun is the third from the right.

 Uncle Sam, behind the protective wooden petticoats of the British navy, to blow a deﬁant, nationalistic blast at all of Europe. The distresses of the Old World set the stage once again for an American diplomatic coup. The Monroe Doctrine was born late in 1823, when the nationalistic Adams won the nationalistic Monroe over to his way of thinking. The president, in his regular annual message to Congress on December 2, 1823, incorporated a stern warning to the European powers. Its two basic features were (1) noncolonization and (2) nonintervention. Monroe ﬁ rst directed his verbal volley primarily at the lumbering Russian bear in the Northwest. He proclaimed, in effect, that the era of colonization in the Americas had ended and that henceforth the hunting season was permanently closed. What the great powers had they might keep, but neither they nor any other Old World governments could seize or otherwise acquire more. At the same time, Monroe trumpeted a warning against foreign intervention. He was clearly concerned

 with regions to the south, where fears were felt for the ﬂedgling Spanish American republics. Monroe bluntly directed the crowned heads of Europe to keep their hated monarchical systems out of this hemisphere. For its part the United States would not intervene in the war that the Greeks were then ﬁghting against the Turks for their independence.

 Monroe’s Doctrine Appraised The ermined monarchs of Europe were angered at Monroe’s doctrine. Having resented the incendiary American experiment from the beginning, they were now deeply offended by Monroe’s high-ﬂown declaration—all the more so because of the gulf between America’s pretentious pronouncements and its puny military strength. But though offended by the upstart Yankees, the European powers found their hands tied, and their frustration increased their annoyance. Even if they had worked out plans for invading the Americas,



Oregon and Florida


RUSSIAN AMERICA 40°W

160°W


N


Hudson
Bay


54°40'
51°


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)
Columbia R. 
60°W
Missouri R.
M
Bear R.


Great
Salt Lake


 l Co

 o R. ad or

.


PAC I F IC OC EA N

Arkansas R.


 io Oh

R.


U N I TED STATES

 MEXICO



N


40°


 iss ippi R iss

OREGON COUNTRY
(Disputed by United States and Great Britain) 
Snake R.


(Independent 1821)


300 600 Km.


AT L A N T I C O C E A N

 o Ri





600 Mi.


120°W


 an Gr

Map 12.6 The West and
Northwest, 1818–1824
 The British Hudson’s Bay Company moved to secure its claim to the Oregon Country in 1824, when it sent a heavily armed expedition led by Peter Skene Ogden into the Snake River country. In May 1825 Ogden’s party descended the Bear River “and found it discharged into a large Lake of 100 miles in length”—one of the ﬁrst documented sightings by white explorers of the Great Salt Lake. (The mountain man Jim Bridger is usually credited with being the ﬁrst white man to see the lake.)

 de

Gulf of
Mexico


 British treaty line, 1818

 r

 ance

 of C

20°N


 CUBA (Spain)

 Spanish treaty line, 1819 Tsar's decree, 1821 Russian treaty line, 1824

 ic Trop

Caribbean Sea
100°W


80°W


Interactive Map


 they would have been helpless before the booming broadsides of the British navy. Monroe’s solemn warning, when issued, made little splash in the newborn republics to the south. Anyone could see that Uncle Sam was only secondarily concerned about his neighbors, because he was primarily concerned about defending himself against future invasion. Only a relatively few educated Latin Americans knew of the message, and they generally recognized that the British navy—not the paper pronouncement of James Monroe—stood between them and a hostile Europe. In truth, Monroe’s message did not have much contemporary signiﬁcance. Americans applauded it and then forgot it. Not until 1845 did President Polk revive it, and not until midcentury did it become an important national dogma. Even before Monroe’s stiff message, the tsar had decided to retreat. This he formally did in the RussoAmerican Treaty of 1824, which ﬁ xed his southernmost

 limits at the line of 54° 40'—the present southern tip of the Alaska panhandle (see Map 12.6). The Monroe Doctrine might more accurately have been called the Self-Defense Doctrine. President Monroe was concerned basically with the security of his own country—not of Latin America. The United States has never willingly permitted a powerful foreign nation to secure a foothold near its strategic Caribbean vitals. Yet in the absence of the British navy or other allies, the strength of the Monroe Doctrine has never been greater than America’s power to eject the trespasser. The doctrine, as often noted, was just as big as the nation’s armed forces—and no bigger. The Monroe Doctrine has had a long career of ups and downs. It was never law—domestic or international. It was not, technically speaking, a pledge or an agreement. It was merely a simple, personalized statement of the policy of President Monroe. What one president says, another may unsay. And Monroe’s successors have ignored, revived, distorted, or expanded



Chapter 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 1812–1824


 the original version, chieﬂy by adding interpretations. Like ivy on a tree, it has grown with America’s growth. But the Monroe Doctrine in 1823 was largely an expression of the post-1812 nationalism energizing the United States. Although directed at a speciﬁc menace in 1823, and hence a kind of period piece, the doctrine proved to be the most famous of all the long-lived off-

 spring of that nationalism. While giving voice to a spirit of patriotism, it simultaneously deepened the illusion of isolationism. Many Americans falsely concluded, then and later, that the Republic was in fact insulated from European dangers simply because it wanted to be and because, in a nationalistic outburst, Monroe had publicly warned the Old World powers to stay away.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Fletcher v. Peck ruling asserts right of Supreme Court to invalidate state laws deemed unconstitutional



 Madison vetoes Calhoun’s Bonus Bill Rush-Bagot agreement limits naval armament on Great Lakes



 Venezuela declares independence from Spain





 United States declares war on Britain Madison reelected president

 Jackson invades Florida Chile, in rebellion since 1810, declares independence from Spain Anglo-American Convention

1812–




 American invasions of Canada fail



Battle of the Thames
Battle of Lake Erie


Panic of 1819
 Spain cedes Florida to United States in Adams-Onís Treaty McCulloch v. Maryland Dartmouth College v. Woodward



Battle of Horseshoe Bend
 Napoleon exiled to Elba British burn Washington, D.C. Battle of Plattsburgh Treaty of Ghent signed ending War of 1812



Missouri Compromise
 Missouri and Maine admitted to Union Land Act of 1820 Monroe reelected



Cohens v. Virginia
 Austria intervenes to crush popular uprising in Italy



 France intervenes to suppresses liberal government in Spain Secretary Adams proposes Monroe Doctrine



Russo-American Treaty
Gibbons v. Ogden




 Erie Canal completed

1814–


Hartford Convention
Congress of Vienna




Battle of New Orleans
 Napoleon’s army defeated at Waterloo



 Second Bank of the United States founded Protectionist Tariff of 1816 Argentina declares independence from Spain Monroe elected president

To Learn More


KEY TERMS
War of 1812 (248) New Orleans, Battle of (252) Congress of Vienna (252) Ghent, Treaty of (252) Hartford Convention (253) Rush-Bagot agreement (255) Tariff of 1816 (256) American System (256) Era of Good Feelings (258) panic of 1819 (258) Land Act of 1820 (258) Tallmadge amendment (259) peculiar institution (262) 


PEOPLE TO KNOW
Missouri Compromise (263) McCulloch v. Maryland (263) loose construction (263) Cohens v. Virginia (263) Gibbons v. Ogden (263) Fletcher v. Peck (264) Dartmouth College v. Woodward (264) Anglo-American Convention (265) Florida Purchase Treaty (Adams-Onís Treaty) (267) Monroe Doctrine (268) Russo-American Treaty (269) 
Isaac Brock
Oliver Hazard Perry
Thomas Macdonough


Francis Scott Key
James Monroe
George Canning


To Learn More
 George Dangerﬁeld, The Awakening of American Nationalism, 1815–1828 (1965) R. David Edmunds, Tecumseh and the Quest for Indian Leadership (1984) David Heidler, Old Hickory’s War: Andrew Jackson and the Quest for Empire (2003) James E. Lewis, The American Union and the Problem of Neighborhood (1998) Arand Otto Mayr and Robert C. Post, eds., Yankee Enterprise: The Rise of the American System of Manufactures (1981) Drew R. McCoy, The Last of the Fathers: James Madison and the Republican Legacy (1989)

Dexter Perkins, A History of the Monroe Doctrine (1955)
Jack N. Rakove, James Madison and the Creation of the
American Republic (1990)
Robert Remini, Henry Clay: Statesman for the Union (1991)


 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Rise of a
Mass Democracy





1824–1840
 In the full enjoyment of the gifts of Heaven and the fruits of superior industry, economy, and virtue, every man is equally entitled to protection by law; but when the laws undertake to add to those natural and just advantages artiﬁcial distinctions . . . and exclusive privileges . . . the humble members of society— the farmers, mechanics, and laborers . . . have a right to complain of the injustice of their government.

T


 he so-called Era of Good Feelings was never entirely tranquil, but even the illusion of national consensus was shattered by the panic of 1819 and the Missouri Compromise of 1820. Economic distress and the slavery issue raised the political stakes in the 1820s and 1830s. Vigorous political conﬂ ict, once feared, came to be celebrated as necessary for the health of democracy. New political parties emerged. New styles of campaigning took hold. A new chapter opened in the history of American—and world—politics, as many European societies began haltingly to expand their electorates and broaden democratic practices. The American political landscape of 1824 was similar, in its broad outlines, to that of 1796. By 1840 it would be almost unrecognizable.

 The deference, apathy, and virtually nonexistent party orga ni zations of the Era of Good Feelings yielded to the boisterous democracy, frenzied vitality, and strong political parties of the Jacksonian era. The old suspicion of political parties as illegitimate disrupters of society’s natural harmony gave way to an acceptance, even a celebration, of the sometimes wild contentiousness of political life. In 1828 an energetic new party, the Democrats, captured the White House. By the 1830s the Democrats faced an equally vigorous opposition party, the Whigs. This two-party system institutionalized divisions that had vexed the Revolutionary generation and came to constitute an important part of the nation’s checks and balances on political power.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Corrupt Bargain




Canvassing for a Vote, by
George Caleb Bingham, 1852
 This painting shows the “new politics” of the Jacksonian era. Politicians now had to take their message to the common man.

 New forms of politicking emerged in this era, as candidates used banners, badges, parades, barbecues, free drinks, and baby kissing to “get out the vote.” Voter turnout rose dramatically. Only about one-quarter of eligible voters cast a ballot in the presidential election of 1824, but that proportion doubled in 1828, and in the election of 1840 it reached 78 percent. Everywhere people ﬂexed their political muscles.

The “Corrupt Bargain” of 1824
 The last of the old-style elections was marked by the controversial corrupt bargain of 1824. The woods were full of presidential timber as James Monroe, last of the Virginia dynasty, completed his second term. Four candidates towered above the others: John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts, highly intelligent, experienced, and aloof; Henry Clay of Kentucky, the gamy and gallant “Harry of the West”; William H. Crawford of Georgia, an able though ailing giant of a man; and Andrew Jackson of Tennessee, the gaunt and gutsy hero of New Orleans. All four rivals professed to be “Republicans.” Wellorga nized parties had not yet emerged; their identities

 were so fuzzy, in fact, that South Carolina’s John C. Calhoun appeared as the vice-presidential candidate on both the Adams and Jackson tickets. The results of the noisy campaign were interesting but confusing. Jackson, the war hero, clearly had the strongest personal appeal, especially in the West, where his campaign against the forces of corruption and privilege in government resonated deeply. He polled almost as many popular votes as his next two rivals combined, but he failed to win a majority of the electoral vote (see Table 13.1). In such a deadlock, the House of Representatives, as directed by the Twelfth Amendment (see the Appendix), must choose among the top three candidates. Clay was thus eliminated, yet as Speaker of the House, he presided over the very chamber that had to pick the winner. The inﬂuential Clay was in a position to throw the election to the candidate of his choice. He reached his decision by process of elimination. Crawford, recently felled by a paralytic stroke, was out of the picture. Clay hated the “military chieftain” Jackson, his archrival for the allegiance of the West. Jackson, in turn, bitterly resented Clay’s public denunciation of his Florida foray in 1818. The only candidate left was the puritanical Adams, with whom Clay—a free-living gambler



Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


Table 13.1 Election of 1824
Candidates
Jackson
Adams
Crawford
Clay


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Popular Percentage




153,544
108,740
46,618
47,136


42.16%
31.89
12.95
12.99


 and duelist—had never established cordial personal relations. But the two men had much in common politically: both were fervid nationalists and advocates of the American System. Shortly before the ﬁ nal balloting in the House, Clay met privately with Adams and assured him of his support. Decision day came early in 1825. The House of Representatives met amid tense excitement, with sick members being carried in on stretchers. On the ﬁ rst ballot, thanks largely to Clay’s behind-the-scenes inﬂuence, Adams was elected president. A few days later, the victor announced that Henry Clay would be the new secretary of state. The ofﬁce of secretary of state was the prize plum then, even more so than today. Three of the four preceding secretaries had reached the presidency, and the high cabinet ofﬁce was regarded as an almost certain pathway to the White House. According to Jackson’s supporters, Adams had bribed Clay with the position, making himself, the people’s second choice, the victor over Jackson, the people’s ﬁ rst choice. Masses of angry Jacksonians, most of them common folk, raised a roar of protest against this “corrupt bargain.” The clamor continued for nearly four years. Jackson condemned Clay as the “Judas of the West,” and John Randolph of Virginia publicly assailed the alliance between “the Puritan [Adams] and the black-leg [Clay],” who, he added, “shines and stinks like rotten mackerel by moonlight.” Clay, outraged, challenged Randolph to a duel, though poor marksmanship and shaky nerves rendered the outcome bloodless. No positive evidence has yet been unearthed to prove that Adams and Clay entered into a formal bargain. Clay was a natural choice for secretary of state, and Adams was both scrupulously honest and not given to patronage. Even if a bargain had been struck, it was not necessarily corrupt. Deals of this nature have long been the stock-in-trade of politicians. But the outcry over Adams’s election showed that change was in the wind. What had once been common practice was now condemned as furtive, elitist, and subversive of democ-

 racy. The next president would not be chosen behind closed doors.

A
Yankee Misﬁt in the White House John Quincy Adams was a chip off the old family glacier. Short, thickset, and billiard-bald, he was even more frigidly austere than his presidential father, John Adams. Shunning people, he often went for earlymorning swims, sometimes stark naked, in the thenpure Potomac River. Essentially a closeted thinker rather than a politician, he was irritable, sarcastic, and tactless. Yet few individuals have ever come to the presidency with a more brilliant record in statecraft, especially in foreign affairs. He ranks as one of the most successful secretaries of state, yet one of the least successful presidents. A man of scrupulous honor, Adams entered upon his four-year “sentence” in the White House smarting under charges of “bargain,” “corruption,” and “usurpation.” Fewer than one-third of the voters had voted for him. As the ﬁ rst “minority president,” he would have found it difﬁcult to win popular support even under the most favorable conditions. He did not possess many of the usual arts of the politician and scorned those who did. He had achieved high ofﬁce by commanding respect rather than by courting popularity. In an earlier era, an aloof John Adams had won the votes of propertied men by sheer ability. But with the dawning age of backslapping and baby-kissing democracy, his coldﬁsh son could hardly hope for success at the polls. While Adams’s enemies accused him of striking a corrupt bargain, his political allies wished that he would strike a few more. Whether through highmindedness or political ineptitude, Adams resolutely declined to oust efﬁcient ofﬁceholders in order to create vacancies for his supporters. During his entire administration, he removed only twelve public servants from the federal payroll. Such stubbornness caused 
President John Quincy Adams




 like a scandalous waste of public funds. The South in particular bristled. If the federal government should take on such heavy ﬁ nancial burdens, it would have to continue the hated tariff duties. Worse, if it could meddle in local concerns like education and roads, it might even try to lay its hand on the “peculiar institution” of black slavery. Adams’s land policy likewise antagonized the westerners. They clamored for wide-open expansion and resented the president’s well-meaning attempts to curb feverish speculation in the public domain. The fate of the Cherokee Indians, threatened with eviction from their holdings in Georgia, brought additional bitterness. White Georgians wanted the Cherokees out. The ruggedly honest Adams attempted to deal fairly with the Indians. The Georgia governor, by threatening to resort to arms, successfully resisted the efforts of the Washington government to interpose federal authority on behalf of the Cherokees. Another fateful chapter was thus written in the nulliﬁcation of the national will—and another nail was driven in Adams’s political cofﬁ n.

Going “Whole Hog”
 for Jackson in 1828 President John Quincy Adams (1767–1848), Daguerreotype by Phillip Haas, 1843 Adams wrote in his diary in June 1819, nearly six years before becoming president, “I am a man of reserved, cold, austere, and forbidding manners: my political adversaries say, a gloomy misanthropist, and my personal enemies an unsocial savage.”

 countless Adams followers to throw up their hands in despair. If the president would not reward party workers with political plums, why should they labor to keep him in ofﬁce? Adams’s nationalistic views gave him further woes. Much of the nation was turning away from post-Ghent nationalism and toward states’ rights and sectionalism. But Adams swam against the tide. Conﬁ rmed nationalist that he was, Adams, in his ﬁ rst annual message, urged upon Congress the construction of roads and canals. He renewed George Washington’s proposal for a national university and went so far as to advocate federal support for an astronomical observatory. The public reaction to these proposals was prompt and unfavorable. To many workaday Americans grubbing out stumps, astronomical observatories seemed

 Andrew Jackson’s next presidential campaign started early—on February 9, 1825, the day of John Quincy Adams’s controversial election by the House—and it continued noisily for nearly four years. Even before the election of 1828, the temporarily united Republicans of the Era of Good Feelings had split into two camps. One was the National Republicans, with Adams as their standard-bearer. The other was the Democratic-Republicans, with the ﬁery Jackson heading their ticket. Rallying cries of the Jackson zealots were “Bargain and Corruption,” “Huzza for Jackson,” and “All Hail Old Hickory.” Jacksonites planted hickory poles for their hickory-tough hero; Adamsites adopted the oak as the symbol of their oakenly independent candidate. Jackson’s followers presented their hero as a roughhewn frontiersman and a stalwart champion of the common man. They denounced Adams as a corrupt aristocrat and argued that the will of the people had been thwarted in 1825 by the backstairs “bargain” of Adams and Clay. The only way to right the wrong was to seat Jackson, who would then bring about “reform” by sweeping out the “dishonest” Adams gang. Much of this talk was political hyperbole. Jackson was no frontier farmer but a wealthy planter. He had



Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840




ME NR-8/ D-1

NY D-20/NR-16

MICHIGAN TERRITORY UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

PA IL

 OH

 IN

 MO

 VA

 KY

 VT 7 NH

 NJ

MA RI CT 4

DE MD NR-6/D-5

 NC

TN SC

AR TERR. MS

 AL

 GA

LA FL TERR.

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Jackson (Democrat)




68%


647,286


56.0%




32%


508,064


44.0%


J. Q.
Adams (National Republican) 

Popular Vote


 Territories, unsettled, etc.

 Rachel Jackson A devoted wife who did not live to become ﬁrst lady, Rachel died a month after the election of 1828. Andrew Jackson was convinced that his enemies’ vicious accusations that she was a bigamist and an adulteress had killed her. The more complicated truth was that Andrew Jackson had married Rachel Robards conﬁdent that her divorce had been granted. Two years later, when they discovered to their dismay that it had not been, they made haste to correct the marital miscue.

 been born in a log cabin but now lived in a luxurious manor off the labor of his many slaves. And Adams, though perhaps an aristocrat, was far from corrupt. If anything, his uncompromising morals were too elevated for the job. Mudslinging reached new lows in 1828, and the electorate developed a taste for bare-knuckle politics. Adams would not stoop to gutter tactics, but many of his backers were less squeamish. They described Jackson’s mother as a prostitute and his wife as an adulteress; they printed black-bordered handbills shaped like cofﬁ ns, recounting his numerous duels and brawls and trumpeting his hanging of six mutinous militiamen. Jackson men also hit below the belt. President Adams had purchased, with his own money and for his own use, a billiard table and a set of chessmen. In the mouths of rabid Jacksonites, these items became “gaming tables” and “gambling furniture” for the “presidential palace.” Criticism was also directed at the large sums Adams had received over the years in federal

 Map 13.1 Presidential Election of 1828 (with electoral vote by state) Jackson swept the South and West, whereas Adams retained the old Federalist stronghold of the Northeast. Yet Jackson’s inroads in the Northeast were decisive. He won twenty of New York’s electoral votes and all twenty-eight of Pennsylvania’s. If those votes had gone the other way, Adams would have been Interactive Map victorious—by a margin of one vote.

 salaries, well earned though they had been. He was even accused of having procured a servant girl for the lust of the Russian tsar—in short, of having served as a pimp. On voting day the electorate split on largely sectional lines. Jackson’s strongest support came from the West and South (see Map 13.1). The middle states and the Old Northwest were divided, while Adams won the backing of his own New Eng land and the propertied “better elements” of the Northeast. But when the popular vote was converted to electoral votes, General Jack-

 One anti-Jackson newspaper declared,

“


 General Jackson’s mother was a Common Prostitute, brought to this country by the British soldiers! She afterwards married a MULATTO man with whom she had several children, of which number GENERAL JACKSON is one.

”


The Election of Andrew Jackson


 son’s triumph could not be denied. Old Hickory had trounced Adams by an electoral count of 178 to 83. Although a considerable part of Jackson’s support was lined up by machine politicians in eastern cities, particularly in New York and Pennsylvania, the political center of gravity clearly had shifted away from the conser vative eastern seaboard toward the emerging states across the mountains.



 In 1824 Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826) said of Jackson,

“


When I was President of the Senate he
 was a Senator; and he could never speak on account of the rashness of his feelings. I have seen him attempt it repeatedly, and as often choke with rage. His passions are no doubt cooler now . . . but he is a dangerous man.

”


“Old Hickory” as President
 The new president cut a striking ﬁgure—tall, lean, with bushy iron-gray hair brushed high above a prominent forehead, craggy eyebrows, and blue eyes. His irritability and emaciated condition resulted in part from long-term bouts with dysentery, malaria, tuberculosis, and lead poisoning from two bullets that he carried in his body from near-fatal duels. His autobiography was written in his lined face. Jackson’s upbringing had its shortcomings. Born in the Carolinas and early orphaned, “Mischievous Andy” grew up without parental restraints. As a youth he displayed much more interest in brawling and cockﬁghting than in his scanty opportunities for reading and spelling. Although he eventually learned to express himself in writing with vigor and clarity, his grammar was always rough-hewn and his spelling original, like that of many contemporaries. He sometimes misspelled a word two different ways in the same letter. The youthful Carolinian shrewdly moved “up West” to Tennessee, where ﬁghting was prized above writing. There—through native intelligence, force of personality, and powers of leadership—he became a judge and a member of Congress. Afﬂ icted with a violent temper, he early became involved in a number of duels, stabbings, and bloody frays. His passions were so profound that on occasion he would choke into silence when he tried to speak. The ﬁ rst president from the West, the ﬁ rst nominated at a formal party convention (in 1832), and only the second without a college education (Washington was the ﬁ rst), Jackson was unique. His university was adversity. He had risen from the masses, but he was not one of them, except insofar as he shared many of their prejudices. Essentially a frontier aristocrat, he owned many slaves, cultivated broad acres, and lived in one of the ﬁ nest mansions in America—the Hermitage, near Nashville, Tennessee. More westerner than easterner, more country gentleman than common clay, more courtly than crude, he was hard to ﬁt into a neat category.

 Jackson’s inauguration seemed to symbolize the ascendancy of the masses. “Hickoryites” poured into Washington from far away, sleeping on hotel ﬂoors and in hallways. They were curious to see their hero take ofﬁce and perhaps hoped to pick up a well-paying ofﬁce for themselves. Nobodies mingled with notables as the White House, for the ﬁ rst time, was thrown open to the multitude. A milling crowd of rubbernecking clerks and shopkeepers, hobnailed artisans, and grimy laborers surged in, allegedly wrecking the china and furniture and threatening the “people’s champion” with cracked ribs. Jackson was hastily spirited through a side door, and the White House miraculously emptied itself when the word was passed that huge bowls of well-spiked punch had been placed on the lawns. Such was “the inaugural brawl.” To conser vatives this orgy seemed like the end of the world. “King Mob” reigned triumphant as Jacksonian vulgarity replaced Jeffersonian simplicity. Fainthearted traditionalists shuddered, drew their blinds, and recalled with trepidation the opening scenes of the French Revolution.

 English novelist Charles Dickens (1812–1870) traveled to the United States just a few years after Alexis de Tocqueville (see “Thinking Globally: Alexis de Tocqueville on Democracy in America and Europe,” pp. 278–279). He had his own views on the implications of America’s vaunted “equality”:

“


 The people are all alike too. There is no diversity of character. They travel about on the same errands, say and do the same things in exactly the same manner, and follow in the same dull cheerless round. All down the long table there is scarcely a man who is in anything different from his neighbor.

”


THINKING GLOBALLY

Alexis de Tocqueville on Democracy in America and Europe


O


 n May 11, 1831, a twenty-six-year-old Frenchman, Alexis de Tocqueville stepped ashore in New York City and began his fateful acquaintance with Andrew Jackson’s America. For nine months he visited the cities of the Atlantic seaboard from Boston to Washington, trekked west to Detroit, and ﬂoated down the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers to New Orleans, keenly observing the American scene. Four years later he published the ﬁrst volume of his monumental work Democracy in America. It remains to this day probably the most insightful analysis of American society ever written and provides an indispensable starting point for understanding both the nature of modern democracy and the American national character. Tocqueville was born in the French Revolutionary era, and he witnessed the so-called July Revolution in France in 1830, which widened the French electorate. He was following closely the agitation in Britain for a broader, more democratic franchise, which culminated in the landmark Reform Bill of 1832. He also knew of the several independent democratic republics that had blossomed in Latin America as the disruptions of the Napoleonic Wars weakened Spain’s imperial grip: Venezuela proclaimed its independence in 1811, Argentina in 1816, Chile in 1818, Mexico and Peru in 1821. (Brazil declared its independence from Portugal in 1822, but remained a monarchy until becoming a republic in 1889.) Those events convinced him that democracy was the irresistible wave of the future, but he was far less certain about what that democratic future might mean for human happiness, political stability, and social justice. Thus he studied America to understand Europe’s—indeed the world’s— fate. “In America I saw more than America,” he wrote. “I sought there the image of democracy itself . . . in order to learn what we have to fear or to hope from its progress.” He announced his central insight in his book’s ﬁrst sentence: “Among the novel objects that attracted my attention during my stay in the United States, nothing struck me more forcibly than the general equality of condition among the people.” (He acknowledged the gross inequality of slavery, but he considered slavery to be something that was “peculiar to America, not to democracy.”) The “primary fact” of equality, he argued, exercised a “prodigious inﬂuence on the whole course of society.”

 It is easy to understand why the scale and pervasiveness of American equality made such an impression on Tocqueville. Mass democratic participation was already a well-established fact when he arrived. Almost 1.2 million voters—nearly 50 percent of the adult white male population—had cast their ballots in the election that brought Jackson to the White House in 1828. In contrast, France’s July Revolution had enfranchised fewer than 200,000 propertied males, less than 1 percent of the total population, in 1830. And Britain’s Reform Bill of 1832 would extend voting rights only to some 800,000 male property holders—in a country with 50 percent more people than the United States. Tocqueville repeatedly remarked on the seething, restless energy that American equality unleashed, and he speculated on two possible futures for the United States. They might be called, respectively, the centripetal and centrifugal scenarios. In the ﬁrst scenario, Tocqueville thought that the doctrine of equality might breed a suffocating conformity that would eventually invoke the power of the state to enforce a stern and repressive consensus—the kind of “tyranny of the majority” that had worried Founders like James Madison. Tocqueville thought he saw signs that such a future was already emerging. “I know of no country in which there is so little independence of mind and real freedom of discussion as in America,” he wrote. In the second scenario, equality might foster radical individualism, a word that Tocqueville coined to capture the unique psychology he encountered every where in America. “As social conditions become more equal,” he wrote, people “acquire the habit of always considering themselves as standing alone, and they are apt to imagine that their whole destiny is in their own hands.” In this case, gnawing individual loneliness and even social anarchy might deﬁne America’s future. “Democracy makes every man forget his ancestors,” Tocqueville wrote. “It throws him back forever upon himself alone and threatens in the end to conﬁne him entirely within the solitude of his own heart.” Tocqueville noted several factors that mitigated both of those grim prospects and held American democracy in a Alexis de Tocqueville (1805–1859)

Election Day in Philadelphia, by John Lewis
 Krimmel, 1815 The German immigrant Krimmel recorded as early as 1815 the growing popular interest in elections that would culminate in Jacksonian democracy a decade later. Although politics was serious business, it also provided the occasion for much socializing and merriment. Even disfranchised free blacks, women, and children turned out for the festivities on election day. healthy balance: the absence of hostile countries on its borders; a vigorously free press; robust voluntary associations (especially churches and political parties); and, crucially, “habits of the heart,” which sustained a sense of civic belonging and responsibility. But Tocqueville raised troubling questions about whether those factors would prove durable. If not, what would the ultimate fate of democracy be?

 Ironically, today the United States has markedly lower rates of political participation than many other countries, especially those in Europe (see Table 13.2). Can it be that America—the pioneering mass democracy that served as Tocqueville’s laboratory and his window on the future—has proved to be less fertile soil for the development of democracy than the Old World societies with which he compared it in the 1830s?

Table 13.2 Voter Turnout by Country, 1840–2000




Percentage of
Voting-Age
Population*


Percentage of
Eligible Voters†


(1841)
(1842)


(1841)
(1842)


Germany
Japan


—
—


Mexico


—


United States
United Kingdom
France


Percentage of
Voting-Age
Population


Percentage of
Eligible Voters






Percentage of
Voting-Age
Population


Percentage of
Voting-Age
Population‡








—
—


(1902)
(1898)
—


(1902)
(1898)
—


—


—


—


(1958)
(1961)
(1958)


(2001)
(1995)
(1998)


 *Voting-age population includes individuals of any race and both genders. For France and the United Kingdom, individuals over the age of twenty are included in population estimates. For the United States, the voting-age population is an approximation of the total population over age twenty-one. †Virtually all blacks and all women were ineligible to vote in the United States. Landholding requirements severely limited eligibility in the United Kingdom and France. ‡The voting age was reduced to eighteen in the United States, France, the United Kingdom, and Germany in the second half of the twentieth century. The voting age in Mexico was eighteen for both the 1958 and 2000 elections. The voting age in Japan is twenty. (Sources: Historical Statistics of the United States, vol. 5; State, Economy and Society in Western Europe, 1815–1975; International Historical Statistics, 1750–2005: Europe; and International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance.)





Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


The Spoils System
 Once in power, the Democrats, famously suspicious of the federal government, demonstrated that they were not above striking some bargains of their own. Under Jackson the spoils system—that is, rewarding political supporters with public ofﬁce—was introduced into the federal government on a large scale. The basic idea was as old as politics. Its name came later from Senator William Marcy’s classic remark in 1832, “To the victor belong the spoils of the enemy.” The system had already secured a ﬁ rm hold in New York and Pennsylvania, where well-greased machines ladled out the “gravy” of ofﬁce. Jackson defended the spoils system on democratic grounds. “Every man is as good as his neighbor,” he declared—perhaps “equally better.” As this was believed to be so, and as the routine of ofﬁce was thought to be simple enough for any upstanding American to learn quickly, why encourage the development of an aristocratic, bureaucratic, ofﬁceholding class? Better to bring in new blood, he argued; each generation deserved its turn at the public trough. Washington was due, it is true, for a housecleaning. No party overturn had occurred since the defeat of the Federalists in 1800, and even that had not produced wholesale evictions. A few ofﬁceholders, their commissions signed by President Washington, were lingering on into their eighties, drawing breath and salary but doing little else. But the spoils system was less about ﬁ nding new blood than about rewarding old cronies. “Throw their rascals out and put our rascals in,” the Democrats were essentially saying. The questions asked of each appointee were not “What can he do for the country?” but “What has he done for the party?” or “Is he loyal to Jackson?” Scandal inevitably accompanied the new system. Men who had openly bought their posts by campaign contributions were appointed to high ofﬁce. Illiterates, incompetents, and plain crooks were given positions of public trust; men on the make lusted for the spoils— rather than the toils—of ofﬁce. Samuel Swartwout, despite ample warnings of his untrustworthiness, was awarded the lucrative post of collector of the customs of the port of New York. Nearly nine years later, he “Swartwouted out” for Eng land, leaving his accounts more than a million dollars short—the ﬁ rst person to steal a million from the Washington government. But despite its undeniable abuse, the spoils system was an important element of the emerging two-party order, cementing as it did loyalty to party over compet-

 ing claims based on economic class or geographic region. The promise of patronage provided a compelling reason for Americans to pick a party and stick with it through thick and thin.

The Tricky “Tariff
 of Abominations” The touchy tariff issue had been one of John Quincy Adams’s biggest headaches. Now Andrew Jackson felt his predecessor’s pain. Tariffs protected American industry against competition from European manufactured goods, but they also drove up prices for all Americans and invited retaliatory tariffs on American agricultural exports abroad. The middle states had long been supporters of protectionist tariffs. In the 1820s inﬂuential New Eng landers like Daniel Webster gave up their traditional defense of free trade to support higher tariffs, too. The wool and textile industries were booming, and forward-thinking Yankees came to believe that their future prosperity would ﬂow from the factory rather than from the sea. In 1824 Congress had increased the general tariff signiﬁcantly, but wool manufacturers bleated for stillhigher barriers. Ardent Jacksonites now played a cynical political game. They promoted a high-tariff bill, expecting to be defeated, which would give a black eye to President Adams. To their surprise, the tariff passed in 1828, and Andrew Jackson inherited the political hot potato. Southerners, as heavy consumers of manufactured goods with little manufacturing industry of their own, were hostile to tariffs. They were particularly shocked by what they regarded as the outrageous rates of the Tariff of 1828. Hotheads branded it the “Black Tariff” or the Tariff of Abominations. Several southern states adopted formal protests. In South Carolina ﬂags were lowered to half-mast. “Let the New Eng land beware how she imitates the Old,” cried one eloquent South Carolinian. Why did the South react so angrily against the tariff? Southerners believed, not illogically, that the “Yankee tariff” discriminated against them. The bustling Northeast was experiencing a boom in manufacturing, the developing West was prospering from rising property values and a multiplying population, and the energetic Southwest was expanding into virgin cotton lands. But the Old South was falling on hard times, and the tariff provided a convenient and plausible scapegoat. Southerners sold their cotton and other farm produce in a world market completely unprotected by

The South and the Tariff




 ment in Washington to suppress slavery in the South. If so, now was the time, and the tariff was the issue, to take a strong stand on principle against all federal encroachments on states’ rights. South Carolinians took the lead in protesting against the “Tariff of Abominations.” Their legislature went so far as to publish in 1828, though without formal endorsement, a pamphlet known as The South Carolina Exposition. It had been secretly written by John C. Calhoun, one of the few topﬂ ight political theorists ever produced by America. (As vice president, he was forced to conceal his authorship.) The Exposition denounced the recent tariff as unjust and

South Carolina Belle Sewing Palmetto Cockade The
 “Tariff of Abominations” of 1828 drove many people in South Carolina—the “Palmetto State”—to ﬂirt with secession. Anti-tariff protesters wore palmetto blossoms, real or sewn from fabric, to symbolize their deﬁance of the federal law. The blue cockade indicated support for the ordinance of nulliﬁcation.

 tariffs but were forced to buy their manufactured goods in an American market heavily protected by tariffs. Protectionism protected Yankee and middle-state manufacturers. The farmers and planters of the Old South felt they were stuck with the bill. But much deeper issues underlay the southern outcry—in particular, a growing anxiety about possible federal interference with the institution of slavery. The congressional debate on the Missouri Compromise had kindled those anxieties, and they were further fanned by an aborted slave rebellion in Charleston in 1822, led by a free black named Denmark Vesey. The South Carolinians, still closely tied to the British West Indies, also knew full well that their slaveowning West Indian cousins were feeling the mounting pressure of British abolitionism on the London government. Abolitionism in America might similarly use the power of the govern-

John C. Calhoun (1782–1850), by John Trumbull, 1827
 Calhoun was a South Carolinian, educated at Yale. Beginning as a strong nationalist and Unionist, he reversed himself and became the ablest of the sectionalists and disunionists in defense of the South and slavery. As a foremost nulliﬁer, he died trying to reconcile strong states’ rights with a strong Union. In his last years, he advocated a Siamese-twin “dual presidency,” probably unworkable, with one president for the North and one for the South. His former plantation home is now the site of Clemson University.



Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


 John C. Calhoun (1782–1850), leader of South Carolina’s offensive to nullify the Tariff of 1832, saw nulliﬁcation as a way of preserving the Union while preventing secession of the southern states. In his mind he was still a Unionist, even if also a southern sectionalist:

“


 I never use the word ‘nation’ in speaking of the United States. I always use the word ‘union’ or ‘confederacy.’ We are not a nation, but a union, a confederacy of equal and sovereign states.

”


 During the crisis of 1832, some of his South Carolina compatriots had different ideas. Medals were struck off in honor of Calhoun, bearing the words, “First President of the Southern Confederacy.”

 unconstitutional. Going a stride beyond the Kentucky and Virginia resolutions of 1798, it bluntly and explicitly proposed that the states should nullify the tariff— that is, they should declare it null and void within their borders.

“Nullies” in South Carolina
 The stage was set for a showdown. Through Jackson’s ﬁ rst term, the nulliﬁers—“nullies,” they were called— tried strenuously to muster the necessary two-thirds vote for nulliﬁcation in the South Carolina legislature. But they were blocked by a determined minority of Unionists, scorned as “submission men.” Back in Washington, Congress tipped the balance by passing the new Tariff of 1832. Though it pared away the worst “abominations” of 1828, it was still frankly protective and fell far short of meeting southern demands. Worse yet, to many southerners it had a disquieting air of permanence. The Nulliﬁcation Crisis deepened. South Carolina was now nerved for drastic action. Nulliﬁers and Unionists clashed head-on in the state election of 1832. “Nullies,” deﬁantly wearing palmetto ribbons on their hats to mark their loyalty to the “Palmetto State,” emerged with more than a two-thirds majority. The state legislature then called for a special convention. Several weeks later the delegates, meeting in Columbia, solemnly declared the existing tariff to be null and void within South Carolina. As a further act of deﬁance, the convention threatened to take South Car-

 At a Jefferson Day dinner on April 13, 1830, in the midst of the nulliﬁcation controversy, President Andrew Jackson (1767–1845) offered a toast:

“


 Our federal Union: It must be preserved.

 John C. Calhoun rose to his feet to make a countertoast:

”


“”


 To the Union, next to our liberty, most dear.

 olina out of the Union if Washington attempted to collect the customs duties by force. Such tactics might have intimidated John Quincy Adams, but Andrew Jackson was the wrong president to stare down. The cantankerous general was not a diehard supporter of the tariff, but he would not permit deﬁance or disunion. His military instincts rasped, Jackson privately threatened to invade the state and have the nulliﬁers hanged. In public he was only slightly less pugnacious. He dispatched naval and military reinforcements to the Palmetto State, while quietly preparing a sizable army. He also issued a ringing proclamation against nulliﬁcation, to which the governor of South Carolina, former senator Robert Y. Hayne, responded with a counterproclamation. The lines were drawn. If civil war was to be avoided, one side would have to surrender, or both would have to compromise. Conciliatory Henry Clay of Kentucky, now in the Senate, stepped forward. An unforgiving foe of Jackson, he had no desire to see his old enemy win new laurels by crushing the Carolinians and returning with the scalp of Calhoun dangling from his belt. Although himself a supporter of tariffs, the gallant Kentuckian therefore threw his inﬂuence behind a compromise bill that would gradually reduce the Tariff of 1832 by about 10 percent over a period of eight years. By 1842 the rates would be back at the mildly protective level of 1816.* The compromise Tariff of 1833 ﬁ nally squeezed through Congress. Debate was bitter, with most of the opposition naturally coming from protectionist New Eng land and the middle states. Calhoun and the South favored the compromise, so it was evident that Jackson would not have to use ﬁ rearms and rope. But at the same time, and partly as a face-saving device, Congress

 *For the history of tariff rates, see the Appendix.

 The Nulliﬁcation Crisis



 passed the Force Bill, known among Carolinians as the “Bloody Bill.” It authorized the president to use the army and navy, if necessary, to collect federal tariff duties. South Carolinians welcomed this opportunity to extricate themselves from a dangerously tight corner without loss of face. To the consternation of the Calhounites, no other southern states had sprung to their support, though Georgia and Virginia toyed with the idea. Moreover, an appreciable Unionist minority within South Carolina was gathering guns, organizing militias, and nailing Stars and Stripes to ﬂagpoles. Faced with civil war within and invasion from without, the Columbia convention met again and repealed the ordinance of nulliﬁcation. As a ﬁ nal but futile gesture of ﬁst-shaking, it nulliﬁed the unnecessary Force Bill and adjourned. Neither Jackson nor the “nullies” won a clear-cut victory in 1833. Clay was the true hero of the hour, hailed in Charleston and Boston alike for saving the country. Armed conﬂ ict had been avoided, but the fundamental issues had not been resolved. When next the “nullies” and the Union clashed, compromise would prove more elusive.

The Trail of Tears
 Jackson’s Democrats were committed to western expansion, but such expansion necessarily meant confrontation with the current inhabitants of the land. More than 125,000 Native Americans lived in the forests and prairies east of the Mississippi in the 1820s. Federal policy toward them varied. Beginning in the 1790s, the Washington government ostensibly recognized the tribes as separate nations and agreed to acquire land from them only through formal treaties. The Indians were shrewd and stubborn negotiators, but this availed them little when Americans routinely violated their own covenants, erasing and redrawing treaty line after treaty line on their maps as white settlement pushed west. Many white Americans felt respect and admiration for the Indians and believed that they could be assimilated into white society. Much energy therefore was devoted to “civilizing” and Christianizing the Indians. The Society for Propagating the Gospel Among Indians was founded in 1787, and many denominations sent missionaries into Indian villages. In 1793 Congress appropriated $20,000 for the promotion of literacy and agricultural and vocational instruction among the Indians.

 Jackson the “Great Father” An anonymous cartoonist satirizes Jackson’s alleged compassion for the Indians, but in fact his feelings toward Native Americans were complicated. He made ruthless war on the Creeks as a soldier, but he also adopted a Creek Indian son (who died of tuberculosis at the age of sixteen). At least in part, his motives for pursuing Indian removal stemmed from his concern that if the Indians were not removed from contact with the whites, they would face certain annihilation.

 Although many tribes violently resisted white encroachment, others followed the path of accommodation. The Cherokees of Georgia made especially remarkable efforts to learn the ways of the whites. They gradually abandoned their seminomadic life and adopted a system of settled agriculture and a notion of private property. Missionaries opened schools among the Cherokees, and the Indian Sequoyah devised a Cherokee alphabet. In 1808 the Cherokee National Council legislated a written legal code, and in 1827 it adopted a



Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


 The “Trail of Tears” In the fall and winter of 1838–1839, the U.S. Army forcibly removed about ﬁfteen thousand Cherokees, some of them in manacles, from their ancestral homelands in the southeastern United States and marched them to Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma). Freezing weather and inadequate food supplies led to unspeakable suffering. The escorting troops refused to slow the forced march so that the ill could recover, and some four thousand Cherokees died on the 116-day journey.

 written constitution that provided for executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government. Some Cherokees became prosperous cotton planters and even turned to slaveholding. Nearly thirteen hundred black slaves toiled for their Native American masters in the Cherokee nation in the 1820s. For these efforts the Cherokees—along with the Creeks, Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Seminoles—were numbered by whites among the “Five Civilized Tribes.” All this embrace of “civilization” apparently was not good enough for whites. In 1828 the Georgia legislature declared the Cherokee tribal council illegal and asserted its own jurisdiction over Indian affairs and Indian lands. The Cherokees appealed this move to the Supreme Court, which thrice upheld the rights of the Indians. But President Jackson, who clearly wanted to open Indian lands to white settlement, refused to recognize the Court’s decisions. In a cal lous jibe at the Indians’ defender, Jackson allegedly snapped,

 *One hundred sixty years later, in 1992, the state government of Georgia formally pardoned the two white missionaries, Samuel Austin Worcester and Elihu Butler, who ﬁgured prominently in the decision Jackson condemned. They had been convicted of living on Cherokee lands without a license from the state government of Georgia. They had served sixteen months at hard labor on a chain gang and later had accompanied the Cherokees on the “Trail of Tears” to Oklahoma.

 “John Marshall has made his decision; now let him enforce it.”* Feeling some obligation to rescue “this much injured race,” Jackson proposed a bodily removal of the remaining eastern tribes—chieﬂy Cherokees, Creeks, Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Seminoles—beyond the Mississippi. Emigration was supposed to be voluntary because it would be “cruel and unjust to compel the aborigines to abandon the graves of their fathers.” Jackson evidently consoled himself with the belief that

 One survivor of the Indians’ forced march in 1838– 1839 on the “Trail of Tears” to Indian Territory, farther west, remembered,

“


 One each day, and all are gone. Looks like maybe all dead before we get to new Indian country, but always we keep marching on. Women cry and make sad wails. Children cry, and many men cry, and all look sad when friends die, but they say nothing and just put heads down and keep on toward west. . . . She [his mother] speak no more; we bury her and go on.

”


Removal of the Indians


 the Indians could preserve their native cultures in the wide-open West. Jackson’s policy led to the forced uprooting of more than 100,000 Indians. In 1830 Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, providing for the transplanting of all Indian tribes then resident east of the Mississippi (see Map 13.2). Ironically, the heaviest blows fell on the Five Civilized Tribes. In the ensuing decade, countless Indians died on forced marches—notably the Cherokees along the notorious Trail of Tears—to the newly established Indian Territory, where they were to be “permanently” free of white encroachments. The Bureau of Indian Affairs was established in 1836 to administer relations with America’s original inhabitants. But as the land-hungry “palefaces” pushed west faster



 than anticipated, the government’s guarantees went up in smoke. The “permanent” frontier lasted about ﬁ fteen years. Suspicious of white intentions from the start, Sauk and Fox braves from Illinois and Wisconsin, ably led by Black Hawk, resisted eviction. They were bloodily crushed in the Black Hawk War of 1832 by regular troops, including Lieutenant Jefferson Davis of Mississippi, and by volunteers, including Captain Abraham Lincoln of Illinois. In Florida the Seminole Indians, joined by runaway black slaves, retreated to the swampy Everglades. For seven years (1835–1842), they waged a bitter guerrilla war that took the lives of some ﬁ fteen hundred soldiers. The spirit of the Seminoles was broken in 1837, when

Map 13.2 Indian Removals, 1830–1846
Interactive Map


Lake
Michigan


90°W


Oto and
Missouri


 SAUK

 Land granted to Indians west of the Mississippi River

Iowa
Sauk and Fox 1
Kickapoo




I LLI NOI S


Wea and Piankasha
Peoria and Kaskaskia
Wea and Piankasha
 Miami M I SSOU R I New York Indians Cherokee Neutral Lands Quapaw

.


AR K AN SAS TER R.

N


Red R
.


Ft.
Smith




TEN N ESSEE

Tenne
 ssee

 CHICKASAW

Ft.
Towson






 CHEROKEE

R.




Ft.
Chickasaw Arbuckle
 and Choctaw Ft. Washita

NORTH C AROLI NA

Mi s
 siss

Ft. Gibson


 ippi

Seneca


N


 sR nsa

Cherokee


VI RGI N IA KENTUCKY

A


 a rk

Creek and
Seminole


Osage


R.


Potawatomi
A


Fort
 io R .

E


Sauk and Fox


Cherokee Outlet


Oh


 Buffalo range

SOUTH C AROLI NA

 CREEK

AL ABAMA

 GEORGIA

 LA

N


 CHOCTAW

 AT



M I SSI SSI P P I


C


Ft.
Leavenworth
Shawnee


I N DIAN TER R ITORY

Forest


OH IO

I N DIANA

O


Wyandot and Delaware


 Indian tribes’ home territories 1835 Date and route of removal

 FOX



40°N


L


 e

C


 i R.

M ICH IGAN TER R ITORY

80°W


Eri
 ake

 TI

 sour Mis

Omaha


M EXICO LOU I SIANA

30°N








200 Km.


F LOR I DA
TER R.

New Orleans


200 Mi.


Gulf of Mexico


 SEMINOLE



Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


Black Hawk and His Son Whirling Thunder, by John
Wesley Jarvis, 1833 Chief Black Hawk and his son
 are depicted here in captivity. After their surrender in the Black Hawk War of 1832, they were put on public display throughout the United States.

 the American ﬁeld commander treacherously seized their leader, Osceola, under a ﬂag of truce. The war dragged on for ﬁve more years, but the Seminoles were doomed. Some ﬂed deeper into the Everglades, where their descendants now live, but about four-ﬁ fths of them were moved to present-day Oklahoma, where several thousand of the tribe survive.

The Bank War
 President Jackson did not hate all banks and all businesses, but he distrusted monopolistic banking and overbig businesses, as did his followers. A man of virulent dislikes, he came to share the prejudices of his own West against the “moneyed monster” known as the Bank of the United States. What made the bank a monster in Jackson’s eyes? The national government minted gold and silver coins in the mid-nineteenth century but did not issue paper money. Paper notes were printed by private banks. Their value ﬂuctuated with the health of the bank and the amount of money printed, giving private bankers considerable power over the nation’s economy.

 No bank in America had more power than the Bank of the United States. In many ways the bank acted like a branch of government. It was the principal depository for the funds of the Washington government and controlled much of the nation’s gold and silver. Its notes, unlike those of many smaller banks, were stable in value. A source of credit and stability, the bank was an important and useful part of the nation’s expanding economy. But the Bank of the United States was a private institution, accountable not to the people, but to its elite circle of moneyed investors. Its president, the brilliant but arrogant Nicholas Biddle, held an immense—and to many unconstitutional—amount of power over the nation’s ﬁ nancial affairs. Enemies of the bank dubbed him “Czar Nicolas I” and called the bank a “hydra of corruption,” a serpent that grew new heads whenever old ones were cut off. To some the bank’s very existence seemed to sin against the egalitarian credo of American democracy. The conviction formed the deepest source of Jackson’s opposition. The bank also won no friends in the West by foreclosing on many western farms and draining “tribute” into eastern coffers. Proﬁt, not public ser vice, was its ﬁ rst priority. The Bank War erupted in 1832, when Daniel Webster and Henry Clay presented Congress with a bill to renew the Bank of the United States’ charter. The charter was not set to expire until 1836, but Clay pushed for renewal four years early to make it an election issue in 1832. As Jackson’s leading rival for the presidency, Clay, with fateful blindness, looked upon the bank issue as a sureﬁ re winner. Clay’s scheme was to ram a recharter bill through Congress and then send it on to the White House. If Jackson signed it, he would alienate his worshipful western followers. If he vetoed it, as seemed certain, he would presumably lose the presidency in the forthcoming election by alienating the wealthy and inﬂuential groups in the East. Clay seems not to have fully realized that the “best people” were now only a minority and that they generally feared Jackson anyhow. The recharter bill slid through Congress on greased skids, as planned, but was killed by a scorching veto from Jackson. The “Old Hero” declared the monopolistic bank to be unconstitutional. Of course, the Supreme Court had earlier declared it constitutional in the case of McCulloch v. Maryland (1819), but Jackson acted as though he regarded the executive branch as superior to the judicial branch. The old general growled privately, “The Bank . . . is trying to kill me, but I will kill it.”

Beginnings of the Bank War




 In Mother Bank’s Sickroom Pro-bank men Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, and John C. Calhoun consult on the grave illness that is causing Mother Bank to cough up her deposits. While Nicholas Biddle, president of the Bank of the United States, ministers to the patient, U.S. president Andrew Jackson looks on with pleasure.

 Jackson’s veto message reverberated with constitutional consequences. It not only squashed the bank bill but vastly ampliﬁed the power of the presidency. All previous vetoes had rested almost exclusively on questions of constitutionality. But though Jackson invoked the Constitution in his bank-veto message, he essentially argued that he was vetoing the bill because he personally found it harmful to the nation. In effect, he was claiming for the president alone a power equivalent to two-thirds of the votes in Congress. If the legislative and executive branches were partners in government, he implied, the president was unmistakably the senior partner. Henry Clay’s political instincts continued to fail him. Delighted with the ﬁ nancial fallacies of Jackson’s

 Banker Nicholas Biddle (1786–1844) wrote to Henry Clay (August 1, 1832) expressing his satisfaction:

“


 I have always deplored making the Bank a party question, but since the President will have it so, he must pay the penalty of his own rashness. As to the veto message, I am delighted with it. It has all the fury of a chained panther biting the bars of his cage. It is really a manifesto of anarchy . . . and my hope is that it will contribute to relieve the country of the domination of these miserable [Jackson] people.

”




Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


 Symptoms of a Locked Jaw An outraged and outmaneuvered Henry Clay vainly tries to “muzzle” Andrew Jackson after Jackson’s stinging message vetoing the bill to recharter the Bank of the United States.

 message but blind to its political appeal, he arranged to have thousands of copies printed as a campaign document. The president’s sweeping accusations may indeed have seemed demagogic to the moneyed interests of the East, but they made perfect sense to the common people. The bank issue was now thrown into the noisy arena of the presidential contest of 1832.

“Old Hickory” Wallops
Clay in 1832
 Clay and Jackson were the chief gladiators in the looming electoral combat. The grizzled old general, who had earlier favored one term for a president and rotation in ofﬁce, was easily persuaded by his cronies not to rotate himself out of ofﬁce. Presidential power is a heady brew and can be habit-forming.

 The ensuing campaign was raucous. The “Old Hero’s” adherents again raised the hickory pole and bellowed, “Jackson Forever: Go the Whole Hog.” Admirers of Clay shouted, “Freedom and Clay,” while his detractors harped on his dueling, gambling, cockﬁghting, and fast living. Novel features made the campaign of 1832 especially memorable. For the ﬁ rst time, a third party entered the ﬁeld—the newborn Anti-Masonic party, which opposed the inﬂuence and fearsome secrecy of the Masonic order. Energized by the mysterious disappearance and probable murder in 1826 of a New Yorker who was threatening to expose the secret rituals of the Masons, the Anti-Masonic party quickly became a potent political force in New York and spread its inﬂuence throughout the middle Atlantic and New Eng land states. The Anti-Masons appealed to long-standing American suspicions of secret societies, which they condemned as citadels of privilege and monopoly— a note that harmonized with the democratic chorus of the Jacksonians. But since Jackson himself was a Mason and publicly gloried in his membership, the Anti-Masonic party was also an anti-Jackson party. The Anti-Masons also attracted support from many evangelical Protestant groups seeking to use political power to effect moral and religious reforms, such as prohibiting mail delivery on Sunday and otherwise keeping the Sabbath holy. This moral busybodiness was anathema to the Jacksonians, who were generally opposed to all government meddling in social and economic life. A further novelty of the presidential contest in 1832 was the calling of national nominating conventions (three of them) to name candidates. The Anti-Masons and a group of National Republicans added still another innovation when they adopted formal platforms, publicizing their positions on the issues. Henry Clay and his overconﬁdent National Republicans enjoyed impressive advantages. Ample funds ﬂowed into their campaign chest, including $50,000 in “life insurance” from the Bank of the United States. Most of the newspaper editors, some of them “bought” with Biddle’s bank loans, dipped their pens in acid when they wrote of Jackson. Yet Jackson, idol of the masses, easily defeated the big-money Kentuckian. A Jacksonian wave again swept over the West and South, surged into Pennsylvania and New York, and even washed into rock-ribbed New Eng land. The popular vote stood at 687,502 to 530,189 for Jackson; the electoral count was a lopsided 219 to 49.

The Bank of the United States Expires




 Fistﬁght Between Old Hickory and Bully Nick, 1834 An aged President Andrew Jackson faces off against the bank’s director, aristocratic Nicholas Biddle. Comically presented as sparring pugilists undressed in the style of the popular sport, the two are assisted by their seconds, Daniel Webster and Henry Clay for Biddle, Vice President Martin Van Buren for Jackson.

 Burying Biddle’s Bank Its charter denied, the Bank of the United States was due to expire in 1836. But Jackson was not one to let the ﬁnancial octopus die in peace. He was convinced that he now had a mandate from the voters for its extermination, and he feared that the slippery Biddle might try to manipulate the bank (as he did) so as to force its recharter. Jackson therefore decided in 1833 to bury the bank for good by removing federal deposits from its vaults. He proposed depositing no more funds with Biddle and gradually shrinking existing deposits by using them to defray the day-to-day expenses of the government. By slowly siphoning off the government’s funds, he would bleed the bank dry and ensure its demise.

 Removing the deposits involved nasty complications. Even the president’s closest advisers opposed this seemingly unnecessary, possibly unconstitutional, and certainly vindictive policy. Jackson, his dander up, was forced to reshufﬂe his cabinet twice before he could ﬁ nd a secretary of the Treasury who would bend to his iron will. A desperate Biddle called in his bank’s loans, evidently hoping to illustrate the bank’s importance by producing a minor ﬁ nancial crisis. A number of wobblier banks were driven to the wall by “Biddle’s Panic,” but Jackson’s resolution was ﬁ rm. If anything, the vengeful conduct of the dying “monster” seemed to justify the earlier accusations of its adversaries. But the death of the Bank of the United States left a ﬁ nancial vacuum in the American economy and kicked off a lurching cycle of booms and busts. Surplus federal



Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


 funds were placed in several dozen state institutions— the so-called pet banks, chosen for their pro-Jackson sympathies. Without a sober central bank in control, the pet banks and smaller “wildcat” banks—ﬂy-bynight operations that often consisted of little more than a few chairs and a suitcase full of printed notes— ﬂooded the country with paper money. Jackson tried to rein in the runaway economy in 1836, the year Biddle’s bank breathed its last. “Wildcat” currency had become so unreliable, especially in the West, that Jackson authorized the Treasury to issue a Specie Circular—a decree that required all public lands to be purchased with “hard,” or metallic, money. This drastic step slammed the brakes on the speculative boom, a neck-snapping change of direction that contributed to a ﬁ nancial panic and crash in 1837. But by then Jackson had retired to his Nashville home, hailed as the hero of his age. His successor would have to deal with the damage.

The Birth of the Whigs
 New political parties were gelling as the 1830s lengthened. As early as 1828, the Democratic-Republicans of Jackson had unashamedly adopted the once-tainted name “Democrats.” Jackson’s opponents, fuming at his ironﬁsted exercise of presidential power, condemned him as “King Andrew I” and began to coalesce as the Whigs—a name deliberately chosen to recollect eighteenth-century British and Revolutionary American opposition to the monarchy. The Whig party contained so many diverse elements that it was mocked at ﬁ rst as “an orga nized incompatibility.” Hatred of Jackson and his “executive usurpation” was its only apparent cement in its formative days. The Whigs ﬁ rst emerged as an identiﬁable group in the Senate, where Clay, Webster, and Calhoun joined forces in 1834 to pass a motion censuring Jackson for his single-handed removal of federal deposits from the Bank of the United States. Thereafter, the Whigs rapidly evolved into a potent national political force by attracting other groups alienated by Jackson: supporters of Clay’s American System, southern states’ righters offended by Jackson’s stand on nulliﬁcation, the larger northern industrialists and merchants, and eventually many of the evangelical Protestants associated with the Anti-Masonic party. Whigs thought of themselves as conser vatives, yet they were progressive in their support of active government programs and reforms. Instead of boundless

 territorial acquisition, they called for internal improvements like canals, railroads, and telegraph lines, and they supported institutions like prisons, asylums, and public schools. The Whigs welcomed the market economy, drawing support from manufacturers in the North, planters in the South, and merchants and bankers in all sections. But they were not simply a party of wealthy fat cats, however dearly the Democrats wanted to paint them as such. By absorbing the Anti-Masonic party, the Whigs blunted much of the Democratic appeal to the common man. The egalitarian anti-Masons portrayed Jackson, and particularly his New York successor Martin Van Buren, as imperious aristocrats. This turned Jacksonian rhetoric on its head: now the Whigs claimed to be the defenders of the common man and declared the Democrats the party of cronyism and corruption.

The Election of 1836
 The smooth-tongued and keen-witted vice president, Martin Van Buren of New York, was Jackson’s choice for “appointment” as his successor in 1836. The hollowcheeked Jackson, now nearing seventy, was too old and ailing to consider a third term. But he was not loath to try to serve a third term through Van Buren, something of a “yes man.” Leaving nothing to chance, Jackson carefully rigged the nominating convention and rammed his favorite down the throats of the delegates. Van Buren was supported by the Jacksonites without wild enthusiasm, even though he had promised “to tread generally” in the military-booted footsteps of his predecessor. As the election neared, the still-ramshackle orga nization of the Whigs showed in their inability to nominate a single presidential candidate. Their long-shot strategy was instead to run several prominent “favorite sons,” each with a different regional appeal, and hope to scatter the vote so that no candidate would win a majority. The deadlock would then have to be broken by the House of Representatives, where the Whigs might have a chance. With Henry Clay rudely elbowed aside, the leading Whig “favorite son” was heavy-jawed General William Henry Harrison of Ohio, hero of the Battle of Tippecanoe (see p. 245). The ﬁ ne-spun schemes of the Whigs availed nothing, however. Van Buren, the dapper “Little Magician,” squirmed into ofﬁce by the close popular vote of 765,483 to 739,795, but by the comfortable margin of 170 to 124 votes (for all the Whigs combined) in the Electoral College.

Examining the Evidence




Satiric Bank Note, 1837
 olitical humor can take more forms than the commonly seen caustic cartoon. Occasionally historians stumble upon other examples, such as this fake bank note. A jibe at Andrew Jackson’s money policies, it appeared in New York in 1837 after Jackson’s insistence on shutting down the Bank of the United States resulted in the suspension of specie payments. The clever creator of this satiric bank note for six cents left little doubt about the worthlessness of the note or Jackson’s responsibility for it. The six

P


Big Woes for the
“Little Magician”
 Martin Van Buren, eighth president, was the ﬁrst to be born under the American ﬂag. Short and slender, bland and bald, the adroit little New Yorker has been described as “a ﬁ rst-class second-rate man.” An accomplished strategist and spoilsman—“the wizard of Albany”—he was also a statesman of wide experience in both legislative and administrative life. In intelligence, education, and training, he was above the average of the presidents since Jackson. The myth of his mediocrity

 cents payable by the “Humbug Glory Bank”—whose symbols were a donkey and a “Hickory Leaf” (for Old Hickory)—were redeemable “in mint drops or Glory at cost.” The bank’s cashier was “Cunning Reuben,” possibly an anti-Semitic allusion to usurious Jewish bankers. Can you identify other ways in which this document takes aim at Jackson’s banking policies? What symbols did the note’s creator assume the public would comprehend?

 sprouted mostly from a series of misfortunes over which he had no control. From the outset the new president labored under severe handicaps. As a machine-made candidate, he incurred the resentment of many Democrats—those who objected to having a “bastard politician” smuggled into ofﬁce beneath the tails of the old general’s military coat. Jackson, the master showman, had been a dynamic type of executive whose administration had resounded with furious quarrels and cracked heads. Mild-mannered Martin Van Buren seemed to rattle about in the military boots of his testy predecessor. The people felt let down. Inheriting Andrew Jackson’s



Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


 mantle without his popularity, Van Buren also inherited the ex-president’s numerous and vengeful enemies. Van Buren’s four years overﬂowed with toil and trouble. A pair of short-lived rebellions in Canada in 1837, mostly over political reform but aggravated by unregulated immigration from the United States, stirred up ugly incidents along the northern frontier and threatened to trigger war with Britain. The president’s attempt to play a neutral game led to the wail, “Woe to Martin Van Buren!” The antislavery agitators in the North were also in full cry. Among other grievances, they were condemning the prospective annexation of Texas (see p. 295). Worst of all, Jackson bequeathed to Van Buren the makings of a searing depression. Much of Van Buren’s energy had to be devoted to the purely negative task of battling the panic, and there were not enough rabbits in the “Little Magician’s” tall silk hat. Hard times ordinarily blight the reputation of a president, and Van Buren was no exception.

Depression Doldrums and
 the Independent Treasury The panic of 1837 was a symptom of the ﬁ nancial sickness of the times. Its basic cause was rampant speculation prompted by a mania of get-rich-quickism. Gamblers in western lands were doing a “land-ofﬁce business” on borrowed capital, much of it in the shaky currency of “wildcat banks.” The speculative craze spread to canals, roads, railroads, and slaves. But speculation alone did not cause the crash. Jacksonian ﬁ nance, including the Bank War and the Specie Circular, gave an additional jolt to an already teetering structure. Failures of wheat crops, ravaged by the Hessian ﬂy, deepened the distress. Grain prices were forced so high that mobs in New York City, three weeks before Van Buren took the oath, stormed warehouses and broke open ﬂour barrels. The panic really began before Jackson left ofﬁce, but its full fury burst about Van Buren’s bewildered head. Financial stringency abroad likewise endangered America’s economic house of cards. Late in 1836 the failure of two prominent British banks created tremors, and these in turn caused British investors to call in foreign loans. The resulting pinch in the United States, combined with other setbacks, heralded the beginning of the panic. Europe’s economic distresses have often become America’s distresses, for every major American ﬁ nancial panic has been affected by conditions overseas.

 The Long Bill Americans who bought on credit, conﬁdent that they could make their payments later, were caught off guard by the panic of 1837. Customers like the one shown here found themselves confronted with a “long bill” that they could not pay, particularly when the banks holding their savings collapsed.

 Hardship was acute and widespread. American banks collapsed by the hundreds, including some “pet banks,” which carried down with them several million in government funds. Commodity prices drooped, sales of public lands fell off, and customs revenues dried to a rivulet. Factories closed their doors, and unemployed workers milled in the streets. The Whigs came forward with proposals for active government remedies for the economy’s ills. They called for the expansion of bank credit, higher tariffs, and subsidies for internal improvements. But Van Buren, shackled by the Jacksonian philosophy of keeping the government’s paws off the economy, spurned all such ideas. The beleaguered Van Buren tried to apply vintage Jacksonian medicine to the ailing economy through his controversial “Divorce Bill.” Convinced that some of the ﬁ nancial fever was fed by the injection of federal

 Van Buren's Presidency

 Philip Hone (1780–1851), a New York businessman, described in his diary (May 10, 1837) a phase of the ﬁnancial crisis:

“


 The savings-bank also sustained a most grievous run yesterday. They paid 375 depositors $81,000. The press was awful; the hour for closing the bank is six o’clock, but they did not get through the paying of those who were in at that time till nine o’clock. I was there with the other trustees and witnessed the madness of the people—women nearly pressed to death, and the stoutest men could scarcely sustain themselves; but they held on as with a death’s grip upon the evidences of their claims, and, exhausted as they were with the pressure, they had strength to cry ‘Pay! Pay!’

”


 funds into private banks, he championed the principle of “divorcing” the government from banking altogether. By establishing a so-called independent treasury, the government could lock its surplus money in vaults in several of the larger cities. Government funds would thus be safe, but they would also be denied to the banking system as reserves, thereby shriveling available credit resources. Van Buren’s “divorce” scheme was never highly popular. His fellow Democrats, many of whom longed for the risky but lush days of the “pet banks,” supported

 One foreign traveler decried the chaotic state of American currency following the demise of the Bank of the United States and the panic of 1837:

“


 The greatest annoyance I was subjected to in travelling was in exchanging money. It is impossible to describe the wretched state of the currency—which is all bills issued by private individuals; companies; cities and states; almost all of which are bankrupt; or what amounts to the same thing, they cannot redeem their issues. . . . And these do not pass out of the state, or frequently, out of the city in which they are issued.

”




 it only lukewarmly. The Whigs condemned it, primarily because it squelched their hopes for a revived Bank of the United States. After a prolonged struggle, the Independent Treasury Bill passed Congress in 1840. Repealed the next year by the victorious Whigs, the scheme was reenacted by the triumphant Democrats in 1846 and then continued until the Republicans instituted a network of national banks during the Civil War.

Gone to Texas
 Americans, greedy for land, continued to covet the vast expanse of Texas, which the United States had abandoned to Spain when acquiring Florida in 1819. The Spanish authorities wanted to populate this virtually unpeopled area, but before they could carry through their contemplated plans, the Mexicans won their independence, in 1821. A new regime in Mexico City thereupon concluded arrangements in 1823 for granting a huge tract of land to Stephen Austin, with the understanding that he would bring into Texas three hundred American families. Immigrants were to be of the established Roman Catholic faith and upon settlement were to become properly Mexicanized. These two stipulations were largely ignored. Hardy Texas pioneers remained Americans at heart, resenting the trammels imposed by a “foreign” government. They were especially annoyed by the presence of Mexican soldiers, many of whom were ragged ex-convicts. Energetic and proliﬁc, Texan Americans numbered about thirty thousand by 1835 (see “Makers of America: Mexican or Texican?” pp. 296–297). Most of them were law-abiding, God-fearing people, but some of them had left the “States” only one or two jumps ahead of the sheriff. “G.T.T.” (Gone to Texas) became current descriptive slang. Among the adventurers were Davy Crockett, the famous riﬂeman, and Jim Bowie, the presumed inventor of the murderous knife that bears his name. Bowie’s blade was widely known in the Southwest as the “genuine Arkansas toothpick.” A distinguished latecomer and leader was an ex-governor of Tennessee, Sam Houston. His life had been temporarily shattered in 1829 when his bride of a few weeks left him and he took up transient residence with the Arkansas Indians, who dubbed him “Big Drunk.” He subsequently took the pledge of temperance. The pioneer individualists who came to Texas were not easy to push around. Friction rapidly increased between Mexicans and Texans over issues such as slavery, immigration, and local rights. Slavery was a



Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


 particularly touchy topic. Mexico emancipated its slaves in 1830 and prohibited the further importation of slaves into Texas, as well as further colonization by troublesome Americans. The Texans refused to honor these decrees. They kept their slaves in bondage, and new American settlers kept bringing more slaves into Texas. When Stephen Austin went to Mexico City in 1833 to negotiate these differences with the Mexican government, the dictator Santa Anna clapped him in jail for eight months. The explosion ﬁ nally came in 1835, when Santa Anna wiped out all local rights and started to raise an army to suppress the upstart Texans.

The Lone Star Rebellion


Samuel (“Sam”) Houston (1793–1863) After a
 promising career in Tennessee as a soldier, lawyer, congressman, and governor, Houston became the chief leader and hero of the Texas rebels. Elected to the U.S. Senate and the governorship of Texas, he was forced into retirement when his love for the Union caused him to spurn the Confederacy in the Civil War.

“Come and Take It” This
 mosaic, done in 1959 by Bert Rees of Austin, Texas, shows one of the defenders’ cannon, as well as their legendary battle ﬂag of deﬁance.

 Early in 1836 the Texans declared their independence, unfurled their Lone Star ﬂag, and named Sam Houston commander in chief. Santa Anna, at the head of about six thousand men, swept ferociously into Texas. Trapping a band of nearly two hundred pugnacious Texans at the Alamo in San Antonio, he wiped them out to a man after a thirteen-day siege. The Texans’ commander, Colonel W. B. Travis, had declared, “I shall never surrender nor retreat. . . . Victory or Death.” A short time later, a band of about four hundred surrounded and defeated American volunteers, having thrown down their arms at Goliad, were butchered as “pirates.” All these operations further delayed the Mexican advance and galvanized American opposition.

The Fall of the Alamo




The Battle of the Alamo, 1836
 Long celebrated in song and story, the battle was a military defeat but a spiritual victory for the Texas rebels, whose annihilation to a man inspired others and led eventually to independence from Mexico.

 Slain heroes like Jim Bowie and Davy Crockett, well-known in life, became legendary in death. Texan war cries—“Remember the Alamo!” “Remember Goliad!” and “Death to Santa Anna!”—swept up into the United States. Scores of vengeful Americans seized their riﬂes and rushed to the aid of relatives, friends, and compatriots. General Sam Houston’s small army retreated to the east, luring Santa Anna to San Jacinto, near the site of the city that now bears Houston’s name (see Map 13.3). The Mexicans numbered about thirteen hundred men, the Texans about nine hundred. Suddenly, on April 21, 1836, Houston turned. Taking full advantage of the Mexican siesta, the Texans wiped out the pursuing force and captured Santa Anna, who was found cowering in the tall grass near the battleﬁeld. Confronted with thirsty bowie knives, the quaking dictator was speedily induced to sign two treaties. By their terms he agreed to withdraw Mexican troops and to recognize the Rio Grande as the extreme southwestern boundary of Texas. When released, he repudiated the agreement as illegal because it had been extorted under duress. These events put the U.S. government in a sticky situation. The Texans, though courageous, could hardly have won their independence without the help in men and supplies from their American cousins. The Washington government, as the Mexicans bitterly com-

 plained, had a solemn obligation under international law to enforce its leaky neutrality statutes. But American public opinion, overwhelmingly favorable to the Texans, openly nulliﬁed the existing legislation. The federal authorities were powerless to act, and on the day before he left ofﬁce in 1837, President Jackson even extended the right hand of recognition to the Lone Star Republic, led by his old comrade-in-arms against the Indians, Sam Houston. Many Texans wanted not just recognition of their independence but outright union with the United States. What nation in its right mind, they reasoned, would refuse so lavish a dowry? The radiant Texas bride, ofﬁcially petitioning for annexation in 1837, presented herself for marriage. But the expectant groom, Uncle Sam, was jerked back by the black hand of the slavery issue. Antislavery crusaders in the North were opposing annexation with increasing vehemence. They contended that the whole scheme was merely a conspiracy cooked up by the southern “slavocracy” to bring new slave pens into the Union. At ﬁ rst glance a “slavery plot” charge seemed plausible. Most of the early settlers in Texas, as well as American volunteers during the revolution, had come from the states of the South and Southwest. But scholars have concluded that the settlement of Texas was merely the normal and inexorable march of the westward

MAKERS OF

 AMERICA or TheMexican Great AfricanTexican? American Migration

M


 oses Austin, born a Connecticut Yankee in 1761, was determined to be Spanish—if that’s what it took to acquire cheap land and freedom from pesky laws. In 1798 he tramped into untracked Missouri, still part of Spanish Louisiana, and pledged his allegiance to the king of Spain. He was not pleased when the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 restored him to American citizenship. In 1820, with his old Spanish passport in his saddlebag, he rode into Spanish Texas and asked for permission to establish a colony of three hundred families. Austin’s request posed a dilemma for the Texas governor. The Spanish authorities had repeatedly stamped out the bands of American horse thieves and squatters who periodically splashed across the Red and Sabine Rivers from the United States into Spanish territory. Yet the Spanish had lured only some three thousand of their own settlers into Texas during their three centuries of rule. If the land were ever to be wrestled from the Indians and “civilized,” maybe Austin’s plan could do it. Hoping that this band of the “right sort” of

 José Antonio Navarro (1795–1871) A native of San Antonio, Navarro signed the Texas declaration of independence in 1836.



 Americans might prevent the further encroachment of the buckskinned border rufﬁans, the governor reluctantly agreed to Austin’s proposal. Upon Moses Austin’s death in 1821, the task of realizing his dream fell to his twenty-seven-year-old son, Stephen. “I bid an everlasting farewell to my native country,” Stephen Austin said, and he crossed into Texas on July 15, 1821, “determined to fulﬁ ll rigidly all the duties and obligations of a Mexican citizen.” (Mexico declared its independence from Spain early in 1821 and ﬁ nalized its agreement with Austin in 1823.) Soon he learned ﬂuent Spanish and was signing his name as “Don Estévan F. Austin.” In his new colony between the Brazos and Colorado Rivers, he allowed “no drunkard, no gambler, no profane swearer, no idler”—and sternly enforced these rules. Not only did he banish several families as “undesirables,” but he ordered the public ﬂogging of unwanted interlopers. Austin fell just three families short of recruiting the three hundred households that his father had contracted to bring to Texas. The original settlers were still dubbed the “Old Three Hundred,” the Texas equivalent of New Eng land’s Mayﬂower Pilgrims or the “First Families of Virginia.” Mostly Scots-Irish southerners from the trans-Appalachian frontier, the Old Three Hundred were cultured folk by frontier standards; all but four of them were literate. Other settlers followed, from Europe as well as America. Within ten years the “Anglos” (many of them French and German) outnumbered the Mexican residents, or tejanos, ten to one and soon evolved a distinctive “Texican” culture. The wideranging horse patrols orga nized to attack Indian camps became the Texas Rangers; Samuel Maverick, whose unbranded calves roamed the limitless prairies, left his surname as a label for rebellious loners who refused to run with the herd; and Jared Groce, an Alabama planter whose caravan of ﬁ fty covered wagons and one hundred slaves arrived in 1822, etched the original image of the larger-than-life, big-time Texas operator. The original Anglo-Texans brought with them the old Scots-Irish frontiersmen’s hostility to authority. They ignored Mexican laws and ofﬁcials, including restrictions against owning or importing slaves. When the Mexican government tried to impose its will on the

West Side Main Plaza, San Antonio, Texas, by William G. M. Samuel, 1849
 (detail) Even after annexation, Texas retained a strong Spanish Mexican ﬂavor, as the architecture and activities here illustrate.

 Anglo-Texans in the 1830s, they took up their guns. Like the American revolutionaries of the 1770s, who at ﬁ rst demanded only the rights of Eng lishmen, the Texans began by asking simply for Mexican recognition of their rights as guaranteed by the Mexican constitution of 1824. But bloodshed at the Alamo in 1836, like that at Lexington and Concord in 1775, transformed protest into rebellion. Texas lay—and still lies—along the frontier where Hispanic and Anglo-American cultures met, mingled, and clashed. In part the Texas Revolution was a contest between those two cultures. But it was also a contest about philosophies of government, pitting liberal frontier ideals of freedom against the conser vative concept of centralized control. Stephen Austin sincerely tried to “Mexicanize” himself and his followers—until the Mexican government grew too arbitrary and authoritarian. And not all the Texas revolutionaries were “Anglos.” Many tejanos fought for Texas independence—seven perished defending the Alamo. Among

 the ﬁ fty-nine signers of the Texas declaration of independence were several Hispanics, including the tejanos José Antonio Navarro and Francisco Ruiz. Lorenzo de Zavala, an ardent Mexican liberal who had long resisted the centralizing tendencies of Mexico’s dominant political party, was designated vice president of the Texas republic’s interim government in 1836. Like the Austins, these tejanos and Mexicans had sought in Texas an escape from overbearing governmental authority. Their role in the revolution underscores the fact that the uprising was a struggle between defenders of local rights and the agents of central authority as much as it was a ﬁght between Anglo and Mexican cultures.





Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


 movement. Most of the immigrants came from the South and Southwest simply because these states were closer. The explanation was proximity rather than conspiracy. Yet the fact remained that many Texans were slaveholders, and admitting Texas to the Union inescapably meant enlarging American slavery.

95°W


 Area claimed by Texas and Mexico Land grant

UNITED STATES

 Houston’s strategic retreat

 ARKANSAS

 Mexican movement

R.
Red


 Texan victory

Sab


100°W


Tr


 in

 ry by

 os

 ed

 az

 im Sant

 aA

 nn a1

Nueces R
 x de Te a n d by Gr e Rio claim ry n da Bou

Bexar
Dec. 10,
Goliad
Mar. 20, 1836
Refugio
Mar. 14, 1836


San Patricio
Feb. 14, 1836




Crockett
Huntsville


Los
Adaes


San Augustine


San Jacinto
Gonzales Apr. 21, 1836 Galveston
Oct. 2, 1835
Brazoria


Victoria


Velasco
Matagorda
La Vaca (Port Vaca)
Indianola
Copano
Gu lf


Corpus Christi


 of Mexic o

 a 1836 Urre

Mier
Dec. 25, 1842


 MEXICO

R.


 o

 xic

Me


New
Braunfels


Nacogdoches


 Bevil's Settlement Austin LA AUSTIN’S Bastrop Beaumont La GrangeCOLONY 30°N Lynchburg n 1836 usto Ho New Washington

Laredo Agua
Dulce




Natchitoches


EDWARD’S
Tenaha COLONY 
Br


 cla

 TEXAS

Alamo
Mar. 6, 1836


San Antonio
Castroville




R.


R.


 da

Fredericksburg


N


 ine

Henderson


 ity

 un

Bo


Dallas


 as

Ceded to
Texas 1840


Clarksville


 Mexican victory

.


35°N


INDIAN TERRITORY

Matamoros


Brownsville


150 Km.


150 Mi.


25°N


Map 13.3 The Texas Revolution, 1836 General
 Houston’s strategy was to retreat and use defense in depth. His line of supply from the United States was shortened as Santa Anna’s lengthened. The Mexicans were forced to bring up supplies by land because the Texas navy controlled the sea. This force consisted of only four small ships, but it was big enough to do the job. Interactive Map

Log Cabins and
Hard Cider of 1840
 Martin Van Buren was renominated by the Democrats in 1840, albeit without terriﬁc enthusiasm. The party had no acceptable alternative to what the Whigs called “Martin Van Ruin.” The Whigs, hungering for the spoils of ofﬁce, scented victory in the breeze. Pangs of the panic were still being felt, and voters blamed their woes on the party in power. Learning from their mistake in 1836, the Whigs united behind one candidate, Ohio’s William Henry Harrison. He was not their ablest statesman— that would have been Daniel Webster or Henry Clay— but he was believed to be their ablest vote-getter. The aging hero, nearly sixty-eight when the campaign ended, was known for his successes against Indians and the British at the Battles of Tippecanoe (1811) and the Thames (1813). Harrison’s views on current issues were only vaguely known. “Old Tippecanoe” was nominated primarily because he was issueless and enemyless—a tested recipe for electoral success that still appeals today. John Tyler of Virginia, an afterthought, was selected as his vice-presidential running mate. The Whigs, eager to avoid offense, published no ofﬁcial platform, hoping to sweep their hero into ofﬁce with a frothy huzza-for-Harrison campaign reminiscent of Jackson’s triumph in 1828. A dull-witted Democratic editor played directly into Whig hands. Stupidly insulting the West, he lampooned Harrison as an impoverished old farmer who should be content with a pension, a log cabin, and a barrel of hard cider—the poor westerner’s champagne. Whigs gleefully adopted honest hard cider and the sturdy log cabin as symbols of their campaign. Harrisonites portrayed their hero as the poor “Farmer of North Bend,” who had been called from his cabin and his plow to drive corrupt Jackson spoilsmen from the “presidential palace.” They denounced Van Buren as a supercilious aristocrat, a simpering dandy who wore corsets and ate French food from golden plates. As a jeering Whig campaign song proclaimed, Old Tip, he wears a homespun shirt, He has no rufﬂed shirt, wirt, wirt. But Matt, he has the golden plate, and he’s a little squirt, wirt, wirt. The Whig campaign was a masterpiece of inane hoopla. Log cabins were dished up in every conceivable form. Bawling Whigs, stimulated by fortiﬁed cider, rolled huge inﬂated balls from village to village and

Tippecanoe, and Tyler Too




Campaign Flag for William Henry Harrison, 1840
 As the two-party system came into its own by 1840, presidential elections became more public contests. Lively political campaigns used banners, posters, and ﬂags to whip up voters’ support. Although General Harrison was hardly a simple log-cabin-living Ohioan, the Whigs disseminated this logo to persuade the voters that the Virginia-born gentleman was really a homespun western farmer.

 state to state—balls that represented the snowballing majority for “Tippecanoe, and Tyler too.” In truth, Harrison was not lowborn, but from one of the FFVs (“First Families of Virginia”). He was not poverty-stricken. He did not live in a one-room log cabin, but rather in a sixteen-room mansion on a three-thousand-acre farm. He did not swill down gallons of hard cider (he evi-

 dently preferred whiskey). And he did not plow his ﬁelds with his own “huge paws.” But such details had not mattered when General Jackson rode to victory, and they did not matter now. The Democrats who hurrahed Jackson into the White House in 1828 now discovered to their chagrin that whooping it up for a backwoods westerner was a game two could play. Harrison won by the surprisingly close margin of 1,274,624 to 1,127,781 popular votes, but by an overwhelming electoral margin of 234 to 60. With hardly a real issue debated, though with hard times blighting the incumbent’s fortunes, Van Buren was washed out of Washington on a wave of apple juice. The hard-ciderites had apparently received a mandate to tear down the White House and erect a log cabin. Although campaigners in 1840 did their best to bury substantive issues beneath the ballyhoo, voters actually faced a stark choice between two economic visions of how to cope with the nation’s ﬁ rst major depression. Whigs sought to expand and stimulate the economy, while Democrats favored retrenchment and an end to high-ﬂying banks and aggressive corporations.

Martin Van Buren Gags on Hard Cider
 This 1840 “pull-card” shows Van Buren on the left as an aristocratic fop sipping champagne. When the right-hand card was pulled out, Van Buren’s face soured as he discovered that his “champagne” was actually hard cider. The cartoonist clearly sympathized with Van Buren’s opponent in the 1840 presidential election, William Henry Harrison, who waged the famous “log cabin and hard cider” campaign.



Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


William Henry Harrison Campaign in Philadelphia,
 1840 The parties of Democratic incumbent Martin Van Buren and his Whig challenger, “the Hero of Tippecanoe,” took their electoral rivalry into the streets of cities like Philadelphia, launching modern-style popular politics. Harrison won, but a mere month after delivering the longest inaugural address ever (two hours), he succumbed to pneumonia and died. He served the shortest term of any president (thirty-one days). One of his forty-eight grandchildren, Benjamin Harrison, became the twenty-third president of the United States.

Politics for the People
 The election of 1840 conclusively demonstrated two major changes in American politics since the Era of Good Feelings. The ﬁ rst was the triumph of a populist democratic style. Democracy had been something of a taint in the days of the lordly Federalists. Martha Washington, the ﬁ rst First Lady, was shocked after a presidential reception to ﬁ nd a greasy smear on the wallpaper—left there, she was sure, by an uninvited “ﬁ lthy democrat.”

The County Election, by George
Caleb Bingham, 1851–1852
 The artist here gently satirizes the drinking and wheeling and dealing that sometimes marred the electoral process in the boisterous age of Jacksonian politics.

 But by the 1840s, aristocracy was the taint, and democracy was respectable. Politicians were now forced to curry favor with the voting masses. Lucky indeed was the aspiring ofﬁce seeker who could boast of birth in a log cabin. In 1840 Daniel Webster publicly apologized for not being able to claim so humble a birthplace, though he quickly added that his brothers could. Hopelessly handicapped was the candidate who appeared to be too clean, too well dressed, too grammatical, too highbrowishly intellectual. In truth, most high political ofﬁces continued to be ﬁ lled by “leading citizens.” But now these wealthy and prominent men had to forsake all social pretensions and cultivate the common touch if they hoped to win elections. Snobbish bigwigs, unhappy over the change, sneered at “coonskin congressmen” and at the newly enfranchised “bipeds of the forest.” To them the tyranny of “King Numbers” was no less offensive than that

The Two-Party System


 of King George. But these critics protested in vain. The common man was at last moving to the center of the national political stage: the sturdy American who donned coarse trousers rather than buff breeches, who sported a coonskin cap rather than a silk top hat, and who wore no man’s collar, often not even one of his own. Instead of the old divine right of kings, America was now bowing to the divine right of the people.

The Two-Party System
 The second dramatic change resulting from the 1840 election was the formation of a vigorous and durable two-party system. The Jeffersonians of an earlier day had been so successful in absorbing the programs of their Federalist opponents that a full-blown two-party system had never truly emerged in the subsequent Era of Good Feelings. The idea had prevailed that parties of any sort smacked of conspiracy and “faction” and were injurious to the health of the body politic in a virtuous republic. By 1840 political parties had fully come of age, a lasting legacy of Andrew Jackson’s and Martin Van Buren’s tenaciousness. Both national parties, the Democrats and the Whigs, grew out of the rich soil of Jeffersonian republicanism, and each laid claim to different aspects of the republican inheritance. Jacksonian Democrats gloriﬁed the liberty of the individual and were ﬁercely on guard against the inroads of “privilege” into government. Whigs trumpeted the natural harmony of society and the value of community, and were willing to use government to realize their objectives. Whigs also berated those leaders—and they considered Jackson to be one—whose appeals to self-interest fostered conﬂ ict among individuals, classes, or sections. Democrats clung to states’ rights and federal restraint in social and economic affairs as their basic doctrines. Whigs tended to favor a renewed national bank, protective tariffs, internal improvements, public schools, and, increasingly, moral reforms such as the prohibition of liquor and eventually the abolition of slavery.



 President Andrew Jackson advised a supporter in 1835 on how to tell the difference between Democrats and “Whigs, nullies, and blue-light federalists.” In doing so, he neatly summarized the Jacksonian philosophy:

“


 The people ought to inquire [of political candidates]—are you opposed to a national bank; are you in favor of a strict construction of the Federal and State Constitutions; are you in favor of rotation in ofﬁce; do you subscribe to the republican rule that the people are the sovereign power, the ofﬁcers their agents, and that upon all national or general subjects, as well as local, they have a right to instruct their agents and representatives, and they are bound to obey or resign; in short, are they true Republicans agreeable to the true Jeffersonian creed?

”


 The two parties were thus separated by real differences of philosophy and policy. But they also had much in common. Both were mass-based, “catchall” parties that tried deliberately to mobilize as many voters as possible for their cause. Although it is true that Democrats tended to be more humble folk and Whigs more prosperous, both parties nevertheless commanded the loyalties of all kinds of Americans, from all social classes and in all sections. The social diversity of the two parties had important implications. It fostered horse-trading compromises within each party that prevented either from assuming extreme or radical positions. By the same token, the geographical diversity of the two parties retarded the emergence of purely sectional political parties—temporarily suppressing, through compromise, the ultimately uncompromisable issue of slavery. When the two-party system began to creak in the 1850s, the Union was mortally imperiled.



Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


 CHRONOLOGY

 Vesey slave conspiracy in Charleston, South Carolina

1832–


 South Carolina nulliﬁcation crisis



 Mexico opens Texas to American settlers





 Lack of electoral majority for presidency throws election into House of Representatives

Compromise Tariff of 1833
 Jackson removes federal deposits from Bank of the United States



 House elects John Quincy Adams president



Tariff of 1828 (“Tariff of Abominations”)
 Jackson elected president The South Carolina Exposition published



Indian Removal Act
July Revolution in France


 Bank of the United States expires Specie Circular issued Bureau of Indian Affairs established Battle of the Alamo Battle of San Jacinto Texas wins independence from Mexico Van Buren elected president



 Seminole Indians defeated and eventually removed from Florida United States recognizes Texas republic but refuses annexation Panic of 1837

1838–


 Cherokee Indians removed on “Trail of Tears”



 Independent treasury established Harrison defeats Van Buren for presidency

1831–


 Alexis de Tocqueville tours United States



 “Bank War”—Jackson vetoes bill to recharter Bank of the United States Reform Bill in Britain expands electorate Tariff of 1832 Black Hawk War Jackson defeats Clay for presidency

KEY TERMS
corrupt bargain (273) spoils system (280) Tariff of Abominations (280) Nulliﬁcation Crisis (282) compromise Tariff of 1833 (282) Force Bill (283) Indian Removal Act (285) Trail of Tears (285) Black Hawk War (285) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Bank War (286) Anti-Masonic party (288) pet banks (290) Specie Circular (290) panic of 1837 (292) Alamo (294) Goliad (294) San Jacinto, Battle of (295) 
John Quincy Adams
Andrew Jackson
Denmark Vesey
John C. Calhoun
Black Hawk
Nicholas Biddle
Daniel Webster


Henry Clay
Martin Van Buren
Stephen Austin
Sam Houston
Santa Anna
William Henry Harrison


Varying Viewpoints




What Was Jacksonian Democracy?


A


 ristocratic, eastern-born historians of the nineteenth century damned Jackson as a backwoods barbarian. They criticized Jacksonianism as democracy run riot—an irresponsible, ill-bred outburst that overturned the electoral system and wrecked the national ﬁ nancial structure. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, however, another generation of historians came to the fore, many of whom had grown up in the Midwest and rejected the elitist views of their predecessors. Frederick Jackson Turner and his disciples saw the western frontier as the fount of democratic virtue, and they hailed Jackson as a true hero sprung from the forests of the West to protect the will of the people against the moneyed interests, akin to the progressive reformers of their own day. In his famous 1893 essay, “The Signiﬁcance of the Frontier in American History,” Turner argued that the United States owed the survival of its democratic tradition to the rise of the West, not to its roots in the more conser vative, aristocratic East. When Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., published The Age of Jackson in 1945, however, the debate on Jacksonianism shifted dramatically. Although he shared the Turnerians’ admiration for Jackson the democrat, Schlesinger cast the Jacksonian era not as a sectional conﬂ ict, but as a class conﬂ ict between poor farmers, laborers, and noncapitalists on the one hand, and the business community—epitomized by the Second Bank of the United States—on the other. In Schlesinger’s eyes the Jacksonians justiﬁably attacked the bank as an institution dangerously independent of democratic oversight. The political mobilization of the urban working classes in support of Jackson particularly attracted Schlesinger’s interest. Soon after Schlesinger’s book appeared, the discussion again shifted ground and entirely new interpretations of Jacksonianism emerged. Richard Hofstadter argued in The American Political Tradition and the Men Who Made It (1948) that Jacksonian democracy was not a rejection of capitalism, as Schlesinger insisted, but rather the effort of aspiring entrepreneurs to secure laissez-faire policies that would serve their own interests against their entrenched, and monopolistic, eastern competitors. In The Jacksonian Persuasion (1957), Marvin Meyers portrayed the Jacksonians as conser vative capitalists,

 torn between ﬁerce commercial ambitions and a desire to cling to the virtues of the agrarian past. In an effort to resolve this contradiction, he argued, they lashed out at scapegoats like the national bank, blaming it for the very changes their own economic energies had unleashed. Lee Benson contended in The Concept of Jacksonian Democracy (1961) that the political conﬂ icts of the Jacksonian era did not correspond so much to class divisions as to different ethnic and religious splits within American society. Using new quantitative methods of analysis, Benson found no consistent demarcations—in class, occupation, or region—between the Jacksonians and their rivals. Local and cultural issues such as temperance and religion were far more inﬂuential in shaping political life than the national ﬁ nancial questions analyzed by previous historians. In the 1980s Sean Wilentz and other scholars began to resurrect some of Schlesinger’s argument about the importance of class to Jacksonianism. In Chants Democratic (1984), Wilentz maintained that Jacksonian politics could not be properly understood without reference to the changing national economy. Artisans watched in horror as new manufacturing techniques put many of them out of business and replaced their craftsmanship with the unskilled hands of wage laborers. To these anxious small producers, America’s infatuation with impersonal institutions and large-scale employers threatened the very existence of a republic founded on the principle that its citizens were virtuously self-sufﬁcient. Thus Jackson’s attack on the Bank of the United States symbolized the antagonism these individuals felt toward the emergent capitalist economy and earned him their strong allegiance. The scholarly cycle came full circle with the publication of Charles Sellers’s The Market Revolution: Jacksonian America, 1815–1846 (1991). In many ways this ambitious synthesis offered an updated version of Schlesinger’s argument about class conﬂ ict. American democracy and free-market capitalism, according to Sellers, were not twins, born from the common parentage of freedom and opportunity, reared in the wide-open young Republic, and mutually supporting each other ever since. Rather, Sellers suggested, they were really adversaries, with Jacksonians inventing mass democracy in order to hold capitalist expansion



Chapter 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 1824–1840


 in check. Like Schlesinger’s thesis, Sellers’s interpretation provoked a storm of controversy. To supporters, the concept of the “market revolution” (see p. 335) provided a useful organizing tool for seeing social, cultural, political, and economic transformations as interdependent. To critics, Sellers’s book suffered from a hopelessly romantic view of preindustrial society and a pronounced ideological bias. In an era of tightly contested elections, they argued, no party could expect to prevail by appealing exclusively to rich or poor along class lines. Published a decade and a half later, What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815–1848 (2007), Daniel Walker Howe’s equally sweeping synthesis of the period, took a different view of the relationship between commercialization and democracy. Howe argued that mass political participation did not emerge as an antidote to the crushing yoke of industrialization; rather, it evolved out of the same forces that drove market expansion—the “twin revolutions” in transportation and communications. Advances in

 printing and the proliferation of newspapers were prerequisites for mass political parties, which depended on the largely partisan press to publicize their platforms and rally support. The turnpikes, canals, and railroads that delivered local goods to increasingly distant markets also carried ministers to far-off parishes, setting off a religious revival that helped transform the political landscape. New churches, representing a multiplicity of faiths, created venues for debates on issues ranging from abolition to women’s rights, issues that were intentionally kept out of the halls of Congress. Howe argued that Jackson’s supporters did not object to new commercial opportunities. At the same time that Jackson worked to dismantle the Bank of the United States, he also funded transportation projects in the territories to promote westward expansion and built harbors along the eastern seaboard to fuel international trade. According to Howe, Jacksonians welcomed commerce, but they disagreed with Whigs over the direction of development, favoring a more agrarian, atomized economy.

To Learn More
Glenn C. Altschuler and Stuart M. Blumin, Rude Republic:
Americans and Their Politics in the Nineteenth Century
(2001)
Andrew Burstein, The Passions of Andrew Jackson (2003)
Daniel Feller, The Jacksonian Promise, 1815–1840 (1995)
Michael D. Green, The Politics of Indian Removal (1982)
Daniel Walker Howe, What Hath God Wrought: The
Transformation of America, 1815–1848 (2007)
Charles Hudson, The Southeastern Indians(1976)
Louis P. Masur, 1831: Year of Eclipse (2001)
Edward Pessen, Jacksonian America: Society, Personality,
 and Politics (rev. ed., 1978)

Merrill D. Peterson, The Great Triumvirate: Webster, Clay,
 and Calhoun (1987) Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America (1835, 1840) Harry L. Watson, Liberty and Power: The Politics of Jacksonian America (1990)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Forging the
National Economy





1790–1860
 The progress of invention is really a threat [to monarchy]. Whenever I see a railroad I look for a republic. R ALPH WALDO EMERSON, 1866

T


 he new nation bounded into the nineteenth century in a burst of movement. New Eng land Yankees, Pennsylvania farmers, and southern yeomen all pushed west in search of land and opportunity, soon to be joined by vast numbers of immigrants from Europe, who also made their way to the country’s fast-growing cities. And not only people were in motion. Newly invented machinery boomed the cultivation of crops and the manufacture of goods, while workers labored ever longer, harder, and faster. Better roads, faster steamboats, farther-reaching canals, and ribboning rail road lines all moved people, foodstuffs, raw materials, and manufactured goods from coast to coast, from Gulf to Great Lakes, and from American shores to the wider world. The prodigious momentum of burgeoning American capitalism gave rise to an economy that was remarkably dynamic, market driven, continentally scaled, and internationally consequential.

The Westward Movement
 The rise of Andrew Jackson, the ﬁrst president from beyond the Appalachian Mountains, exempliﬁed the inexorable westward march of the American people. The West, with its raw frontier, was the most typically American part of America. As Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote in 1844, “Europe stretches to the Alleghenies; America lies beyond.” The Republic was young, and so were the people— as late as 1850, half of Americans were under the age of thirty. They were also restless and energetic, seemingly always on the move, and always westward. One “tall tale” of the frontier described chickens that voluntarily crossed their legs every spring, waiting to be tied for the annual move west. By 1840 the “demographic center” of the American population map had crossed the

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


90°W


80°W


 WIS.







N.H.


200 Mi.


 MASS.

N.Y.


Boston


 MICH.

CONN. R.I.

Chicago
Mississippi R.


MO. N

St. Louis


Pittsburgh


 IND.





Louisville


 KY.







W. VA.
 VA.



 ARK.

 TENN.



N.J.


39°N


 DEL.



Cincinnati






 OHIO

Indianapolis


New York


 PA.

Cleveland


 ILL.

 ME.

 VT.

200 Km.


N.C.


Washington, D.C.


 MD.

AT L A N T I C OCEAN
Center of population, by decade 
Map 14.1 Westward Movement of Center of Population, 1790–2000
 The triangles indicate the points at which a map of the United States weighted for the population of the country in a given year would balance. Note the remarkable equilibrium of the north-south pull from 1790 to about 1940, and the strong spurt west and south thereafter. The 1980 census revealed that the nation’s center of population had at last moved west of the Mississippi River. The map also shows the slowing of the westward movement between 1890 and 1940—the period of heaviest immigration from Europe, which ended up mainly in East Coast cities. Interactive Map

 Alleghenies (see Map 14.1). By the eve of the Civil War, it had marched across the Ohio River. Legend portrays an army of muscular axmen triumphantly carving civilization out of the western woods. But in reality life was downright grim for most pioneer families. Poorly fed, ill-clad, housed in hastily erected shanties (Abraham Lincoln’s family lived for a year in a three-sided lean-to made of brush and sticks), they were perpetual victims of disease, depression, and premature death. Above all, unbearable loneliness haunted them, especially the women, who were often cut off from human contact, even their neighbors, for days or even weeks, while conﬁ ned to the cramped orbit of a dark cabin in a secluded clearing. Breakdowns and even madness were all too frequently the “opportunities” that the frontier offered to pioneer women. Frontier life could be tough and crude for men as well. No-holds-barred wrestling, which permitted such niceties as the biting off of noses and the gouging out of eyes, was a popular entertainment. Pioneering Americans, marooned by geography, were often ill-informed, superstitious, provincial, and ﬁercely individualistic. Ralph Waldo Emerson’s popular lecture-essay “Self-

 Reliance” struck a deeply responsive chord. Popular literature of the period abounded with portraits of unique, isolated ﬁgures like James Fenimore Cooper’s heroic Natty Bumppo and Herman Melville’s restless Captain Ahab—just as Jacksonian politics aimed to emancipate the lone-wolf, enterprising businessperson. Yet even in this heyday of “rugged individualism,” there were important exceptions. Pioneers, in tasks clearly beyond their own individual resources, would call upon their neighbors for logrolling and barn raising and upon their governments for help in building internal improvements.

Shaping the Western
Landscape
 The westward movement also molded the physical environment. Pioneers in a hurry often exhausted the land in the tobacco regions and then pushed on, leaving behind barren and rain-gutted ﬁelds. In the Kentucky bottomlands, cane as high as ﬁ fteen feet posed a seemingly insurmountable barrier to the plow. But set-

Opening the West




 Major Dougherty’s Indian Agency on the Missouri River, by Karl Bodmer, 1833 The Swiss-born and Paris-trained artist Karl Bodmer painted this scene while accompanying German Prince Maximilian on his expedition across the American West. From St. Louis, the party traveled up the Missouri River by steamboat under the protection of John Jacob Astor’s Fur Company. Bodmer painted scenes along the way, especially of Indians and their surroundings. Trading posts like this one both promoted commerce with the Indians and served settlers heading west.

 tlers soon discovered that when the cane was burned off, European bluegrass thrived in the charred caneﬁelds. “Kentucky bluegrass,” as it was somewhat inaccurately called, made ideal pasture for livestock—and lured thousands more American homesteaders into Kentucky. The American West felt the pressure of civilization in additional ways. By the 1820s American fur-trappers were setting their traplines all over the vast Rocky Mountain region. The fur-trapping empire was based on the rendezvous (French for “meeting”) system. Each summer, traders ventured from St. Louis to a verdant Rocky Mountain valley, made camp, and waited for the trappers and Indians to arrive with beaver pelts to swap for manufactured goods from the East. This trade thrived for some two decades; by the time beaver hats had gone out of fashion, the hapless beaver had all but disappeared from the region. Trade in buffalo robes also ﬂourished, leading eventually to the virtually total annihilation of the massive bison herds that once

 blanketed the western prairies. Still farther west, on the Cal i fornia coast, other traders bought up prodigious quantities of sea-otter pelts, driv ing the oncebountiful otters to the point of near-extinction. Some historians have called this aggressive and often heedless exploitation of the West’s natural bounty ecological imperialism. Yet Americans in this period also revered nature and admired its beauty. Indeed the spirit of nationalism fed a growing belief in the uniqueness of the American wilderness. Searching for the United States’ distinctive characteristics in this nation-conscious age, many observers found the wild, unspoiled character of the land, especially in the West, to be among the young nation’s deﬁ ning attributes. Other countries might have impressive mountains or sparkling rivers, but none had the pristine, natural beauty of America, unspoiled by human hands and reminiscent of a time before the dawn of civilization. This attitude toward wilderness became in time a kind of national mystique,



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 inspiring literature and painting, and eventually kindling a powerful conservation movement. George Catlin, a painter and student of Native American life, was among the ﬁ rst Americans to advocate the preservation of nature as a deliberate national policy. In 1832 he observed Sioux Indians in South Dakota recklessly slaughtering buffalo in order to trade the animals’ tongues for the white man’s whiskey. Appalled at this spectacle and fearing for the preservation of Indians and buffalo alike, Catlin proposed the creation of a national park. His idea later bore fruit with the creation of a national park system—the world’s ﬁ rst—beginning with Yellowstone Park in 1872.

The March of the Millions
 As the American people moved west, they also multiplied at an amazing rate. By midcentury the population was still doubling approximately every twenty-ﬁve years, as in fertile colonial days (see Figure 14.1).

 By 1860 the original thirteen states had more than doubled in number: thirty-three stars graced the American ﬂag. The United States was the fourth most populous nation in the western world, exceeded only by three European countries—Russia, France, and Austria. Urban growth continued explosively. In 1790 there had been only two American cities that could boast populations of twenty thousand or more souls: Philadelphia and New York. By 1860 there were forty-three, and about three hundred other places claimed over ﬁve thousand inhabitants apiece. New York was the metropolis; New Orleans, the “Queen of the South”; and Chicago, the swaggering lord of the Midwest, destined to be “hog butcher for the world.” Such overrapid urbanization unfortunately brought undesirable by-products. It intensiﬁed the problems of smelly slums, feeble street lighting, inadequate policing, impure water, foul sewage, ravenous rats, and improper garbage disposal. Hogs poked their scavenging snouts about many city streets as late as the 1840s. Bos-

 Mouth of the Platte River, 900 Miles Above St. Louis, by George Catlin, 1832 Catlin’s West unfolded as a vast panorama of ﬂat, open space peopled only by the Indians shown in the foreground. Catlin believed that capturing the unending prairie on canvas required a new aesthetic, the sublime horizontal, and an acceptance of a landscape bereft of man-built features, without “anything rising above the horizon, which was a perfect straight line around us, like that of the blue and boundless ocean.”

 An Inﬂux of Immigrants

Year


White


Nonwhite


Percent
Nonwhite


Total
Population




3,172,000


757,000




3,929,000




4,306,000


1,002,000




5,308,000




5,862,000


1,378,000




7,240,000




7,867,000


1,772,000




9,639,000




10,537,000


2,329,000




12,866,000




14,196,000


2,874,000




17,070,000




19,553,000


3,639,000




23,192,000




26,922,000


4,521,000




31,443,000
10M


20M


30M




40M


Figure 14.1 Population Increase, Including Slaves and Indians, 1790–
 1860 Increasing European immigration and the closing of the slave trade gradually “whitened” the population beginning in 1820. This trend continued into the early twentieth century.

 ton in 1823 pioneered a sewer system, and New York in 1842 abandoned wells and cisterns for a piped-in water supply. The city thus unknowingly eliminated the breeding places of many disease-carrying mosquitoes. A continuing high birthrate accounted for most of the increase in population, but by the 1840s the tides of immigration were adding hundreds of thousands more. Before this decade immigrants had been ﬂowing in at a rate of sixty thousand a year, but suddenly the inﬂux tripled in the 1840s and then quadrupled in the 1850s. During these two feverish decades, over a million and

 a half Irish, and nearly as many Germans, swarmed down the gangplanks (see Table 14.1). Why did they come? The immigrants came partly because Europe seemed to be running out of room. The population of the Old World more than doubled in the nineteenth century, and Europe began to generate a seething pool of apparently “surplus” people. They were displaced and footloose in their homelands before they felt the tug of the American magnet. Indeed at least as many people moved about within Europe as crossed the Atlantic. America beneﬁted from these people-churning changes

 Cleveland in 1853, by J. W. Hill Looking west across the Cuyahoga River down Superior Street, the painting features the warehouses, canals, and industries that fed the city’s prosperity and supported its thirty thousand residents.



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


Table 14.1 Irish and German Immigration by
Decade, 1830–1900
Years


Irish


Germans


1831–1840
1841–1850
1851–1860
1861–1870
1871–1880
1881–1890
1891–1900


207,381
780,719
914,119
435,778
436,871
655,482
388,416


152,454
434,626
951,667
787,468
718,182
1,452,970
505,152


3,818,766


5,000,519


 total

 but did not set them all in motion. Nor was the United States the sole beneﬁciary of the process: of the nearly 60 million people who abandoned Europe in the century after 1840, about 25 million went somewhere other than the United States. Yet America still beckoned most strongly to the struggling masses of Europe, and the majority of migrants headed for the “land of freedom and opportunity.” There was freedom from aristocratic caste and state church; there was abundant opportunity to secure broad acres and better one’s condition. Much-read letters sent home by immigrants—“America letters”— often described in glowing terms the richer life: low

A
German immigrant living in Cincinnati wrote to his relatives in Germany in 1847, 
“


 A lot of people come over here who were well off in Germany but were enticed to leave their fatherland by boastful and imprudent letters from their friends or children and thought they could become rich in America. This deceives a lot of people, since what can they do here? If they stay in the city they can only earn their bread at hard and unaccustomed labor. If they want to live in the country and don’t have enough money to buy a piece of land that is cleared and has a house then they have to settle in the wild bush and have to work very hard to clear the trees out of the way so they can sow and plant. But people who are healthy, strong, and hardworking do pretty well.

”


 taxes, no compulsory military ser vice, and “three meat meals a day.” The introduction of transoceanic steamships also meant that the immigrants could come speedily and cheaply. The journey to the United States now took ten or twelve days, instead of ten or twelve weeks on a sailing vessel, and was much less expensive than a voyage to more distant immigrant destinations such as Australia, Argentina, or South Africa. The United States also received a far more diverse array of immigrants than did other countries. Argentina, for example, had a higher proportion of immigrants relative to its population than did the United States, but they came mostly from Spain and Italy. In contrast, the United States beckoned to immigrants from dozens of different nations.

The Emerald Isle Moves West
 Ireland, already groaning under the heavy hand of British overlords, was prostrated in the mid-1840s. A terrible rot attacked the potato crop, on which the people had become dangerously dependent, and about onefourth of them were swept away by disease and hunger. Starved bodies were found dead by the roadsides with grass in their mouths. All told, about 2 million perished. Tens of thousands of destitute souls, ﬂeeing the Land of Famine for the Land of Plenty, ﬂocked to America in the “Black Forties.” Ireland’s great export has been population, and the Irish take their place beside the Jews and the Africans as a dispersed people (see “Makers of America: The Irish,” pp. 312–313). These uprooted newcomers—too poor to move west and buy the necessary land, livestock, and equipment—swarmed into the larger seaboard cities. Noteworthy were Boston and particularly New York, which rapidly became the largest Irish city in the world. Before many decades had passed, more people of Hibernian blood lived in America than on the “ould sod” of Erin’s Isle. The luckless Irish immigrants received no redcarpet treatment. Forced to live in squalor, they were rudely crammed into the already vile slums. They were scorned by the older American stock, especially “proper” Protestant Bostonians, who regarded the scruffy Catholic arrivals as a social menace. Barely literate “Biddies” (Bridgets) took jobs as kitchen maids. Broad-shouldered “Paddies” (Patricks) were pushed into pick-and-shovel drudgery on canals and railroads, where thousands left their bones as victims of disease

Irish and German Immigration


 Margaret McCarthy, a recent arrival to America, captured much of the complexity of the immigrant experience in a letter she wrote from New York to her family in Ireland in 1850:

“


 This is a good place and a good country, but there is one thing that’s ruining this place. The emigrants have not money enough to take them to the interior of the country, which obliges them to remain here in New York and the like places, which causes the less demand for labor and also the great reduction in wages. For this reason I would advise no one to come to America that would not have some money after landing here that would enable them to go west in case they would get no work to do here.

”


 and accidental explosions. It was said that an Irishman lay buried under every railroad tie. As wage-depressing competitors for jobs, the Irish were hated by native workers. “No Irish Need Apply” was a sign commonly posted at factory gates and was often abbreviated to NINA. The Irish, for similar reasons, ﬁercely resented the blacks, with whom they shared society’s basement. Race riots between black and Irish dockworkers ﬂared up in several port cities, and the Irish were generally cool to the abolitionist cause. The friendless “famine Irish” were forced to fend for themselves. The Ancient Order of Hibernians, a semisecret society founded in Ireland to ﬁght rapacious landlords, served in America as a benevolent society, aiding the downtrodden. It also helped to spawn the Molly Maguires, a shadowy Irish miners’ union that rocked the Pennsylvania coal districts in the 1860s and 1870s. The Irish tended to remain in low-skill occupations but gradually improved their lot, usually by acquiring modest amounts of property. The education of children was cut short as families struggled to save money to purchase a home. But for humble Irish peasants, cruelly cast out of their homeland, property ownership counted as a grand “success.” Politics quickly attracted these gregarious Gaelic newcomers. They soon began to gain control of powerful city machines, notably New York’s Tammany Hall, and reaped the patronage rewards. Before long, beguilingly brogued Irishmen dominated police departments



 An early-nineteenth-century French traveler recorded his impressions of America and Ireland:

“


 I have seen the Indian in his forests and the Negro in his chains, and thought, as I contemplated their pitiable condition, that I saw the very extreme of human wretchedness; but I did not then know the condition of unfortunate Ireland.

”


 in many big cities, where they now drove the “Paddy wagons” that had once carted their brawling forebears to jail. American politicians made haste to cultivate the Irish vote, especially in the politically potent state of New York. Irish hatred of the British lost nothing in the transatlantic transplanting. As the Irish Americans increased in number—nearly 2 million arrived between 1830 and 1860—ofﬁcials in Washington glimpsed political gold in those emerald green hills. Politicians often found it politically proﬁtable to ﬁ re verbal volleys at London—a process vulgarly known as “twisting the British lion’s tail.”

The German Forty-Eighters
 The inﬂux of refugees from Germany between 1830 and 1860 was hardly less spectacular than that from Ireland. During these troubled years, over a million and a half Germans stepped onto American soil (see “Makers of America: The Germans,” pp. 316–317). The bulk of them were uprooted farmers, displaced by crop failures and other hardships. But a strong sprinkling were liberal political refugees. Saddened by the collapse of the democratic revolutions of 1848, they had decided to leave the autocratic fatherland and ﬂee to America—the brightest hope of democracy. Germany’s loss was America’s gain. Zealous German liberals like the lanky and public-spirited Carl Schurz, a relentless foe of slavery and public corruption, contributed richly to the elevation of American political life. Unlike the Irish, many of the Germanic newcomers possessed a modest amount of material goods. Most of them pushed out to the lush lands of the Middle West, notably Wisconsin, where they settled and established model farms. Like the Irish, they formed an inﬂuential

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
Irish The The Great AfricanAmerican Migration 
F


 or a generation, from 1793 to 1815, war raged across Europe. Ruinous as it was on the Continent, the ﬁghting brought unprecedented prosperity to the longsuffering landsmen of Ireland, groaning since the twelfth century under the yoke of Eng lish rule. For as Europe’s ﬁelds lay fallow, irrigated only by the blood of its farmers, Ireland fed the hungry armies that ravened for food as well as territory. Irish farmers planted every available acre, interspersing the lowly potato amongst their ﬁelds of grain. With prices for food products ever mounting, tenant farmers reaped a temporary respite from their perpetual struggle to remain on the land. Most landlords were satisﬁed by the prosperity and so relaxed their pressure on tenants; others, stymied by the absence of British police forces that had been stripped of manpower to ﬁght in Europe, had little means to enforce eviction notices. But the peace that brought solace to battle-scarred Europe changed all this. After 1815 war-inﬂated wheat prices plummeted by half. Hard-pressed landlords resolved to leave vast ﬁelds unplanted. Assisted now by a strengthened British constabulary, they vowed to sweep the pesky peasants from the retired acreage. Many of those forced to leave sought work in Eng land; some went to America. Then in 1845 a blight that ravaged the potato crop sounded the ﬁ nal knell for the Irish peasantry. The resultant famine spread desolation throughout the island. In ﬁve years more than a million people died. Another million sailed for America. Of the emigrants, most were young and literate in Eng lish, the majority under thirty-ﬁve years old. Families typically pooled money to send strong young sons to the New World, where they would earn wages to pay the fares for those who waited at home. These “famine Irish” mostly remained in the port cities of the Northeast, abandoning the farmer’s life for the dingy congestion of the urban metropolis. The disembarking Irish were poorly prepared for urban life. They found progress up the economic ladder painfully slow. Their work as domestic servants or construction laborers was dull and arduous, and mortality rates were astoundingly high. Escape from the potato famine hardly guaranteed a long life to an Irish American; a gray-bearded Irishman was a rare sight in nineteenth-century America. Most of the new arrivals



 toiled as day laborers. A fortunate few owned boardinghouses or saloons, where their dispirited countrymen sought solace in the bottle. For Irish-born women, opportunities were still scarcer; they worked mainly as domestic servants. But it was their Roman Catholicism, more even than their penury or their perceived fondness for alcohol, that earned the Irish the distrust and resentment of their native-born, Protestant American neighbors. The cornerstone of social and religious life for Irish immigrants was the parish. Worries about safeguard-

Outward Bound, the Quay at Dublin, 1854
 Thousands ﬂed famine in Ireland by coming to America in the 1840s and 1850s.

 St. Patrick’s Day Parade in America, Union Square, ca. 1870 This painting shows a St. Patrick’s Day parade in New York City. The religious festival was celebrated with greater fanfare in America than in Ireland itself, as Irish immigrants used it to boost their ethnic solidarity and assert their distinctive identity in their adopted country.

 ing their children’s faith inspired the construction of parish schools, ﬁ nanced by the pennies of struggling working-class Irish parents. If Ireland’s green ﬁelds scarcely equipped her sons and daughters for the scrap and scramble of economic life in America’s cities, life in the Old Country nevertheless had instilled in them an aptitude for politics. Irish Catholic resistance against centuries of Eng lish Anglican domination had instructed many Old Country Irish in the ways of mass politics. That political experience readied them for the boss system of the political “machines” in America’s northeastern cities. The boss’s local representatives met each newcomer

 soon after he landed in America. Asking only for votes, the machine supplied coal in wintertime, food, and help with the law. Irish voters soon became a bulwark of the Democratic party, reliably supporting the party of Jefferson and Jackson in cities like New York and Boston. As Irish Americans like New York’s “Honest John” Kelly themselves became bosses, white-collar jobs in government ser vice opened up to the Irish. They became building inspectors, aldermen, and even policemen—an astonishing irony for a people driven from their homeland by the nightsticks and bayonets of the British police.





Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 body of voters whom American politicians shamelessly wooed. But the Germans were less potent politically because their strength was more widely scattered. The hand of Germans in shaping American life was widely felt in still other ways. The Conestoga wagon, the Kentucky riﬂe, and the Christmas tree were all German contributions to American culture. Germans had ﬂed from the militarism and wars of Europe and consequently came to be a bulwark of isolationist sentiment in the upper Mississippi Valley. Better educated on the whole than the stump-grubbing Americans, they warmly supported public schools, including their Kindergarten (children’s garden). They likewise did much to stimulate art and music. As outspoken champions of freedom, they became relentless enemies of slavery during the fevered years before the Civil War. Yet the Germans—often dubbed “damned Dutchmen”—were occasionally regarded with suspicion by their old-stock American neighbors. Seeking to preserve their language and culture, they sometimes settled in compact “colonies” and kept aloof from the surrounding community. Accustomed to the “Continental Sunday” and uncurbed by Puritan tradition, they made merry on the Sabbath and drank huge quantities of an amber beverage called bier (beer), which dates its real popularity in America to their coming. Their Old World drinking habits, like those of the Irish, spurred advocates of temperance in the use of alcohol to redouble their reform efforts.

 Flare-ups of Antiforeignism The invasion by this so-called immigrant “rabble” in the 1840s and 1850s inﬂamed the prejudices of American “nativists.” They feared that these foreign hordes would outbreed, outvote, and overwhelm the old “native” stock. Not only did the newcomers take jobs from “native” Americans, but the bulk of the displaced Irish were Roman Catholics, as were a substantial minority of the Germans. The Church of Rome was still widely regarded by many old-line Americans as a “foreign” church; convents were commonly referred to as “popish brothels.” Roman Catholics were now on the move. Seeking to protect their children from Protestant indoctrination in the public schools, they began in the 1840s to construct an entirely separate Catholic educational system—an enormously expensive undertaking for a poor immigrant community, but one that revealed the strength of its religious commitment. They had formed

 Crooked Voting A bitter “nativist” cartoon charging Irish and German immigrants with “stealing” elections.

 a negligible minority during colonial days, and their numbers had increased gradually. But with the enormous inﬂux of the Irish and Germans in the 1840s and 1850s, the Catholics became a powerful religious group. In 1840 they had ranked ﬁ fth, behind the Baptists, Methodists, Presbyterians, and Congregationalists. By 1850, with some 1.8 million communicants, they had bounded into ﬁ rst place—a position they have never lost. Older-stock Americans were alarmed by these mounting ﬁgures. They professed to believe that in due time the “alien riffraff” would “establish” the Catholic Church at the expense of Protestantism and would introduce “popish idols.” The noisier American “nativists” rallied for political action. In 1849 they formed the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, which soon developed into the formidable American party, more commonly known as the Know-Nothing party, a name derived from its secretiveness. “Nativists” agitated for rigid restrictions on immigration and naturalization and for laws authorizing the deportation of alien paupers. They also promoted a lurid literature of exposure, much of it pure ﬁction. The authors, sometimes posing as escaped nuns, described the shocking sins they imagined the cloisters concealed, including the secret burial of babies. One of these sensational books—Maria Monk’s Awful Disclosures (1836)—sold over 300,000 copies.

Dawn of the Industrial Revolution


 Even uglier was occasional mass violence. As early as 1834, a Catholic convent near Boston was burned by a howling mob, and in ensuing years a few scattered attacks fell upon Catholic schools and churches. The most frightful ﬂare-up occurred during 1844 in Philadelphia, where the Irish Catholics fought back against the threats of the “nativists.” The City of Brotherly Love did not quiet down until two Catholic churches had been burned and some thirteen citizens had been killed and ﬁ fty wounded in several days of ﬁghting. These outbursts of intolerance, though infrequent and generally localized in the larger cities, remain an unfortunate blot on the record of America’s treatment of minority groups. Immigrants were undeniably making America a more pluralistic society—one of the most ethnically and racially varied in the history of the world—and perhaps it was small wonder that cultural clashes would occur. Why, in fact, were such episodes not even more frequent and more violent? Part of the answer lies in the robustness of the American economy. The vigorous growth of the economy in these years both attracted immigrants in the ﬁ rst place and ensured that, once arrived, they could claim their share of American wealth without jeopardizing the wealth of others. Their hands and brains, in fact, helped fuel economic expansion. Immigrants and the American economy, in short, needed one another. Without the newcomers, a preponderantly agricultural United States might well have been condemned to watch in envy as the Industrial Revolution swept through nineteenth-century Europe.

Creeping Mechanization
 A group of gifted British inventors, beginning about 1750, perfected a series of machines for the mass production of textiles. This harnessing of steam multiplied the power of human muscles some ten-thousandfold and ushered in the modern factory system—and with it, the so-called Industrial Revolution. It was accompanied by a no-less-spectacular transformation in agricultural production and in the methods of transportation and communication. The factory system gradually spread from Britain— “the world’s workshop”—to other lands. It took a generation or so to reach western Europe, and then the United States. Why was the youthful American Republic, eventually to become an industrial giant, so slow to embrace the machine?



 Strong antiforeignism was reﬂected in the platform of the American (Know-Nothing) party in 1856:

“


 Americans must rule America; and to this end, native-born citizens should be selected for all state, federal, or municipal ofﬁces of government employment, in preference to naturalized citizens.

”


 For one thing, land was cheap in America. Landstarved descendants of land-starved peasants were not going to coop themselves up in smelly factories when they might till their own acres in God’s fresh air and sunlight. Labor was therefore generally scarce, and enough nimble hands to operate the machines were hard to ﬁ nd—until immigrants began to pour ashore in the 1840s. Money for capital investment, moreover, was not plentiful in pioneering America, whose Industrial Revolution, like that of many a developing country in later centuries, awaited an inﬂux of foreign capital— which in turn awaited assurance of secure property rights, sufﬁcient infrastructure, an adequate work force, and political stability. Without such capital, raw materials lay undeveloped, undiscovered, or unsuspected. The Republic was one day to become the world’s leading coal producer, but much of the coal burned in colonial times was imported all the way from Britain. The young country also had difﬁculty producing goods of high enough quality and cheap enough cost to compete with mass-produced European products. Long-established British factories in particular provided cutthroat competition. Their superiority was attested by the fact that a few unscrupulous Yankee manufacturers, out to make a dishonest dollar, stamped their own products with fake Eng lish trademarks. The British also enjoyed a monopoly of the textile machinery, whose secrets they were anxious to hide from foreign competitors. Parliament enacted laws, in harmony with the mercantile system, forbidding the export of the machines or the emigration of mechanics able to reproduce them. Although a number of small manufacturing enterprises existed in the early Republic, the future industrial colossus was still snoring. Not until well past the middle of the nineteenth century did the value of the output of the factories exceed that of the farms.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
The Germans The Great AfricanAmerican Migration 
B


 etween 1820 and 1920, a sea of Germans lapped at America’s shores and seeped into its very heartland. Their numbers surpassed those of any other immigrant group, even the proliﬁc and often-detested Irish. Yet this Germanic ﬂood, unlike its Gaelic equivalent, stirred little panic in the hearts of native-born Americans because the Germans largely stayed to themselves, far from the madding crowds and nativist fears of northeastern cities. They prospered with astonishing ease, building towns in Wisconsin, agricultural colonies in Texas, and religious communities in Pennsylvania. They added a decidedly Germanic ﬂavor to the heady brew of reform and community building that so animated antebellum America. These “Germans” actually hailed from many different Old World lands, because there was no uniﬁed nation of Germany until 1871, when the ruthless and crafty Prussian Otto von Bismarck assembled the German state out of a mosaic of independent principali-

 “Little Germany” Cincinnati’s “Over-the-Rhine” district in 1887.



 ties, kingdoms, and duchies. Until that time, “Germans” came to America as Prussians, Bavarians, Hessians, Rhinelanders, Pomeranians, and Westphalians. They arrived at different times and for many different reasons. Some, particularly the so-called Forty-Eighters— the refugees from the abortive democratic revolutions of 1848—hungered for the democracy they had failed to win in Germany. Others, particularly Jews, Pietists, and Anabaptist groups like the Amish and the Mennonites, coveted religious freedom. And they came not only to America. Like the Italians later, many Germans sought a new life in Brazil, Argentina, and Chile. But the largest number ventured into the United States. Typical German immigrants arrived with fatter purses than their Irish counterparts. Small landowners or independent artisans in their native countries, they did not have to settle for bottom-rung industrial employment in the grimy factories of the Northeast and instead could afford to push on to the open spaces of the American West. In Wisconsin these immigrants found a home away from home, a place with a climate, soil, and geography much like central Europe’s. Milwaukee, a crude frontier town before the Germans’ arrival, became the “German Athens.” It boasted a German theater, German beer gardens, a German volunteer ﬁre company, and a German-Eng lish academy. In distant Texas, German settlements like New Braunfels and Friedrichsburg ﬂourished. When the famous landscape architect and writer Frederick Law Olmsted stumbled upon these prairie outposts of Teutonic culture in 1857, he was shocked to be “welcomed by a ﬁgure in a blue ﬂannel shirt and pendant beard, quoting Tacitus.” These German colonies in the frontier Southwest mixed high European elegance with Texas ruggedness. Olmsted described a visit to a German household where the settlers drank “coffee in tin cups upon Dresden saucers” and sat upon “barrels for seats, to hear a Beethoven symphony on the grand piano.” These Germanic colonizers of America’s heartland also formed religious communities, none more distinctive or durable than the Amish settlements of Pennsylvania, Indiana, and Ohio. The Amish took their name from their founder and leader, the Swiss Anabaptist Jacob Amman. Like other Anabaptist groups, they

 shunned extravagance and reserved baptism for adults, repudiating the tradition of infant baptism practiced by most Europeans. For this they were persecuted, even imprisoned, in Europe. Seeking escape from their oppression, some ﬁve hundred Amish ventured to Pennsylvania in the 1700s, followed by three thousand in the years from 1815 to 1865. In America they formed enduring religious communities— isolated enclaves where they could shield themselves from the corruption and the conveniences of the modern world. To this day the German-speaking Amish still travel in horse-drawn carriages and farm without heavy machinery. No electric lights brighten the darkness that nightly envelops their tidy farmhouses; no ringing telephones punctuate the rev-

Marriage Plate, Bucks County,
Pennsylvania, ca. 1806 The Germans
 who settled the “Pennsylvania Dutch” communities in the eighteenth century preserved ancient traditions of handicraft and art, as exempliﬁed by this whimsical “marriage plate” made by a sixteen-year-old potter named John Leidy. The inscription reads, “Rather would I single live than the wife the breeches [trousers] give.”

 erent tranquility of their mealtime prayer; no ornaments relieve the austere simplicity of their black garments. The Amish remain a stalwart, traditional community in a rootless, turbulent society, a living testament to the religious ferment and social experiments of the antebellum era.

 Amish Country, Near Lancaster, Pennsylvania For more than two centuries, the Amish people have preserved their traditional way of life.





Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


Whitney Ends the Fiber Famine
 Samuel Slater has been acclaimed the “Father of the Factory System” in America, and seldom can the paternity of a movement more properly be ascribed to one person. A skilled British mechanic of twenty-one, he was attracted by bounties being offered to British workers familiar with the textile machines. After memorizing the plans for the machinery, he escaped in disguise to America, where he won the backing of Moses Brown, a Quaker capitalist in Rhode Island. Laboriously reconstructing the essential apparatus with the aid of a blacksmith and a carpenter, he put into operation in 1791 the ﬁ rst efﬁcient American machinery for spinning cotton thread. The ravenous mechanism was now ready, but where was the cotton ﬁber? Handpicking one pound of lint from three pounds of seed was a full day’s work for one slave, and this process was so expensive that American-made cotton cloth was relatively rare. Another mechanical genius, Massachusetts-born Eli Whitney, now made his mark. After graduating from Yale, he journeyed to Georgia to serve as a private tutor while preparing for the law. There he was told that the poverty of the South would be relieved if someone

 could only invent a workable device for separating the seed from the short-staple cotton ﬁber. Within ten days, in 1793, he built a crude machine called the cotton gin (short for engine) that was ﬁ fty times more effective than the handpicking process. Few machines have ever wrought so wondrous a change. The gin affected not only the history of America but that of the world. Almost overnight the raising of cotton became highly proﬁtable, and the South was tied hand and foot to the throne of King Cotton. Human bondage had been dying out, but the insatiable demand for cotton reriveted the chains on the limbs of the downtrodden southern blacks. South and North both prospered. Slave-driv ing planters cleared more acres for cotton, pushing the Cotton Kingdom westward off the depleted tidewater plains, over the Piedmont, and onto the black loam bottomlands of Alabama and Mississippi. Humming gins poured out avalanches of snowy ﬁber for the spindles of the Yankee machines, though for decades to come the mills of Britain bought the lion’s share of southern cotton. The American phase of the Industrial Revolution, which ﬁ rst blossomed in cotton textiles, was well on its way. Factories at ﬁ rst ﬂourished most actively in New Eng land, though they branched out into the more populous areas of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. The South, increasingly wedded to the production of

 Francis Cabot Lowell’s Mill, Waltham, Massachusetts, 1826 and Cotton Industry; Carding, Drawing, and Roving; Engraving, 1835 Built in 1814, Lowell’s mill (left) was a marvel of manufacturing efﬁciency. It combined all phases of production, including spinning and weaving, under one roof. The mill’s labor force (right) was composed primarily of young women from the local farming communities.

The Upsurge of Manufacturing




A
Pioneer Woman Batting Cotton Making cotton “batts” from the raw ﬁber was the ﬁrst step in making “homespun” cloth. Mechanical looms and sewing machines would soon make this traditional women’s work obsolete. 
 cotton, could boast of comparatively little manufacturing. Its capital was bound up in slaves; its local consumers for the most part were desperately poor. New Eng land was singularly favored as an industrial center for several reasons. Its narrow belt of stony soil made farming difﬁcult and hence made manufacturing attractive. A relatively dense population provided labor and accessible markets, shipping brought in capital, and snug seaports made easy the import of raw materials and the export of the ﬁ nished products. Finally, the rapid rivers—notably the Merrimack in Massachusetts—provided abundant water power to turn the cogs of the machines. By 1860 more than 400 million pounds of southern cotton poured annually into the gaping maws of over a thousand mills, mostly in New Eng land.

Marvels in Manufacturing
 America’s factories spread slowly until about 1807, when there began the fateful sequence of the embargo, nonintercourse, and the War of 1812. Stern necessity dictated the manufacture of substitutes for normal imports, while the stoppage of European commerce was temporarily ruinous to Yankee shipping. Both capital and labor were driven from the waves onto the factory ﬂoor, as New Eng land, in the striking phrase of John

 Eli Whitney’s Cotton Gin Whitney’s revolutionary little machine was artfully simple. Wire hooks on a rotating cylinder pulled the cotton ﬁbers through slots too narrow to allow seeds to pass. A set of brushes then removed the ﬁbers. Whitney’s gin made possible the mass cultivation of upland, or short-staple, cotton, which was unproﬁtable to raise when its seeds had to be laboriously removed by hand. Before Whitney’s invention, cotton growing had been largely conﬁned to long-staple, or Sea Island cotton, which could grow only in hot, humid coastal areas. With the advent of the cotton gin, short-staple cotton cultivation spread across the southern interior— and so did slavery.



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


Daguerreotype of a Young
 Girl with a Sample of Cotton Dress Fabric, ca. 1850s The growing availability of inexpensive American-made calico, or printed cotton cloth, vastly expanded women’s wardrobes.

 Randolph, exchanged the trident for the distaff. Generous bounties were offered by local authorities for homegrown goods, “Buy American” and “Wear American” became popular slogans, and patriotism prompted the wearing of baggy homespun garments. President Madison donned some at his inauguration, where he was said to have been a walking argument for the better processing of native wool. But the manufacturing boomlet broke abruptly with the peace of Ghent in 1815. British competitors unloaded their dammed-up surpluses at ruinously low prices, and American newspapers were so full of British advertisements for goods on credit that little space was left for news. In one Rhode Island district, all 150 mills were forced to close their doors, except the original Slater plant. Responding to pained outcries, Congress provided some relief when it passed the mildly protective Tariff of 1816—among the earliest political contests to control the shape of the economy. As the factory system ﬂourished, it embraced numerous other industries in addition to textiles. Prominent among them was the manufacturing of ﬁ rearms, and here the wizardly Eli Whitney again appeared with an extraordinary contribution. Frustrated in his earlier efforts to monopolize the cotton gin, he turned to the mass production of muskets for the U.S. Army. Up to this time, each part of a ﬁ rearm had been hand-tooled, and if the trigger of one broke, the trigger of another might or might not ﬁt. About 1798 Whitney seized upon the idea of having machines make each part, so that all

 the triggers, for example, would be as much alike as the successive imprints of a copperplate engraving. Journeying to Washington, he reportedly dismantled ten of his new muskets in the presence of skeptical ofﬁcials, scrambled the parts together, and then quickly reassembled ten different muskets. The principle of interchangeable parts was widely adopted by 1850. It gave rise to a host of other innovations, including Samuel Colt’s fabled revolver, and it ultimately became the basis of modern massproduction, assembly-line methods. It gave to the North the vast industrial plant that ensured military preponderance over the South. Ironically, the Yankee Eli Whitney, by perfecting the cotton gin, gave slavery a

 Said Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865) in a lecture in 1859,

“


 The patent system secured to the inventor for a limited time exclusive use of his invention, and thereby added the fuel of interest to the ﬁre of genius in the discovery and production of new and useful things.

”


 Ten years earlier Lincoln had received patent no. 6469 for a scheme to buoy steamboats over shoals. It was never practically applied, but he remains the only president ever to have secured a patent.

Inventions and Industrialization


 renewed lease on life, and perhaps made the Civil War more likely. At the same time, by popularizing the principle of interchangeable parts, Whitney helped factories to ﬂourish in the North, giving the Union a decided advantage when that showdown came. The sewing machine, invented by Elias Howe in 1846 and perfected by Isaac Singer, gave another strong boost to northern industrialization. The sewing machine became the foundation of the ready-made clothing industry, which took root about the time of the Civil War. It drove many a seamstress from the shelter of the private home to the factory, where, like a human robot, she tended the clattering mechanisms. Each momentous new invention seemed to stimulate still more imaginative inventions. For the decade ending in 1800, only 306 patents were registered in Washington; but the decade ending in 1860 saw the amazing total of 28,000. Yet in 1838 the clerk of the Pat-

 Manufacturing Guns, ca. 1860 A rare daguerreotype showing an operator working the Lock Frame Jigging Machine in Samuel Colt’s state-of-the-art Hartford, Connecticut, gun factory.



 ent Ofﬁce resigned in despair, complaining that all worthwhile inventions had been discovered. Technical advances spurred equally important changes in the form and legal status of business organizations. The principle of limited liability aided the concentration of capital by permitting the individual investor, in cases of legal claims or bankruptcy, to risk no more than his own share of the corporation’s stock. Fifteen Boston families formed one of the earliest investment capital companies, the Boston Associates. They eventually dominated the textile, railroad, insurance, and banking business of Massachusetts. Laws of “free incorporation,” ﬁ rst passed in New York in 1848, meant that businessmen could create corporations without applying for individual charters from the legislature. Samuel F. B. Morse’s telegraph was among the inventions that tightened the sinews of an increasingly complex business world. A distinguished but povertystricken portrait painter, Morse ﬁ nally secured from Congress, to the accompaniment of the usual jeers, an appropriation of $30,000 to support his experiment with “talking wires.” In 1844 Morse strung a wire forty miles from Washington to Baltimore and tapped out the historic message, “What hath God wrought?” The invention brought fame and fortune to Morse, as he put distantly separated people in almost instant communication with one another. By the eve of the Civil War, a web of singing wires spanned nearly the entire continent, revolutionizing news gathering, diplomacy, and ﬁ nance. Thus, by the time of the fabled London World’s Fair in 1851, known as the Great Exhibition, American products were prominent among the world’s commercial wonders. Fairgoers crowded into the dazzling Crystal Palace to see McCormick’s reaper, Morse’s telegraph, Colt’s ﬁ rearms, and Charles Goodyear’s vulcanized rubber goods.

Workers and “Wage Slaves”
 One ugly outgrowth of the factory system was an increasingly acute labor problem. Hitherto manufacturing had been done in the home, or in the small shop, where the master craftsman and his apprentice, rubbing elbows at the same bench, could maintain an intimate and friendly relationship. The Industrial Revolution submerged this personal association in the impersonal ownership of stuffy factories in “spindle cities.” Around these, like tumors, the slumlike hovels of the “wage slaves” tended to cluster.



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


The Master Craftsman Dignity and
 pride of workmanship are evident in this tidy wheelwright’s shop. Smallscale, intimate workplaces like this were eventually overshadowed by the mass-production, impersonal factory system, as in the illustrations on pages 325 and 327.

 Clearly the early factory system did not shower its beneﬁts evenly on all. While many owners grew plump, workingpeople often wasted away at their workbenches. Hours were long, wages were low, and meals were skimpy and hastily gulped. Workers were forced to toil in unsanitary buildings that were poorly ventilated, lighted, and heated. They were forbidden by law to form labor unions to raise wages, for such cooperative activity was regarded as a criminal conspiracy. Not surprisingly, only twenty-four recorded strikes occurred before 1835. Especially vulnerable to exploitation were child workers. In 1820 a signiﬁcant portion of the nation’s industrial toilers were children under ten years of age. Victims of factory labor, many children were mentally blighted, emotionally starved, physically stunted, and even brutally whipped in special “whipping rooms.” In Samuel Slater’s mill of 1791, the ﬁrst machine tenders were seven boys and two girls, all under twelve years of age. By contrast, the lot of most adult wage workers improved markedly in the 1820s and 1830s. In the full ﬂush of Jacksonian democracy, many of the states granted the laboring man the vote. Brandishing the ballot, he ﬁ rst strove to lighten his burden through

 workingmen’s parties. Eventually many workers gave their loyalty to the Democratic party of Andrew Jackson, whose attack on the Bank of the United States and against all forms of “privilege” reﬂected their anxieties about the emerging capitalist economy. In addition to such goals as the ten-hour day, higher wages, and tolerable working conditions, they demanded public educa-

 One observer in 1836 published a newspaper account of conditions in some of the New England factories:

“


 The operatives work thirteen hours a day in the summer time, and from daylight to dark in the winter. At half past four in the morning the factory bell rings, and at ﬁve the girls must be in the mills. . . . So fatigued . . . are numbers of girls that they go to bed soon after receiving their evening meal, and endeavor by a comparatively long sleep to resuscitate their weakened frames for the toil of the coming day.

”


Examining the Evidence




The Invention of the Sewing Machine
 istorians of technology examine not only the documentary evidence of plans and patents left behind by inventors, but surviving machines themselves. In 1845 Elias Howe, a twenty-six-yearold apprentice to a Boston watchmaker, invented a sewing machine that could make 250 stitches a minute, ﬁve times what the swiftest hand-sewer could do. A year later Howe received a patent for his invention, but because the hand-cranked machine could only stitch straight seams for a short distance before requiring resetting, it had limited commercial appeal. Howe took his sewing machine abroad, where he worked with British manufacturers to improve it, and then returned to America and combined his patent with those of other inventors, including Isaac M. Singer. Hundreds of thousands of sewing machines

H


 were produced beginning in the 1850s for the commercial manufacture of clothing, books, shoes, and many other products and also for home use. The sewing machine became the ﬁ rst widely advertised consumer product. Due to its high cost, the Singer company introduced an installment buying plan, which helped place sewing machines in most middleclass households. Why was the sewing machine able to ﬁ nd eager customers in commercial workshops and home sewing rooms alike? How might the sewing machine have changed other aspects of American life, such as work patterns, clothing styles, and retail selling? What other advances in technology might have been necessary for the invention of the sewing machine?



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 tion for their children and an end to the inhuman practice of imprisonment for debt. Employers, abhorring the rise of the “rabble” in politics, fought the ten-hour day to the last ditch. They argued that reduced hours would lessen production, increase costs, and demoralize the workers. Laborers would have so much leisure time that the Devil would lead them into mischief. A red-letter gain was at length registered for labor in 1840, when President Van Buren established the ten-hour day for federal employees on public works. In ensuing years a number of states gradually fell into line by reducing the hours of working people. Day laborers at last learned that their strongest weapon was to lay down their tools, even at the risk of prosecution under the law. Dozens of strikes erupted in the 1830s and 1840s, most of them for higher wages, some for the ten-hour day, and a few for such unusual goals as the right to smoke on the job. The workers usually lost more strikes than they won, for the employer could resort to such tactics as the importing of strikebreakers—often derisively called “scabs” or “rats,” and often fresh off the boat from the Old World. Labor long raised its voice against the unrestricted inpouring of wage-depressing and union-busting immigrant workers. Labor’s early and painful efforts at orga ni zation had netted some 300,000 trade unionists by 1830. But such encouraging gains were dashed on the rocks of hard times following the severe depression of 1837. As unemployment spread, union membership shriveled. Yet toilers won a promising legal victory in 1842. The supreme court of Massachusetts ruled in the case of

 Violence broke out along the New York waterfront in 1836 when laborers striking for higher wages attacked “scabs.” Philip Hone’s (1780–1851) diary records,

“


 The Mayor, who acts with vigour and ﬁrmness, ordered out the troops, who are now on duty with loaded arms. . . . These measures have restored order for the present, but I fear the elements of disorder are at work; the bands of Irish and other foreigners, instigated by the mischievous councils of the tradesunion and other combinations of discontented men, are acquiring strength and importance which will ere long be difﬁcult to quell.

”


 Commonwealth v. Hunt that labor unions were not illegal conspiracies, provided that their methods were “honorable and peaceful.” This enlightened decision did not legalize the strike overnight throughout the country, but it was a signiﬁcant signpost of the times. Trade unions still had a rocky row to hoe, stretching ahead for about a century, before they could meet management on relatively even terms.

Women and the Economy
 Women were also sucked into the clanging mechanism of factory production. Farm women and girls had an important place in the preindustrial economy, spinning yarn, weaving cloth, and making candles, soap, butter, and cheese. New factories such as the textile mills of New Eng land undermined these activities, cranking out manufactured goods much faster than they could be made by hand at home. Yet these same factories offered employment to the very young women whose work they were displacing. Factory jobs promised greater economic independence for women, as well as the means to buy the manufactured products of the new market economy. “Factory girls” typically toiled six days a week, earning a pittance for dreary, limb-numbing, earsplitting stints of twelve or thirteen hours—“from dark to dark.” The Boston Associates, nonetheless, proudly pointed to their textile mill at Lowell, Massachusetts, as a showplace factory. The workers were virtually all New England farm girls, carefully supervised on and off the job by watchful matrons. Escorted regularly to church from their company boardinghouses and forbidden to form unions, they had few opportunities to share dissatisfactions over their grueling working conditions. But factory jobs of any kind were still unusual for women. Opportunities for women to be economically self-supporting were scarce and consisted mainly of nursing, domestic ser vice, and especially teaching. The dedicated Catharine Beecher, unmarried daughter of a famous preacher and sister of Harriet Beecher Stowe, tirelessly urged women to enter the teaching profession. She eventually succeeded beyond her dreams, as men left teaching for other lines of work and schoolteaching became a thoroughly “feminized” occupation. Other work “opportunities” for women beckoned in household ser vice. Perhaps one white family in ten employed servants at midcentury, most of whom were poor white, immigrant, or black women. About 10 percent of white women were working for pay outside their own homes in 1850, and estimates are that about



Working Women


 The Sewing Floor of Thompson’s Skirt Factory, 1859 The burgeoning textile industry provided employment for thousands of women in antebellum America—and also produced the clothes that women wore. This view of a New York City shop in 1859 illustrates the transition from hand-sewing (on the right) to machine-stitching (on the left). It also vividly illustrates the contrast between the kinds of “sewing circles” in which women had traditionally sought companionship to the impersonal mass-production line of the modern manufacturing plant. Note especially the stark exhortation on the wall: “Strive to Excel.” Contrast this impersonal scene with the workplace depicted on page 322.

 20 percent of all women had been employed at some time prior to marriage The vast majority of workingwomen were single. Upon marriage they left their paying jobs and took up their new work (without wages) as wives and mothers. In the home they were enshrined in a cult of domesticity, a widespread cultural creed that gloriﬁed the customary functions of the homemaker. From their pedestal, married women commanded immense moral power, and they increasingly made decisions that altered the character of the family itself. Women’s changing roles and the spreading Industrial Revolution brought some important changes in the life of the nineteenth-century home—the traditional “women’s sphere.” Love, not parental “arrangement,” more and more frequently determined the choice of a spouse—yet parents often retained the power of veto. Families thus became more closely knit and affectionate, providing the emotional refuge that made the threatening impersonality of big-city industrialism tolerable to many people.

 Most striking, families grew smaller. The average household had nearly six members at the end of the eighteenth century but fewer than ﬁve members a century later. The “fertility rate,” or number of births

 A woman worker in the Lowell mills wrote a friend in 1844,

“


 You wish to know minutely of our hours of labor. We go in [to the mill] at ﬁve o’clock; at seven we come out to breakfast; at half-past seven we return to our work, and stay until half-past twelve. At one, or quarter-past one four months in the year, we return to our work, and stay until seven at night. Then the evening is all our own, which is more than some laboring girls can say, who think nothing is more tedious than a factory life.

”




Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 among women ages fourteen to forty-ﬁve, dropped sharply among white women in the years after the Revolution and, in the course of the nineteenth century as a whole, fell by half. Birth control was still a taboo topic for polite conversation, and contraceptive technology was primitive, but clearly some form of family limitation was being practiced quietly and effectively in countless families, rural and urban alike. Women undoubtedly played a large part—perhaps the leading part—in decisions to have fewer children. This newly assertive role for women has been called “domestic feminism,” because it signiﬁed the growing power and

 independence of women, even while they remained wrapped in the “cult of domesticity.” Smaller families, in turn, meant child-centered families, since where children are fewer, parents can lavish more care on them individually. European visitors to the United States in the nineteenth century often complained about the unruly behavior of American “brats.” But though American parents may have increasingly spared the rod, they did not spoil their children. Lessons were enforced by punishments other than the hickory stick. When the daughter of novelist Harriet Beecher Stowe neglected to do her homework, her mother sent her from the dinner table and gave her “only bread and water in her own apartment.” What Europeans saw as permissiveness was in reality the consequence of an emerging new idea of child-rearing, in which the child’s will was not to be simply broken, but rather shaped. In the little republic of the family, as in the Republic at large, good citizens were raised not to be meekly obedient to authority, but to be independent individuals who could make their own decisions on the basis of internalized moral standards. Thus the outlines of the “modern” family were clear by midcentury: it was small, affectionate, and child-centered, and it provided a special arena for the talents of women. Feminists of a later day might decry the stiﬂ ing at mosphere of the nineteenth-century home, but to many women of the time, it seemed a big step upward from the conditions of grinding toil—often alongside men in the ﬁelds—in which their mothers had lived.

Western Farmers Reap
 a Revolution in the Fields

 York, Pennsylvania, Family with Negro Servant, ca. 1828 This portrait of a Pennsylvania family presents a somewhat idealized picture of the home as the woman’s sphere. The wife and mother sits at the center of activity; while she reads to the children, the husband and father stands by somewhat superﬂuously. A black servant cares for an infant in the corner, suggesting the prosperous status of this household.

 As smoke-belching factories altered the eastern skyline, ﬂourishing farms were changing the face of the West. The trans-Allegheny region—especially the OhioIndiana-Illinois tier—was fast becoming the nation’s breadbasket. Before long it would become a granary to the world. Pioneer families ﬁ rst hacked a clearing out of the forest and then planted their painfully furrowed ﬁelds to corn. The yellow grain was amazingly versatile. It could be fed to hogs (“corn on the hoof”) or distilled into liquor (“corn in the bottle”). Both these products could be transported more easily than the bulky grain itself, and they became the early western farmer’s staple market items. So many hogs were butchered, traded,

Advances in Agriculture




 McCormick’s Miraculous Reaper This illustration shows an early test of Cyrus McCormick’s mechanical reaper near his home in Virginia in 1831. The reaper was best suited, however, to the horizonless ﬁelds of wheat on the rolling prairies of the Midwest. By the 1850s McCormick’s Chicago factory was cranking out more than twenty thousand reapers a year for midwestern farmers.

 or shipped at Cincinnati that the city was known as the “Porkopolis” of the West. Most western produce was at ﬁrst ﬂoated down the Ohio-Mississippi River system, to feed the lusty appetite of the booming Cotton Kingdom. But western farmers were as hungry for proﬁts as southern slaves and

 planters were for food. These tillers, spurred on by the easy availability of seemingly boundless acres, sought ways to bring more and more land into cultivation. Ingenious inventors came to their aid. One of the ﬁ rst obstacles that frustrated the farmers was the thickly matted soil of the West, which snagged and

 McCormick Reaper Works, 1850s Contrast this scene of “mass production” with the workplace depicted in “The Master Craftsman” on page 322.



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 snapped fragile wooden plows. John Deere of Illinois in 1837 ﬁ nally produced a steel plow that broke the stubborn soil. Sharp and effective, it was also light enough to be pulled by horses, rather than oxen. In the 1830s Virginia-born Cyrus McCormick contributed the most wondrous contraption of all: a mechanical mower-reaper. The clattering cogs of McCormick’s horse-drawn machine were to the western farmers what the cotton gin was to the southern planters. Seated on his red-chariot reaper, a single husbandman could do the work of ﬁve men with sickles and scythes. No other American invention cut so wide a swath as the McCormick reaper. It made ambitious capitalists out of humble plowmen, who now scrambled for more acres on which to plant more ﬁelds of billowing wheat. Subsistence farming gave way to food production for both domestic and foreign markets, as largescale (“extensive”), specialized, cash-crop agriculture came to dominate the trans-Allegheny West. With it followed mounting indebtedness, as farmers bought more land and more machinery to work it. Soon hustling farmer-businesspeople were annually harvesting a larger crop than the South—which was becoming self-sufﬁcient in food production— could devour. They began to dream of markets elsewhere—in the mushrooming factory towns of the East or across the faraway Atlantic. But they were still largely landlocked. Commerce moved north and south on the river systems. Before it could begin to move east-west in bulk, a transportation revolution would have to occur.

Highways and Steamboats
 In 1789, when the Constitution was launched, primitive methods of travel were still in use. Waterborne commerce, whether along the coast or on the rivers, was slow, uncertain, and often dangerous. Stagecoaches and wagons lurched over bone-shaking roads. Passengers would be routed out to lay nearby fence rails across muddy stretches, and occasionally horses would drown in muddy pits while wagons sank slowly out of sight. Cheap and efﬁcient carriers were imperative if raw materials were to be transported to factories and if ﬁ nished products were to be delivered to consumers. On December 3, 1803, a ﬁ rm in Providence, Rhode Island, sent a shipment of yarn to a point sixty miles away, notifying the purchaser that the consignment

 could be expected to arrive in “the course of the winter.” A promising improvement came in the 1790s, when a private company completed the Lancaster Turnpike in Pennsylvania. It was a broad, hard-surfaced highway that thrust sixty-two miles westward from Philadelphia to Lancaster. As drivers approached the tollgate, they were confronted with a barrier of sharp pikes, which were turned aside when they paid their toll. Hence the term turnpike. The Lancaster Turnpike proved to be a highly successful venture, returning as high as 15 percent annual dividends to its stockholders. It attracted a rich trade to Philadelphia and touched off a turnpikebuilding boom that lasted about twenty years. It also stimulated western development. The turnpikes beckoned to the canvas-covered Conestoga wagons, whose creakings heralded a westward advance that would know no real retreat. Western road building, always expensive, encountered many obstacles. One pesky roadblock was the noisy states’ righters, who opposed federal aid to local projects. Eastern states also protested against being bled of their populations by the westward-reaching arteries. Westerners scored a notable triumph in 1811 when the federal government started construction of the National Road, also known as the Cumberland Road, in honor of its starting point in Cumberland, Maryland. Although construction was interrupted by the War of 1812 and by states’ righters’ complaints about federal grants for internal improvements, the road reached Vandalia, Illinois, 591 miles to the west, in 1839. Later extensions brought it from Baltimore, on Chesapeake Bay, to the banks of the Mississippi River in St. Louis. The steamboat craze, which overlapped the turnpike craze, was touched off by an ambitious painterengineer named Robert Fulton. He installed a powerful steam engine in a vessel that posterity came to know as the Clermont but that a dubious public dubbed “Fulton’s Folly.” On a historic day in 1807, the quaint little ship, belching sparks from its single smokestack, churned steadily from New York City up the Hudson River toward Albany. It made the run of 150 miles in 32 hours. The success of the steamboat was sensational. People could now in large degree defy wind, wave, tide, and downstream current. Within a few years, Fulton had changed all of America’s navigable streams into two-way arteries, thereby doubling their carrying ca-

The Transportation Revolution




Mississippi in Time of Peace, by Mrs. Frances Flora Bond Palmer, 1865 By the
 mid-nineteenth century, steamboats had made the Mississippi a bustling river highway—as it remains today.

 pacity. Hitherto keelboats had been pushed up the Mississippi, with quivering poles and raucous profanity, at less than one mile an hour—a process that was prohibitively expensive. Now the steamboats could churn rapidly against the current, ultimately attaining speeds in excess of ten miles an hour. The mighty Mississippi had met its master. By 1820 there were some sixty steamboats on the Mississippi and its tributaries; by 1860 about one thousand, some of them luxurious river palaces. Keen rivalry among the swift and gaudy steamers led to memorable races. Excited passengers would urge the captain to pile on wood at the risk of bursting the boilers, which all too often exploded, with tragic results for the ﬂoating ﬁ retraps. When the steamer Sultana blew up in April 1865, the explosion killed seventeen hundred passengers, including many Union prisoners of war being repatriated to the North. Chugging steamboats played a vital role in the opening of the West and South, both of which were richly endowed with navigable rivers. Like bunches of grapes on a vine, population clustered along the banks of the broad-ﬂowing streams. Cotton growers and other

 farmers made haste to take up and turn over the nowproﬁtable soil. Not only could they ﬂoat their produce out to market, but, hardly less important, they could ship in at low cost their shoes, hardware, and other manufactured necessities.

 “Clinton’s Big Ditch” in New York A canal-cutting craze paralleled the boom in turnpikes and steamboats (see Map 14.2). A few canals had been built around falls and elsewhere in colonial days, but ambitious projects lay in the future. Resourceful New Yorkers, cut off from federal aid by states’ righters, themselves dug the Erie Canal, linking the Great Lakes with the Hudson River. They were blessed with the driv ing leadership of Governor DeWitt Clinton, whose grandiose project was scofﬁ ngly called “Clinton’s Big Ditch” or “the Governor’s Gutter.” Begun in 1817, the canal eventually ribboned 363 miles. On its completion in 1825, a garlanded canal boat glided from Buffalo, on Lake Erie, to the Hudson

 n

 he

Al
 le g

 e

Connecticut R
.


N


 ad

Raleigh
Cape
Fear R.


Wilmington


Columbia


.


 EA

 e

 ac

R.


Santee


 ad

R.


A


 l Ro

Norfolk


C


Te


Natchez


Ala
 ba ma

 ce

MISSISSIPPI
Re d R. 
 era

Chesapeake
Bay


Roan
 ok

SOUTH CAROLINA
Augusta 
Fed


Montgomery


Lynchburg


 TI

R.
 pp i

 ssi Mi ssi ra

 d

R.


Sa


R


 zT

 at V

 oa yR alle

R.
 ee

 h na

 he

 ee R. igb

N


 c at

 b Tom

Vicksburg


Richmond


Buchanan


NORTH CAROLINA

 oad

 n va

.


 MARYLAND

 e

Cumberland
Gap
Knoxville
R


 s es nn

Washington, D.C.


 VIRGINIA

Gre


 s

 sa an Ark

Florence


Delaware and
Raritan C.


 DELAWARE

Ohio C.


Staunton


 es

 le

 ad

 TENNESSEE

 vil

. Rd.


Portsmouth


Kentucky
R.


 ern

Ro


Nash


Wild


Nashville


New York City
New Brunswick


Lancaster
Tpk.


Rd


R.I.
 CONN.

 s . Trenton rbe Fo Lancaster Philadelphia Bedford NEW Hagerstown JERSEY Baltimore Chesapeake and

Ohio
R.
 and Erie io C. Oh

Boonesboro


R.
Cum
 berland

 sR

 n

 nn

Providence


Wheeling
Zanesville
Marietta
Cumberland


Lexington


 KENTUCKY

 ARKANSAS

Za


Pe


Boston
Worcester


 OC

Louisville


Pennsylvania
State
C.
System 

Ro


 ri

 e’s

 ou

Maysville


Evansville


 MISSOURI

Pittsburgh
Columbus


Cincinnati


Vandalia


Binghamton


 PENNSYLVANIA

 OHIO

Tr


 ss

Haute
St. Louis


Olean


NEW YORK

 TL

Springfield


 l Road Nationa Terre ( C u m b e r l a n d )

Franklin
R.


Ft.


Cleveland


Ohio and
Erie C.


R.


Coastal


 an

Toledo


 y

Lowell


 MASS.

 AN

 an n

 ash

Indianapolis


Springfield
Mi


 ab

Wayne
R.
 sh ba INDIANA a W

W


 ILLINOIS

Illi


R.


C.


Mi ami a nd Erie C.


4 0 °N


 s oi

 ie d Er

 r i e Erie e E

Troy


Albany
Chenango C.


Portland


N.H.


Hudson R.


Genesee
Valley
C.


Harrison


R.


La ke M
 ic

 ron

La Salle


 VT. ck ima Merr

Hu


 hig

 ke

Erie C.


Buffalo


Lak


L.
Champlain 

C.


Lockport


Chicago


 MAINE

 nc re

Oswego
C.
 ario Champlain C. O n tOswego Rome Utica La k e

Welland C.


Detroit


 w La

Carthage Black R.


 MICHIGAN

 IOWA

St
.


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

La


 WISCONSIN

70°W
R.


8 0 °W


9 0 °W


 GEORGIA

Charleston


N


Columbus


Canal


Savannah


 ALABAMA

 Navigable river

 LOUISIANA

 Major road

30 °N
New Orleans


Gulf of Mexico


St. Augustine


 FLORIDA





200 Km.


200 Mi.


Map 14.2 Major Rivers, Roads, and Canals, 1825–1860
Interactive Map


 River and on to New York harbor. There, with colorful ceremony, Governor Clinton emptied a cask of water from the lake to symbolize “the marriage of the waters.” The water from Clinton’s keg baptized the Empire State. Mule-drawn passengers and bulky freight could now be handled with thrift and dispatch, at the dizzy speed of ﬁve miles an hour. The cost of shipping a ton

 of grain from Buffalo to New York City fell from $100 to $5, and the time of transit from about twenty days to six. Ever-widening economic ripples followed the completion of the Erie Canal. The value of land along the route skyrocketed, and new cities—such as Rochester and Syracuse—blossomed. Industry in the state boomed. The new proﬁtability of farming in the Old Northwest—



Canals and Railroads


80°W


 Québec ME.

 Montréal VT.

 WIS.

R.


Chicago


N.H.


Detroit


 IND.

 ILL.

L. O
L.


 e Eri

 ntar

 io

Boston
N.Y.


 PA.

New York


Pittsburgh


N.J.


Philadelphia


 OHIO

DEL. MD.

Washington,
D.C.
Cincinnati VA.


40°N


St.
Joseph


R.
Louisville
 o i Oh KY.

N
N.C.


 TENN.

 EA

 MO.

Richmond


 OC

St. Louis


S.C.
ALA. MISS.

Charleston


 GA.

Savannah


 LA.

Jacksonville


 TEX.

Houston


 FLA.

N


 AT

New Orleans


 IC

 ARK.

30°N


MASS. R.I. CONN.

 NT

 IOWA

 MICH.

 LA

 ss ip MINN. TERR.

 ron

L.
Michi gan 

L.


 ssi

Hu


Mi


70°W


BR IT ISH NO R T H AMER ICA (CANADA)

La k e S u p e r i o r


 pi

 notably in Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, and Illinois— attracted thousands of European immigrants to the unaxed and untaxed lands now available. Flotillas of steamships soon plied the Great Lakes, connecting with canal barges at Buffalo. Interior waterside villages like Cleveland, Detroit, and Chicago exploded into mighty cities. Other profound economic and political changes followed the canal’s completion. The price of potatoes in New York City was cut in half, and many dispirited New Eng land farmers, no longer able to face the ruinous competition, abandoned their rocky holdings and went elsewhere. Some became mill hands, thus speeding the industrialization of America. Others, ﬁ nding it easy to go west over the Erie Canal, took up new farmland south of the Great Lakes, where they were joined by thousands of New Yorkers and other northerners. Still others shifted to fruit, vegetable, and dairy farming. The transformations in the Northeast—canal consequences—showed how long-established local market structures could be swamped by the emerging behemoth of a continental economy. And as American products began to ﬂow into international markets, even far-off Europeans began to feel the effects of America’s economic vitality. Before long, Italian and Polish peasants, displaced from their marginal farms by the arrival of cheap American grains, would come to America to build new lives.

G ulf of
Mexico


Railroads, 1850
 Railroads built 1850–1860 Free state or territory Slave state or territory





400 Km.


 Open to slavery



400 Mi.


The Iron Horse
 The most signiﬁcant contribution to the development of such an economy proved to be the railroad. It was fast, reliable, cheaper than canals to construct, and not frozen over in winter. Able to go almost anywhere, even through the Allegheny barrier, it deﬁed terrain and weather. The ﬁ rst railroad appeared in the United States in 1828, and new lines spread with amazing swiftness. Andrew Jackson rode to his ﬁ rst presidential inauguration in 1829 in a horse-drawn carriage. At the end of his second term, eight years later, he departed from Washington in a railway car. By 1860, on the eve of the Civil War, the United States boasted thirty thousand miles of railroad track, three-fourths of it in the rapidly industrializing North (see Map 14.3). At ﬁ rst the railroad faced strong opposition from vested interests, especially canal backers. Anxious to protect its investment in the Erie Canal, the New York legislature in 1833 prohibited the railroads from carrying freight—at least temporarily. Early railroads

Map 14.3 The Railroad Revolution Note the
 explosion of new railroad construction in the 1850s and its heavy concentration in the North. Interactive Map

 were also considered a dangerous public menace, for ﬂying sparks could set ﬁ re to nearby haystacks and houses, and appalling railway accidents could turn the wooden “miniature hells” into ﬂaming funeral pyres for their riders. Railroad pioneers had to overcome other obstacles as well. Brakes were so feeble that the engineer might miss the station twice, both arriving and backing up. Arrivals and departures were conjectural, and numerous differences in gauge (the distance between the rails) meant frequent changes of trains for passengers. In 1840 there were seven transfers between Philadelphia and Charleston. But gauges gradually



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


Poster-Timetable for Baltimore & Susquehanna
Railroad, 1840 Advertising the Baltimore &
 Susquehanna’s train schedule alone was not sufﬁcient to get passengers to their destinations. A typical trip often entailed coordinating legs on other railroad lines, stagecoaches, and canal boats.

 became standardized, better brakes did brake, safety devices were adopted, and the Pullman “sleeping palace” was introduced in 1859. America at long last was being bound together with braces of iron, later to be made of steel.

Cables, Clippers,
 and Pony Riders Other forms of transportation and communication were binding together the United States and the world. A crucial development came in 1858 when Cyrus Field, called “the greatest wire-puller in history,” orga nized a joint Anglo-American-Canadian venture to stretch a cable under the deep North Atlantic waters from Newfoundland to Ireland. Although this initial cable went

 dead after three weeks of public rejoicing, a heavier cable laid in 1866 permanently linked the American and European continents. The United States merchant marine encountered rough sailing during much of the early nineteenth century. American vessels had been repeatedly laid up by the embargo, the War of 1812, and the panics of 1819 and 1837. American naval designers made few contributions to maritime progress. A pioneer American steamer, the Savannah, crept across the Atlantic in 1819, but it used sail most of the time and was pursued for a day by a British captain who thought it aﬁ re. In the 1840s and 1850s, a golden age dawned for American shipping. Yankee naval yards, notably Donald McKay’s at Boston, began to send down the ways sleek new craft called clipper ships. Long, narrow, and majestic, they glided across the sea under towering

Communication and Trade




 Chariot of Fame Clipper Ship, by Duncan McFarlane, 1854

 masts and clouds of canvas. In a fair breeze, they could outrun any steamer. The stately clippers sacriﬁced cargo space for speed, and their captains made kill ings by hauling high-value cargoes in record times. They wrested much of the tea-carrying trade between the Far East and Britain from their slower-sailing British competitors, and they sped thousands of impatient adventurers to the goldﬁelds of Cal i fornia and Australia. But the hour of glory for the clipper was relatively brief. On the eve of the Civil War, the British had clearly won the world race for maritime ascendancy with their iron tramp steamers (“teakettles”). Although slower and less romantic than the clipper, these vessels were steadier, roomier, more reliable, and hence more proﬁtable. No story of rapid American communication would be complete without including the Far West. By 1858 horse-drawn overland stagecoaches, immortalized by Mark Twain’s Roughing It, were a familiar sight. Their

 dusty tracks stretched from the banks of the muddy Missouri River clear to Cal i fornia (see Map 14.4). Even more dramatic was the Pony Express, established in 1860 to carry mail speedily the two thousand lonely miles from St. Joseph, Missouri, to Sacramento, Cal i fornia. Daring, lightweight riders, leaping onto wiry ponies saddled at stations approximately ten miles

 As late as 1877, stagecoach passengers were advised in print,

“


 Never shoot on the road as the noise might frighten the horses. . . . Don’t point out where murders have been committed, especially if there are women passengers. . . . Expect annoyances, discomfort, and some hardships.

”


BRITIS H N ORTH A M E RIC A ( C A N A DA ) 110°W

 b

 on

R.


Ta
 o

Tr
 a

 il

 le

Gr e


 en

 il

 s

Tr
 a

 te

El Paso
 del Norte

B ut


Sa c r a m e nt o
R.


 l

Sa


 l

30°N


 ILL.

Eri


 e

Nauvoo


 as

St.
Louis


 an

Oh


 io

R.


KY. TENN.

R.


Ft. Smith


 TERRITORY rl Ove

 OHIO

 IND.

Independence


 MO.

 rail dT

ARK. MISS.

 TEXAS

 ALA.

 GA.

 LA.

San
Antonio


Gr


Galveston


Gulf of Mexico


 an

N


 MICH.

UNITED STATES

 INDIAN

 ld fie

Rio


Chihuahua


 r

 on Trail

Trail


R.


 ron

 i Tra

Gila


Hu


Red


 r field Ov erland

WIS. R.

 s

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

 pi

 an

 on arr il Cim g Tra Taos n i s s Cro Santa Fe Fe Trail Ft. Smith–Sa nta

 ip

IOWA
Morm 
Ft. Leavenworth


S a n t a Fe


 e

.


 iss

L.


 t P la t e R.

KANSAS
Tr TERRITORY 
 or La k

 iss

 uri R.

A rk


 tte

 l

 INS

 NS

Bu


IC IF N C A PA CE O

San
Diego


 s

 nT rai

 so

Ft.
Kearney


 PLA

R.


 go

E AT


Salt Lake City


 GREAT e BASIN ng CALIF. sA R. o to L do ra ke o l a o C tL ish d Span Ol

Los Angeles


Ft. Laramie
N.
P la
O
 tte re R.

TA I

Santa Barbara


Trail


 UN

 r Great Salt lifo Lake Ca Express Overland Mail y n Po

UTAH
Sacramento (Sutter’s Fort) TERRITORY 
 rmon

 is

Mo


M


R.


 ra il aT

 MO

San
Francisco


 ni

Ft. Hall


 GR

40°N


Y


 ke

Superi


 MINN.

NEBRASKA TERRITORY

 CK

Sna


Ft.
Lane


La k e


UNORG. TERR.

M


 RO

 il

R.


 a Tr

OREGON TERRITORY

R.


.
 ri R Mis s ou . e n R wsto Yello

 TER

Or eg


 ON

Portland


Milk


IN GT

 n

Colum


WAS H

Ft.
Vancouver


Astoria


80°W


90°W


100°W


La k e M i c h i g a


120°W
 ia R.

 de

 MEXICO





400 Km.


400 Mi.


 Map 14.4 Main Routes West Before the Civil War Mark Twain described his stagecoach trip to California in the 1860s in Roughing It: “We began to get into country, now, threaded here and there with little streams. These had high, steep banks on each side, and every time we ﬂew down one bank and scrambled up the other, our party inside got mixed somewhat. First we would all be down in a pile at the forward end of the stage, . . . and in a second we would shoot to the other end, and stand on our heads. And . . . as the dust rose from the tumult, we would all sneeze in chorus, and the majority of us would grumble, and probably say some hasty thing, like: ‘Take your elbow out of my ribs!—can’t you quit crowding?’ ”

 apart, could make the trip in an amazing ten days. These unarmed horsemen galloped on, summer or winter, day or night, through dust or snow, past Indians and bandits. The speeding postmen missed only one trip, though the whole enterprise lost money heavily and folded after only eighteen legend-leaving months. Just as the clippers had succumbed to steam, so were the express riders unhorsed by Samuel Morse’s clacking keys, which began tapping messages to Cal ifornia in 1861. The swift ships and the ﬂeet ponies ush334

Interactive Map


 ered out a dying technology of wind and muscle. In the future, machines would be in the saddle.

The Transport Web
Binds the Union
 More than anything else, the desire of the East to tap the West stimulated the transportation revolution. Until about 1830 the produce of the western region

Forging a Continental Economy


 drained southward to the cotton belt or to the heapedup wharves of New Orleans. The steamboat vastly aided the reverse ﬂow of ﬁ nished goods up the watery western arteries and helped bind West and South together. But the truly revolutionary changes in commerce and communication came in the three decades before the Civil War, as canals and railroad tracks radiated out from the East, across the Alleghenies and into the blossoming heartland. The ditch-diggers and tie-layers were attempting nothing less than a conquest of nature itself. They would offset the “natural” ﬂow of trade on the interior rivers by laying down an impressive grid of “internal improvements.” The builders succeeded beyond their wildest dreams. The Mississippi was increasingly robbed of its trafﬁc, as goods moved eastward on chugging trains, pufﬁ ng lake boats, and mule-tugged canal barges. Governor Clinton had in effect picked up the mighty Father of Waters and ﬂung it over the Alleghenies, forcing it to empty into the sea at New York City. By the 1840s the city of Buffalo handled more western produce than New Orleans. Between 1836 and 1860, grain shipments through Buffalo increased a staggering sixtyfold. New York City became the seaboard queen of the nation, a gigantic port through which a vast hinterland poured its wealth and to which it daily paid economic tribute. By the eve of the Civil War, a truly continental economy had emerged. The principle of division of labor, which spelled productivity and proﬁts in the factory, applied on a national scale as well. Each region now specialized in a particular type of economic activity. The South raised cotton for export to New England and Britain; the West grew grain and livestock to feed factory workers in the East and in Europe; the East made machines and textiles for the South and the West. The economic pattern thus woven had fateful political and military implications. Many southerners regarded the Mississippi as a silver chain that naturally linked together the upper valley states and the Cotton Kingdom. They would become convinced, as secession approached in the 1850s, that some or all of these states would have to secede with them or be strangled. But they would overlook the man-made links that increasingly bound the upper Mississippi Valley to the East in intimate commercial union. Southern rebels would have to ﬁght not only Northern armies but the tight bonds of an interdependent continental economy. Economically, the two northerly sections were Siamese twins.



The Market Revolution
 No less revolutionary than the political upheavals of the antebellum era was the market revolution that transformed a subsistence economy of scattered farms and tiny workshops into a national network of industry and commerce (see Map 14.5). Greater mechanization and a more robust market-oriented economy raised new legal questions about winners and losers. How tightly should patents protect inventions? Should the government regulate monopolies? Who should own the technologies and networks that made America hum in the 1840s and 1850s? Under Chief Justice John Marshall, the U.S. Supreme Court vigilantly protected contract rights by requiring state governments to grant irrevocable charters. Monopolies easily developed, as new companies found it difﬁcult to break into markets. After Marshall died in 1835, the climate began to change and the winds of economic opportunity blew more freely. When the proprietors of Boston’s Charles River Bridge (which included Harvard College) sued the owners of the new Warren Bridge for unconstitutionally violating their original contract, the new chief justice, Roger B. Taney, sided with the newcomers and argued that “the rights of the community” outweighed any exclusive corporate rights. Taney’s decision opened new entrepreneurial channels and encouraged greater competition. So did the passage of more liberal state incorporation laws beginning in the 1830s, granting investors the beneﬁt of “limited liability” if their companies were sued or went bankrupt. As more and more Americans—mill workers as well as farmhands, women as well as men—linked their economic fate to the burgeoning market economy, the self-sufﬁcient households of colonial days were transformed. Most families had once raised all their own food, spun their own wool, and bartered with their neighbors for the few necessities they could not make themselves. In growing numbers they now scattered to work for wages in the mills, or they planted just a few crops for sale at market and used the money to buy goods made by strangers in far-off factories. As storebought fabric, candles, and soap replaced homemade products, a quiet revolution occurred in the household division of labor and status. Traditional women’s work was rendered superﬂuous and devalued. The home itself, once a center of economic production in which all family members cooperated, grew into a place of refuge from the world of work, a refuge that became increasingly the special and separate sphere of women.



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 Revolutionary advances in manufacturing and transportation brought increased prosperity to all Americans, but they also widened the gulf between the rich and the poor. Millionaires had been rare in the early days of the Republic, but by the eve of the Civil War, several specimens of colossal ﬁ nancial success were strutting across the national stage. Spectacular was the case of fur-trader and real estate speculator John Jacob Astor, who left an estate of $30 million on his death in 1848. Cities bred the greatest extremes of economic inequality. Unskilled workers, then as always, fared worst. Many of them came to make up a ﬂoating mass of “drifters,” buffeted from town to town by the shifting

 prospects for menial jobs. These wandering workers accounted at various times for up to half the population of the brawling industrial centers. Although their numbers were large, they left little behind them but the homely fruits of their transient labor. Largely unstoried and unsung, they are among the forgotten men and women of American history. Many myths about “social mobility” grew up over the buried memories of these unfortunate day laborers. Mobility did exist in industrializing America—but not in the proportions that legend often portrays. Ragsto-riches success stories were relatively few. Yet America, with its dynamic society and wideopen spaces, undoubtedly provided more “opportu-

 Map 14.5 Industry and Agriculture, 1860 Still a nation of farmers on the eve of the Civil War, Americans had nevertheless made an impressive start on their own Industrial Revolution, especially in the Northeast.

 First oil well, 1859 Titusville, PA.

 WIS.

N.H.Manchester
 MASS.

O


 KY.

 TENN.

N.C.


Knoxville


Memphis


 ARK.

S.C.
 MISS.

Atlanta


N
EA OC

 ALA.

30°N


Richmond


 GA.

Industry
F
Flour and meal 
Natchez


 TEXAS

Mobile


 LA.

New Orleans


Houston


 FLA.

 MEXICO

G ul f of M ex i c o


Agriculture
 Corn and wheat Dairy cattle and hay Tobacco and hemp

 Range and ranch cattle

Cotton


 Orchard fruits

 Rice and sugar cane

 Lumber and timber





400 Km.


400 Mi.


N


N


Albuquerque


T


Louisville


F


A


INDIAN TERRITORY

DEL. MD.

F VA.


L


Los Angeles


OH. I

St. Louis


 MO.

N.J.


Baltimore


T


IC PAC I F

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

Kansas
City


R.I.


I
TPhiladelphia 
Cincinnati


 ILL.

KANSAS TERRITORY

F


Cleveland Pittsburgh PA.


 IND.

New Bedford


T S
Providence  New YorkCONN. Newark

 IC

UTAH TERRITORY

Boston


 ST

Detroit


Chicago
Des Moines


T
S I


A


Salt Lake City


N.Y.


 MICH.

Milwaukee


 IOWA

Albany
Troy


Rochester


F


40°N


 CALIF.

 VT.

T


Minneapolis


 ME.

N


 MINN.

.
NEBRASKA TERRITORY

San
Francisco


70°W


A


UNORG. TERR.

 TERR

OREGON TERRITORY

80°W


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

G
N
 TO

Portland


 IN

90°W


E


WAS H

100°W


C


110°W


Interactive Map


T
Textiles S
Shoes and clothing I Iron and steelworks Mining 
 Principal manufacturing cities’ product value

 Silver and gold

 T over $100,000,000

Iron ore


  over $10,000,000

 Bituminous coal

 Other major city

Copper


 Anthracite coal

Social Mobility in Industrializing America




 Chicago, 1857 A modest village of a few hundred souls in the 1830s, Chicago was a teeming metropolis just two decades later—one of the fastest-growing cities in the world. A food and livestock processing center and transportation hub, it served the vast farming area of the western plains, a remarkably productive agricultural region and breadbasket to the world.

 nity” than did the contemporary countries of the Old World—which is why millions of immigrants packed their bags and headed for New World shores. Moreover, a rising tide lifts all boats, and the improvement in overall standards of living was real. Wages for unskilled workers in a labor-hungry America rose about 1 percent a year from 1820 to 1860. This general prosperity helped defuse the potential class conﬂ ict that might otherwise have exploded—and that did explode in many European countries.

 The famed English writer Charles Dickens (1812– 1870) traveled to the United States in 1842 and was sharply critical of certain aspects of the national character:

“


 Another prominent feature is the love of ‘smart’ dealing which gilds over many a swindle and gross breach of trust; many a defalcation [embezzlement], public and private; and enables many a knave to hold his head up with the best, who well deserves a halter.

”


 Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.



Chapter 14 Forging the National Economy, 1790–1860


 CHRONOLOGY ca. 1843–

 Era of clipper ships



 Samuel Morse invents telegraph Anti-Catholic riot in Philadelphia

 Whitney develops interchangeable parts for muskets

1845–


 Potato famine in Ireland



 Robert Fulton’s ﬁ rst steamboat Embargo spurs American manufacturing



 Elias Howe invents sewing machine



 Cumberland Road construction begins



 Erie Canal construction begins

 First general incorporation laws in New York Democratic revolutions collapse in Germany



 Erie Canal completed



 American, or Know-Nothing, party formed



 First railroad in United States



 London World’s Fair

 1830s

 Cyrus McCormick invents mechanical mower-reaper



 Cumberland Road completed





 Cyrus Field lays ﬁ rst transatlantic cable

 Anti-Catholic riot in Boston





 Pony Express established

 John Deere develops steel plow





 First transcontinental telegraph

 President Van Buren establishes ten-hour day for federal employees



 Permanent transatlantic cable established

 ca. 1750

 Industrial Revolution begins in Britain



 Samuel Slater builds ﬁ rst U.S. textile factory



 Eli Whitney invents cotton gin





 Massachusetts declares labor unions legal in Commonwealth v. Hunt

KEY TERMS
“Self-Reliance” (306) rendezvous (307) ecological imperialism (307) Ancient Order of Hibernians (311) Molly Maguires (311) Tammany Hall (311) Know-Nothing party (314) Awful Disclosures (314) cotton gin (318) Patent Ofﬁce (321) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
limited liability (321) Commonwealth v. Hunt (324) cult of domesticity (325) McCormick reaper (328) turnpike (328) Erie Canal (329) clipper ships (332) Pony Express (333) transportation revolution (334) market revolution (335) 
Samuel Slater
Eli Whitney
Elias Howe
Isaac Singer
Samuel F. B. Morse
John Deere
 Cyrus McCormick

Robert Fulton
 DeWitt Clinton Cyrus Field John Jacob Astor

To Learn More




To Learn More
John Bodnar, The Transplanted: A History of Immigrants in
Urban America (1985)
Christopher Clark, Social Change in America: From the
Revolution Through the Civil War (2006)
Thomas C. Cochran, Frontiers of Change: Early
Industrialism in America (1981)
 Hasia Diner, Erin’s Daughters in America (1983) David H. Hounshell, From the American System to Mass Production, 1800–1932: The Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States (1984) Paul E. Johnson, Sam Patch, the Famous Jumper (2003) Bruce Levine, The Spirit of 1848: German Immigrants, Labor Conﬂict, and the Coming of the Civil War (1992)

David Nye, Consuming Power: A Social History of American
Energies (1998)
Michael O’Malley, Keeping Watch: A History of American
Time (1996)
 Carol Sheriff, The Artiﬁcial River (1996) Augustus J. Veenendaal, American Railroads in the Nineteenth Century (2003) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Ferment of
Reform and Culture





1790–1860
 We [Americans] will walk on our own feet; we will work with our own hands; we will speak our own minds. R ALPH WALDO EMERSON, “THE AMERICAN SCHOLAR,” 1837

A


 third revolution accompanied the reformation of American politics and the transformation of the American economy in the mid-nineteenth century. It consisted of a diffuse yet deeply felt commitment to improve the character of ordinary Americans, to make them more upstanding, God-fearing, and literate. Some high-minded souls were disillusioned by the roughand-tumble realities of democratic politics. Others, notably women, were excluded from the political game altogether. As the young Republic grew, increasing numbers of Americans poured their considerable energies into an astonishing variety of religious revivals and reform movements. Reform campaigns of all types ﬂourished in sometimes bewildering abundance. There was not “a reading man” who was without some scheme for a new utopia in his “waistcoat pocket,” claimed Ralph Waldo Emerson. Reformers promoted better public schools and rights for women, as well as miracle medicines, polygamy, celibacy, rule by prophets, and guidance by

 spirits. Societies were formed against alcohol, tobacco, profanity, and the transit of mail on the Sabbath. Eventually overshadowing all other reforms was the great crusade against slavery (see pp. 383–384). Many reformers drew their crusading zeal from religion. Beginning in the late 1790s and boiling over into the early nineteenth century, the Second Great Awakening swept through America’s Protestant churches, transforming the place of religion in American life and sending a generation of believers out on their missions to perfect the world.

Reviving Religion
 Church attendance was still a regular ritual for about three-fourths of the 23 million Americans in 1850. Alexis de Tocqueville declared that there was “no country in the world where the Christian religion retains a greater inﬂuence over the souls of men than in Amer-

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Religious Revivalism


 ica.” Yet the religion of these years was not the old-time religion of colonial days. The austere Calvinist rigor had long been seeping out of the American churches. The rationalist ideas of the French Revolutionary era had done much to soften the older orthodoxy. Thomas Paine’s widely circulated book The Age of Reason (1794) had shockingly declared that all churches were “set up to terrify and enslave mankind, and monopolize power and proﬁt.” American anticlericalism was seldom that virulent, but many of the Founding Fathers, including Jefferson and Franklin, embraced the liberal doctrines of Deism that Paine promoted. Deists relied on reason rather than revelation, on science rather than the Bible. They rejected the concept of original sin and denied Christ’s divinity. Yet Deists believed in a Supreme Being who had created a knowable universe and endowed human beings with a capacity for moral behavior. Deism helped to inspire an important spinoff from the severe Puritanism of the past—the Unitarian faith, which began to gather momentum in New Eng land at the end of the eighteenth century. Unitarians held that God existed in only one person (hence unitarian), and not in the orthodox Trinity (God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit). Although denying the deity of Jesus, Unitarians stressed the essential goodness of human nature rather than its vileness; they proclaimed their belief in free will and the possibility of salvation through good works; they pictured God not



 as a stern Creator but as a loving Father. Embraced by many leading thinkers (including Ralph Waldo Emerson), the Unitarian movement appealed mostly to intellectuals whose rationalism and optimism contrasted sharply with the hellﬁ re doctrines of Calvinism, especially predestination and human depravity. A boiling reaction against the growing liberalism in religion set in about 1800. A fresh wave of roaring revivals, beginning on the southern frontier but soon rolling even into the cities of the Northeast, sent the Second Great Awakening surging across the land. Sweeping up even more people than the First Great Awakening (see p. 98) almost a century earlier, the Second Awakening was one of the most momentous episodes in the history of American religion. This tidal wave of spiritual fervor left in its wake countless converted souls, many shattered and reorga nized churches, and numerous new sects. It also encouraged an effervescent evangelicalism that bubbled up into innumerable areas of American life—including prison reform, the temperance cause, the women’s movement, and the crusade to abolish slavery. The Second Great Awakening was spread to the masses on the frontier by huge “camp meetings.” As many as twenty-ﬁve thousand people would gather for an encampment of several days to drink the hellﬁ re gospel as served up by an itinerant preacher. Thousands of spiritually starved souls “got religion” at these

Religious Camp Meeting, by J. Maze
 Burbank, 1839 At huge, daylong encampments, repentant sinners dedicated themselves to lives of personal rectitude and social reform. Fire-and-brimstone preachers like the one depicted here inspired convulsions, speaking in tongues, and ecstatic singing and dancing among the converted. Out of this religious upheaval grew many of the movements for social improvement in the pre– Civil War decades, including the abolitionist crusade.



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 gatherings and in their ecstasy engaged in frenzies of rolling, dancing, barking, and jerking. Many of the “saved” soon backslid into their former sinful ways, but the revivals boosted church membership and stimulated a variety of humanitarian reforms. Responsive easterners were moved to do missionary work in the West with Indians, in Hawaii, and in Asia. Methodists and Baptists reaped the most abundant harvest of souls from the ﬁelds fertilized by revivalism. Both sects stressed personal conversion (contrary to predestination), a relatively democratic

 control of church affairs, and a rousing emotionalism. As a frontier jingle ran, The devil hates the Methodists Because they sing and shout the best. Powerful Peter Cartwright (1785–1872) was the best known of the Methodist “circuit riders,” or traveling frontier preachers. This ill-educated but sinewy servant of the Lord ranged for a half-century from Tennessee to Illinois, calling upon sinners to repent. With bellowing voice and ﬂailing arms, he converted thousands of souls to the Lord. Not only did he lash the Devil with his tongue, but with his ﬁsts he knocked out rowdies who tried to break up his meetings. His Christianity was deﬁ nitely muscular. Bell-voiced Charles Grandison Finney was the greatest of the revival preachers. Trained as a lawyer, Finney abandoned the bar to become an evangelist after a deeply moving conversion experience as a young man. Tall and athletically built, Finney held huge crowds spellbound with the power of his oratory and the pungency of his message. He led massive revivals in Rochester and New York City in 1830 and 1831. Finney preached a version of the old-time religion, but he was also an innovator. He devised the “anxious bench,” where repentant sinners could sit in full view of the

 In his lecture “Hindrances to Revivals,” delivered in the 1830s, Charles Grandison Finney (1792–1875) proposed the excommunication of drinkers and slaveholders:

“
Charles Grandison Finney (1792–1875), 1834
 The charismatic Finney appears here at age fortytwo, at the height of his career as an evangelist. A mesmerizer of audiences, he was said to have converted over a half million people. In 1834, Finney had just led a series of enormously successful revivals in cities along the Erie Canal. The next year he would establish a theology department at the newly founded Oberlin College in Ohio, where he helped train a generation of ministers and served as president from 1851 to 1866.

 Let the churches of all denominations speak out on the subject of temperance, let them close their doors against all who have anything to do with the death-dealing abomination, and the cause of temperance is triumphant. A few years would annihilate the trafﬁc. Just so with slavery. . . . It is a great national sin. It is a sin of the church. The churches by their silence, and by permitting slaveholders to belong to their communion, have been consenting to it. . . . The church cannot turn away from this question. It is a question for the church and for the nation to decide, and God will push it to a decision.

”


The Birth of the Mormons


 congregation, and he encouraged women to pray aloud in public. Holding out the promise of a perfect Christian kingdom on earth, Finney denounced both alcohol and slavery. He eventually served as president of Oberlin College in Ohio, which he helped to make a hotbed of revivalist activity and abolitionism. A key feature of the Second Great Awakening was the feminization of religion, in terms of both church membership and theology. Middle-class women, the wives and daughters of businessmen, were the ﬁ rst and most fervent enthusiasts of religious revivalism. They made up the majority of new church members, and they were most likely to stay within the fold when the tents were packed up and the traveling evangelists left town. Perhaps women’s greater ambivalence than men about the changes wrought by the expanding market economy made them such eager converts to piety. It helped as well that evangelicals preached a gospel of female spiritual worth and offered women an active role in bringing their husbands and families back to God. That accomplished, many women turned to saving the rest of society. They formed a host of benevolent and charitable orga ni zations and spearheaded crusades for most, if not all, of the era’s ambitious reforms.

Denominational Diversity
 Revivals also furthered the fragmentation of religious faiths. Western New York, where many descendants of New Eng land Puritans had settled, was so blistered by sermonizers preaching “hellﬁ re and damnation” that it came to be known as the Burned-Over District. Millerites, or Adventists, who mustered several hundred thousand adherents, rose from the superheated soil of the Burned-Over District in the 1830s. Named after the eloquent and commanding William Miller, they interpreted the Bible to mean that Christ would return to earth on October 22, 1844. Donning their go-to-meeting clothes, they gathered in prayerful assemblies to greet their Redeemer. The failure of Jesus to descend on schedule dampened but did not destroy the movement. Like the First Great Awakening, the Second Great Awakening tended to widen the lines between classes and regions. The more prosperous and conser vative denominations in the East were little touched by revivalism, and Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, and Unitarians continued to rise mostly from the wealthier, better-educated levels of society.



 Methodists, Baptists, and the members of the other new sects spawned by the swelling evangelistic fervor tended to come from less prosperous, less “learned” communities in the rural South and West. Religious diversity further reﬂected social cleavages when the churches faced up to the slavery issue. By 1844–1845 both the southern Baptists and the southern Methodists had split with their northern brethren over human bondage. The Methodists came to grief over the case of a slaveowning bishop in Georgia, whose second wife added several household slaves to his estate. In 1857 the Presbyterians, North and South, parted company. The secession of the southern churches foreshadowed the secession of the southern states. First the churches split, then the political parties split, and then the Union split.

A
Desert Zion in Utah  The smoldering spiritual embers of the Burned-Over District kindled one especially ardent ﬂame in 1830. In that year Joseph Smith—a rugged visionary, proud of his prowess at wrestling—reported that he had received some golden plates from an angel. When deciphered, they constituted the Book of Mormon, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (the Mormons) was launched. It was a native American product, a new religion, destined to spread its inﬂuence worldwide. After establishing a religious oligarchy, Smith ran into serious opposition from his non-Mormon neighbors, ﬁ rst in Ohio and then in Missouri and Illinois. His cooperative sect antagonized rank-and-ﬁ le Americans, who were individualistic and dedicated to free enterprise. The Mormons aroused further anger by voting as a unit and by openly but understandably drilling their militia for defensive purposes. Accusations of polygamy likewise arose and increased in intensity, for Joseph Smith was reputed to have several wives. Continuing hostility ﬁ nally drove the Mormons to desperate mea sures. In 1844 Joseph Smith and his brother were murdered and mangled by a mob in Carthage, Illinois, and the movement seemed near collapse. The falling torch was seized by a remarkable Mormon Moses named Brigham Young. Stern and austere in contrast to Smith’s charm and affability, the barrelchested Brigham Young had received only eleven days of formal schooling. But he quickly proved to be an aggressive leader, an eloquent preacher, and a gifted administrator. Determined to escape further persecution,



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


Mormon Trekkers Crossing the Mississippi on the Ice Driven out of Illinois
 after the murder of founder Joseph Smith in 1844, the Mormons wintered near Council Bluffs, Iowa Territory, before beginning the long overland trek to Utah.

 Young in 1846–1847 led his oppressed and despoiled Latter-Day Saints over vast rolling plains to Utah as they sang “Come, Come, Ye Saints.” Overcoming pioneer hardships, the Mormons soon made the desert bloom like a new Eden by means of ingenious and cooperative methods of irrigation. The crops of 1848, threatened by hordes of crickets, were saved when ﬂocks of gulls appeared, as if by a miracle, to gulp down the invaders. (A monument to the seagulls stands in Salt Lake City today.) Semiarid Utah grew remarkably. By the end of 1848, some ﬁve thousand settlers had arrived, and other large bands were to follow them (see Map 15.1). Many dedicated Mormons in the 1850s actually made the thirteenhundred-mile trek across the plains pulling two-wheeled carts. Under the rigidly disciplined management of Brigham Young, the community became a prosperous frontier theocracy and a cooperative commonwealth. Young married as many as twenty-seven women— some of them wives in name only—and begot ﬁ fty-six

 children. The population was further swelled by thousands of immigrants from Europe, where the Mormons had established a ﬂourishing missionary movement. A crisis developed when the Washington government was unable to control the hierarchy of Brigham Young, who had been made territorial governor in 1850. A federal army marched in 1857 against the Mormons, who harassed its lines of supply and rallied to die in their last dusty ditch. Fortunately the quarrel was ﬁ-

 Polygamy was an issue of such consequence that it was bracketed with slavery in the Republican national platform of 1856:

“


 It is both the right and the imperative duty of Congress to prohibit in the Territories those twin relics of barbarism—Polygamy and Slavery.

”


OREGON TERRITORY
Sn 
 ak

 eR .

Fort Bridger
Salt Lake City


UTAH TERRITORY C

Littlefield
Las Vegas


 r th

Pla


 tte

 iss

 our

 i R.

IOWA R.

Winter Quarters


Council
Bluffs


.
Platte R


R.


Carthage


Nauvoo


 ILLINOIS

Moab
Arkansas


INDIAN TERRITORY

R.


 Lee’s Ferry

 MISSOURI

Tempe


 ipp

 ARKANSAS

Luna


Mesa


N


.
Gila R


 e

 TENN.

Red R.


 Mormon trek, 1846–1847

Thatcher


Pomerene


California Trail


St. David


N


 siss

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

 nd

Holbrook


Mis


E A
O C


San Bernardino


 i R.

Tuba City


Barstow
120°W


 ado olor

Fort Laramie


No


M


Rio G
 ra

I C
P A C I F


Parowan Beaver
Mountain Meadow
Cedar City
St. George


 CALIFORNIA

MINNESOTA TERRITORY

UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

Fort Hall


40°N


Mormon Station


90°W


100°W


110°W


WASHINGTON TERRITORY

Mormon Corridor


 TEXAS

30°N






200 Mi.


Fort


 Map 15.1 The Mormon World After Joseph Smith’s murder at Carthage in 1844, the Mormons abandoned their thriving settlement at Nauvoo, Illinois (which had about twenty thousand inhabitants in 1845) and set out for the valley of the Great Salt Lake, then still part of Mexico. When the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (see p. 410) in 1848 brought the vast Utah Territory into the United States, the Mormons rapidly expanded their desert colony, which they called Deseret, especially along the “Mormon Corridor” that stretched from Salt Lake to southern California.

Free Schools for
 a Free People Tax-supported primary schools were scarce in the early years of the Republic. They had the odor of pauperism about them, since they existed chieﬂy to educate the children of the poor—the so-called ragged schools. Advocates of “free” public education met stiff opposition. A midwestern legislator cried that he wanted only this simple epitaph when he died: “Here lies an enemy of public education.”

 Mormon settlements Non-Mormon settlement

 MEXICO

 nally adjusted without serious bloodshed. The Mormons later ran afoul of the antipolygamy laws passed by Congress in 1862 and 1882, and their unique marital customs delayed statehood for Utah until 1896.

 Proposed state of Deseret Boundaries as of 1853

200 Km.


Interactive Map


 Well-to-do, conser vative Americans gradually saw the light. If they did not pay to educate “other folkses brats,” the “brats” might grow up into a dangerous, ignorant rabble—armed with the vote. Taxation for education was an insurance premium that the wealthy paid for stability and democracy. Tax-supported public education, though miserably lagging in the slavery-cursed South, triumphed between 1825 and 1850. Hard-toiling laborers wielded increased inﬂuence and demanded instruction for their children. Most important was the gaining of manhood suffrage for whites in Jackson’s day. A free vote cried aloud for free education. A civilized nation that was both ignorant and free, declared Thomas Jefferson, “never was and never will be.” The famed little red schoolhouse—with one room, one stove, one teacher, and often eight grades—became



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 The Country School, by Winslow Homer, 1871 Stark and simple by latter-day standards, the one-room schoolhouse nevertheless contributed richly to the development of the young Republic.

 the shrine of American democracy. Regrettably, it was an imperfect shrine. Early free schools stayed open only a few months of the year. Schoolteachers, most of them men in this era, were too often ill-trained, ill-tempered, and ill-paid. They frequently put more stress on “lickin’” (with a hickory stick) than on “larnin’.” These knights of the blackboard often “boarded around” in the community, and some knew scarcely more than their older pupils. They usually taught only the “three Rs”— “readin’, ’ritin’, and ’rithmetic.” To many rugged Americans, suspicious of “book larnin’,” this was enough. Reform was urgently needed. Into the breach stepped Horace Mann (1796–1859), a brilliant and idealistic graduate of Brown University. As secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education, he campaigned effectively for more and better schoolhouses, longer school terms, higher pay for teachers, and an expanded curriculum. His inﬂuence radiated out to other states, and impressive improvements were chalked up. Yet education remained an expensive luxury for many communities. As late as 1860, the nation counted only about a hundred public secondary schools—and nearly a million white adult illiterates. Black slaves in the South

 Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865) wrote of his education (1859),

“


 There were some schools so-called [in Indiana], but no qualiﬁcation was ever required of a teacher beyond ‘readin’, writin’ and cipherin’ to the rule of three. . . . There was absolutely nothing to excite ambition for education. Of course, when I came of age I did not know much. Still, somehow, I could read, write and cipher to the rule of three, but that was all. I have not been to school since. The little advance I now have upon this store of education, I have picked up from time to time under the pressure of necessity. I was raised to work, which I continued till I was twenty-two.

”


The Growth of Higher Education


 were legally forbidden to receive instruction in reading or writing, and even free blacks, in the North as well as the South, were usually excluded from the schools. Educational advances were aided by improved textbooks, notably those of Noah Webster (1758–1843), a Yale-educated Connecticut Yankee who was known as the “Schoolmaster of the Republic.” His “reading lessons,” used by millions of children in the nineteenth century, were partly designed to promote patriotism. Webster devoted twenty years to his famous dictionary, published in 1828, which helped to standardize the American language. Equally inﬂuential was Ohioan William H. McGuffey (1800–1873), a teacher-preacher of rare power. His grade-school readers, ﬁ rst published in the 1830s, sold 122 million copies in the following decades. McGuffey’s Readers hammered home lasting lessons in morality, patriotism, and idealism.

Higher Goals for
Higher Learning
 Higher education was likewise stirring. The religious zeal of the Second Great Awakening led to the planting of many small, denominational, liberal arts colleges, chieﬂy in the South and West. Too often they were academically anemic, established more to satisfy local pride than genuinely to advance the cause of learning. Like their more venerable, ivy-draped brethren, the new colleges offered a narrow, tradition-bound curriculum of Latin, Greek, mathematics, and moral philosophy. On new and old campuses alike, there was little intellectual vitality and much boredom. The ﬁ rst state-supported universities sprang up in the South, beginning with North Carolina in 1795. Federal land grants nourished the growth of state institutions of higher learning. Conspicuous among the early group was the University of Virginia, founded in 1819. It was largely the brainchild of Thomas Jefferson, who designed its beautiful architecture and who at times watched its construction through a telescope from his hilltop home. He dedicated the university to freedom from religious or political shackles, and modern languages and the sciences received unusual emphasis. Women’s higher education was frowned upon in the early decades of the nineteenth century. A woman’s place was believed to be in the home, and training in needlecraft seemed more important than training in algebra. In an era when the clinging-vine bride was the ideal, coeducation was regarded as frivolous. Preju-



 An editorial in the popular women’s magazine Godey’s Lady’s Book in 1845, probably written by editor Sarah Josepha Hale (1788–1879), argued for better education for women as a beneﬁt to all of society:

“


 The mass of mankind are very ignorant and wicked. Wherefore is this? Because the mother, whom God constituted the ﬁrst teacher of every human being, has been degraded by men from her high ofﬁce; or, what is the same thing, been denied those privileges of education which only can enable her to discharge her duty to her children with discretion and effect. . . . If half the effort and expense had been directed to enlighten and improve the minds of females which have been lavished on the other sex, we should now have a very different state of society.

”


 dices also prevailed that too much learning injured the feminine brain, undermined health, and rendered a young lady unﬁt for marriage. The teachers of Susan B. Anthony, the future feminist, refused to instruct her in long division. Women’s schools at the secondary level began to attain some respectability in the 1820s, thanks in part to the dedicated work of Emma Willard (1787–1870). In 1821 she established the Troy (New York) Female Seminary. Oberlin College, in Ohio, jolted traditionalists in 1837 when it opened its doors to women as well as men. (Oberlin had already created shock waves by admitting black students.) In the same year, Mary Lyon established an outstanding women’s school, Mount Holyoke Seminary (later College), in South Hadley, Massachusetts. Mossback critics scoffed that “they’ll be educatin’ cows next.” Adults who craved more learning satisﬁed their thirst for knowledge at private subscription libraries or, increasingly, at tax-supported libraries. House-tohouse peddlers also did a lush business in feeding the public appetite for culture. Traveling lecturers helped to carry learning to the masses through the lyceum lecture associations, which numbered about three thousand by 1835. The lyceums provided platforms for speakers in such areas as science, literature, and moral philosophy. Talented talkers like Ralph Waldo Emerson



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 The Women Graduates of the Oberlin College Class of 1855 Oberlin was the ﬁrst coeducational institution of higher education in the United States, accepting women in 1837, two years after it had welcomed African Americans. Feminists continued to press for coeducation, and by 1872 ninety-seven American universities accepted women. At some of these institutions, however, such as Radcliffe College of Harvard University and Barnard College of Columbia University, women were educated in associated schools, not alongside male students.

 journeyed thousands of miles on the lyceum circuits, casting their pearls of civilization before appreciative audiences. Magazines ﬂourished in the pre–Civil War years, but most of them withered after a short life. The North American Review, founded in 1815, was the long-lived leader of the intellectuals. Godey’s Lady’s Book, founded in 1830, survived until 1898 and attained the enormous circulation (for those days) of 150,000. It was devoured devotedly by millions of women, many of whom read the dog-eared copies of their relatives and friends.

An Age of Reform
 As the young Republic grew, reform campaigns of all types ﬂourished in sometimes bewildering abundance. Some reformers were simply crackbrained cranks. But most were intelligent, inspired idealists, usually touched by the ﬁ re of evangelical religion then licking through the pews and pulpits of American churches. The opti-

 mistic promises of the Second Great Awakening inspired countless souls to do battle against earthly evils. These modern idealists dreamed anew the old Puritan vision of a perfected society: free from cruelty, war, intoxicating drink, discrimination, and—ultimately—slavery. Women were particularly prominent in these reform crusades, especially in their own struggle for suffrage. For many middle-class women, the reform campaigns provided a unique opportunity to escape the conﬁ nes of the home and enter the arena of public affairs. In part the practical, activist Christianity of these reformers resulted from their desire to reafﬁ rm traditional values as they plunged ever further into a world disrupted and transformed by the turbulent forces of a market economy. Mainly middle-class descendants of pioneer farmers, they were often blissfully unaware that they were witnessing the dawn of the industrial era, which posed unprecedented problems and called for novel ideas. They either ignored the factory workers, for example, or blamed their problems on bad habits. With naive single-mindedness, reformers sometimes applied

Social Reform


 In presenting her case to the Massachusetts legislature for more humane treatment for the mentally ill, Dorothea Dix (1802–1887) quoted from the notebook she carried with her as she traveled around the state:

“


 Lincoln. A woman in a cage. Medford. One idiotic subject chained, and one in a close stall for seventeen years. Pepperell. One often doubly chained, hand and foot; another violent; several peaceable now. . . . Dedham. The insane disadvantageously placed in the jail. In the almshouse, two females in stalls . . . ; lie in wooden bunks ﬁlled with straw; always shut up. One of these subjects is supposed curable. The overseers of the poor have declined giving her a trial at the hospital, as I was informed, on account of expense.

”


 conventional virtue to refurbishing an older order— while events hurtled them headlong into the new. Imprisonment for debt continued to be a nightmare, though its extent has been exaggerated. As late as 1830, hundreds of penniless people were languishing



 in ﬁ lthy holes, sometimes for owing less than one dollar. The poorer working classes were especially hard hit by this merciless practice. But as the embattled laborer won the ballot and asserted himself, state legislatures gradually abolished debtors’ prisons. Criminal codes in the states were likewise being softened, in accord with more enlightened European practices. The number of capital offenses was being reduced, and brutal punishments, such as whipping and branding, were being slowly eliminated. A refreshing idea was taking hold that prisons should reform as well as punish—hence “reformatories,” “houses of correction,” and “penitentiaries” (for penance). Sufferers of so-called insanity were still being treated with incredible cruelty. The medieval concept had been that the mentally deranged were cursed with unclean spirits; the nineteenth-century idea was that they were willfully perverse and depraved—to be treated only as beasts. Many crazed persons were chained in jails or poor-houses with sane people. Into this dismal picture stepped a formidable New Eng land teacher-author, Dorothea Dix (1802–1887). A physically frail woman afﬂ icted with persistent lung trouble, she possessed inﬁ nite compassion and willpower. She traveled some sixty thousand miles in eight years and assembled her damning reports on insanity and asylums from ﬁ rsthand observations. Though she

The Stepping Mill, Auburn Prison,
 New York, 1823 Reformers like Dorothea Dix believed that idleness was a scourge and prescribed rigorous exercise regimens for prisoners. At the experimental prison in Auburn, chained prisoners were obliged to turn this wheel for long periods of time.



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 never raised her voice, Dix’s message was loud and clear. Her classic petition of 1843 to the Massachusetts legislature, describing cells so foul that visitors were driven back by the stench, turned legislative stomachs and hearts. Her persistent prodding resulted in improved conditions and in a gain for the concept that the demented were not willfully perverse but mentally ill. Agitation for peace also gained momentum in the pre–Civil War years. In 1828 the American Peace Society was formed, with a ringing declaration of war on war. A leading spirit was William Ladd, who orated when his legs were so badly ulcerated that he had to sit on a stool. His ideas were ﬁ nally to bear some fruit in the international orga ni zations for collective security of the twentieth century. The American peace crusade, linked with a European counterpart, was making promising progress by midcentury, but it was set back by the bloodshed of the Crimean War in Europe and the Civil War in America.

Demon Rum—
The “Old Deluder”
 The ever-present drink problem attracted dedicated reformers. Custom, combined with a hard and monotonous life, led to the excessive drinking of hard liquor, even among women, clergymen, and members of Congress. Weddings and funerals all too often became disgraceful brawls, and occasionally a drunken mourner would fall into the open grave with the corpse. Heavy drinking decreased the efﬁciency of labor, and poorly safeguarded machinery operated under the inﬂuence of alcohol increased the danger of accidents occurring at work. Drunkenness also fouled the sanctity of the family, threatening the spiritual welfare—and physical safety—of women and children. After earlier and feebler efforts, the American Temperance Society was formed in Boston in 1826. Within a few years, about a thousand local groups sprang into existence. They implored drinkers to sign the temperance pledge and orga nized children’s clubs, known as the “Cold Water Army.” Temperance crusaders also made effective use of pictures, pamphlets, and lurid lecturers, some of whom were reformed drunkards. A popular temperance song ran, We’ve done with our days of carousing, Our nights, too, of frolicsome glee; For now with our sober minds choosing, We’ve pledged ourselves never to spree.

Temperance Banner Lithograph, by Kellogg and
 Comstock, ca. 1848–1850 Among the many evils of alcohol, reformers fulminated especially against its corrupting effects on family life. Here a young man is torn between a drink-bearing temptress and a maiden who exempliﬁes the virtues of womanly purity.

 The most popular anti-alcohol tract of the era was T. S. Arthur’s melodramatic novel, Ten Nights in a Barroom and What I Saw There (1854). It described in shocking detail how a once-happy village was ruined by Sam Slade’s tavern. The book was second only to Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin as a best seller in the 1850s, and it enjoyed a highly successful run on the stage. Its touching theme song began with the words of a little girl: Father, dear father, come home with me now, The clock in the belfry strikes one. Early foes of Demon Drink adopted two major lines of attack. One was to stiffen the individual’s will to resist the wiles of the little brown jug. The moderate

The Feminist Movement Takes Form




 reformers thus stressed “temperance” rather than “teetotalism,” or the total elimination of intoxicants. But less patient zealots came to believe that temptation should be removed by legislation. Prominent among this group was Neal S. Dow of Maine, a blue-nosed reformer who, as a mayor of Portland and an employer of labor, had often witnessed the debauching effect of alcohol—to say nothing of the cost to his pocketbook of work time lost because of drunken employees. Dow—the “Father of Prohibition”—sponsored the so-called Maine Law of 1851. This drastic new statute, hailed as “the law of Heaven Americanized,” prohibited the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquor. Other states in the North followed Maine’s example, and by 1857 about a dozen had passed various prohibitory laws. But these ﬁgures are deceptive, for within a decade some of the statutes were repealed or declared unconstitutional, if not openly ﬂouted. It was clearly impossible to legislate thirst for alcohol out of existence, especially in localities where public sentiment was hostile. Yet on the eve of the Civil War, the prohibitionists had registered inspiring gains. There was much less drinking among women than earlier in the century and probably much less per capita consumption of hard liquor.

Women in Revolt
 When the nineteenth century opened, it was still a man’s world, both in America and in Europe. A wife was supposed to immerse herself in her home and subordinate herself to her lord and master (her husband). Like black slaves, she could not vote; like black slaves, she could be legally beaten by her overlord “with a reasonable instrument.” When she married, she could not retain title to her property; it passed to her husband. Yet American women, though legally regarded as perpetual minors, fared better than their European cousins. French visitor Alexis de Tocqueville noted that in his native France, rape was punished only lightly, whereas in America it was one of the few crimes punishable by death. Despite these relative advantages, women were still “the submerged sex” in America in the early part of the century. But as the decades unfolded, women increasingly surfaced to breathe the air of freedom and self-determination. In contrast to women in colonial times, many women now avoided marriage altogether—about 10 percent of adult women remained “spinsters” at the time of the Civil War.

 Stellar Suffragists Elizabeth Cady Stanton (left) and Susan B. Anthony (right) were two of the most persistent battlers for rights. Their National Woman Suffrage Association fought for women’s equality in courts and workplaces as well as at the polls.

 Gender differences were strongly emphasized in nineteenth-century America—largely because the burgeoning market economy was increasingly separating women and men into sharply distinct economic roles. Women were thought to be physically and emotionally weak, but also artistic and reﬁ ned. Endowed with ﬁ nely tuned moral sensibilities, they were the keepers of society’s conscience, with special responsibility to teach the young how to be good and productive citizens of the Republic. Men were considered strong but crude, always in danger of slipping into some savage or beastly way of life if not guided by the gentle hands of their loving ladies. The home was a woman’s special sphere, the centerpiece of the “cult of domesticity.” Even reformers like Catharine Beecher, who urged her sisters to seek employment as teachers, endlessly celebrated the role



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 of the good homemaker. But some women increasingly felt that the gloriﬁed sanctuary of the home was in fact a gilded cage. They yearned to tear down the bars that separated the private world of women from the public world of men. Clamorous female reformers—most of them white and well-to-do—began to gather strength as the century neared its halfway point. Most were broad-gauge battlers; while demanding rights for women, they joined in the general reform movement of the age, ﬁghting for temperance and the abolition of slavery. Like men, they had been touched by the evangelical spirit that offered the promise of earthly reward for human endeavor. Neither foul eggs nor foul words, when hurled by disapproving men, could halt women heartened by these doctrines. The women’s rights movement was mothered by some arresting characters. Prominent among them was Lucretia Mott, a sprightly Quaker whose ire had been aroused when she and her fellow female delegates to the London antislavery convention of 1840 were not recognized. Elizabeth Cady Stanton, a mother of seven who had insisted on leaving “obey” out of her marriage ceremony, shocked fellow feminists by going so far as to advocate suffrage for women. Quaker-reared Susan B. Anthony, a militant lecturer for women’s rights, fearlessly exposed herself to rotten garbage and vulgar epithets. She became such a conspicuous advocate of female rights that progressive women every where were called “Suzy Bs.”

What It Would Be If Some Ladies
Had Their Own Way The men in
 this antifeminist cartoon are sewing, tending the baby, and washing clothes. The scene seemed absurd then, but not a century later.

 Other feminists challenged the man’s world. Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell, a pioneer in a previously forbidden profession for women, was the ﬁ rst female graduate of a medical college. Precocious Margaret Fuller edited a transcendentalist journal, The Dial, and took part in the struggle to bring unity and republican government to Italy. She died in a shipwreck off New York’s Fire Island while returning to the United States in 1850. The talented Grimké sisters, Sarah and Angelina, championed antislavery. Lucy Stone retained her maiden name after marriage—hence the latter-day “Lucy Stoners,” who follow her example. Amelia Bloomer revolted against the current “street sweeping” female attire by donning a short skirt with Turkish trousers—“bloomers,” they were called—amid much bawdy ridicule about “Bloomerism” and “loose habits.” A jeering male rhyme of the times jabbed, Gibbey, gibbey gab The women had a confab And demanded the rights To wear the tights Gibbey, gibbey gab. Unﬂ inching feminists met in 1848 in a memorable Woman’s Rights Convention at Seneca Falls, New York. The deﬁant Stanton read a “Declaration of Sentiments,” which in the spirit of the Declaration of Independence declared that “all men and women are created equal.” One resolution formally demanded the ballot for females. Amid scorn and denunciation from press and

Dress as Reform
 mong the many social movements that swept nineteenth-century America, dress reform emerged in the 1840s as a critique of materialism and the constraints that fashion imposed on women. Medical professionals, social reformers, and transcendentalist intellectuals all argued that corsets constrict ing vital organs and voluminous skirts dragging along garbage-strewn streets unfairly restricted women’s mobility, prevented women from bearing healthy children, and even induced serious sickness and death. The “Bloomer costume” depicted in this illustration from Harper’s New Monthly Magazine in 1851 included Turkish-style trousers, a jacket, and a short overskirt that came to the knees. Named after reformer Amelia Bloomer (1818–1894), who publicized the new style in her magazine, The Lily, the bloomer dress was ﬁ rst adopted by utopian communities such as the Owenites in New Harmony, Indiana, and the Oneidans in New York. Radical social

A


 critic Henry David Thoreau also advocated rational dress as a way of rejecting the artiﬁcial desires created by industrialization. But while applauded by reformers, new-style dress was viciously ridiculed by mainstream society, as this print demonstrates. Critics claimed that women blurred gender distinctions by adopting “male” attire, endangering the family and even American civilization. After only a decade, practitioners gave up wearing bloomers in public, adopting plain and simpliﬁed clothing instead. But Owenites, some Mormons, women’s rights advocates, farmers, and travelers on the overland trail continued to wear bloomers in private. How did dress reform intersect with other religious and social movements of the era? Why did bloomers upset so many antebellum Americans? Have there been other historical eras when new styles of dress came to symbolize broader social change?





Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 When early feminist Lucy Stone (1818–1893) married fellow abolitionist Henry B. Blackwell (1825–1909) in West Brookﬁeld, Massachusetts, in 1855, they added the following vow to their nuptial ceremony:

“


 While acknowledging our mutual affection by publicly assuming the relation of husband and wife, yet in justice to ourselves and a great principle, we deem it a duty to declare that this act on our part implies no . . . promise of voluntary obedience to such of the present laws of marriage, as refuse to recognize the wife as an independent, rational being, while they confer upon the husband an injurious and unnatural superiority.

”


 pulpit, the Seneca Falls meeting launched the modern women’s rights movement. The crusade for women’s rights was eclipsed by the campaign against slavery in the decade before the Civil War. Still, any white male, even an idiot, over the age of twenty-one could vote, while no woman could. Yet women were gradually being admitted to colleges, and some states, beginning with Mississippi in 1839, were even permitting wives to own property after marriage.

Wilderness Utopias
 Bolstered by the utopian spirit of the age, various reformers, ranging from the high-minded to the “lunatic fringe,” set up more than forty communities of a cooperative, communistic, or “communitarian” nature. Seeking human betterment, a wealthy and idealistic Scottish textile manufacturer, Robert Owen, founded in 1825 a communal society of about a thousand people at New Harmony, Indiana. Little harmony prevailed in the colony, which, in addition to hard-working visionaries, attracted a sprinkling of radicals, work-shy theorists, and outright scoundrels. The colony sank in a morass of contradiction and confusion. Brook Farm in Massachusetts, comprising two hundred acres of grudging soil, was started in 1841 with the brotherly and sisterly cooperation of about twenty intellectuals committed to the philosophy of transcen-

 dentalism (see p. 361). They prospered reasonably well until 1846, when they lost by ﬁ re a large new communal building shortly before its completion. The whole venture in “plain living and high thinking” then collapsed in debt. The Brook Farm experiment inspired Nathaniel Hawthorne’s classic novel The Blithedale Romance (1852), whose main character was modeled on the feminist writer Margaret Fuller. A more radical experiment was the Oneida Community, founded in New York in 1848. It practiced free love (“complex marriage”), birth control (through “male continence,” or coitus reservatus), and the eugenic selection of parents to produce superior offspring. This curious enterprise ﬂourished for more than thirty years, largely because its artisans made superior steel traps and Oneida Community (silver) Plate (see “Makers of America: The Oneida Community,” pp. 356–357). Various communistic experiments, mostly small in scale, have been attempted since Jamestown. But in competition with democratic free enterprise and free land, virtually all of them sooner or later failed or changed their methods. Among the longest-lived sects were the Shakers, founded in Eng land in 1747 and brought to America in 1774 by Mother Ann Lee. She moved her tiny band of followers to upstate New York —the ﬁ rst of a score or so of American Shaker communities. The Shakers attained a membership of about six thousand in 1840, but since their monastic customs prohibited both marriage and sexual relations, they were virtually extinct by 1940.

 The Dawn of Scientiﬁc Achievement Early Americans, confronted with pioneering problems, were more interested in practical gadgets than in pure science. Jefferson, for example, was a gifted amateur inventor who won a gold medal for a new type of plow. Noteworthy also were the writings of the mathematician Nathaniel Bowditch (1733–1838) on practical navigation and of the oceanographer Matthew F. Maury (1806–1873) on ocean winds and currents. These writers promoted safety, speed, and economy. But as far as basic science was concerned, Americans were best known for borrowing and adapting the ﬁ ndings of Europeans. Yet the Republic was not without scientiﬁc talent. The most inﬂuential American scientist of the ﬁ rst half of the nineteenth century was Professor Benjamin Sil-

Utopian Communities




 Women Planting Corn, by Olof Krans, 1894–1896 The Shakers’ emphasis on simplicity and ingenuity, and their segregation of the sexes, were captured in this painting of the Bishop Hill community in Illinois. The prongs on the poles measured the distance between rows, and the knots on the rope showed the women how far apart to plant the corn.

 liman (1779–1864), a pioneer chemist and geologist who taught and wrote brilliantly at Yale College for more than ﬁ fty years. Professor Louis Agassiz (1807–1873), a distinguished French Swiss immigrant, served for a quarter of a century at Harvard College. A pathbreaking student of biology who sometimes carried snakes in his pockets, he insisted on original research and deplored the reigning overemphasis on memory work. Professor Asa Gray (1810–1888) of Harvard College, the Columbus of American botany, published over 350 books, monographs, and papers. His textbooks set new standards for clarity and interest. Lovers of American bird lore owed much to the French-descended naturalist John J. Audubon (1785– 1851), who painted wildfowl in their natural habitat. His magniﬁcently illustrated Birds of America attained considerable popularity. The Audubon Society for the protection of birds was named after him, although as a young man he shot much feathered game for sport.

 Medicine in America, despite a steady growth of medical schools, was still primitive by modern standards. Bleeding remained a common cure and a curse as well. Smallpox plagues were still dreaded, and the An outbreak of cholera occurred in New York City in 1832, and a wealthy businessman, Philip Hone (1780–1851), wrote in his diary for the Fourth of July,

“


 The alarm about the cholera has prevented all the usual jolliﬁcation under the public authority. . . . The Board of Health reports today twenty new cases and eleven deaths since noon yesterday. The disease is here in all its violence and will increase. God grant that its ravages may be conﬁned, and its visit short.

”


MAKERS OF

AMERICA
Oneida TheThe Great AfricanCommunity American Migration 
J


 ohn Humphrey Noyes (1811–1886), the founder of the Oneida Community, repudiated the old Puritan doctrines that God was vengeful and that sinful mankind was doomed to dwell in a vale of tears. Noyes believed in a benign deity, in the sweetness of human nature, and in the possibility of a perfect Christian community on earth. “The more we get acquainted with God,” he declared, “the more we shall ﬁ nd it our special duty to be happy.” That sunny thought was shared by many earlynineteenth-century American utopians (a word derived from Greek that slyly combines the meanings of “a good place” and “no such place”). But Noyes added some wrinkles of his own. The key to happiness, he taught, was the suppression of selﬁshness. True Christians should possess no private property—nor should they indulge in exclusive emotional relationships, which bred jealousy, quarreling, and covetousness. Material things and sexual partners alike, Noyes preached, should be shared. Marriage should not be monogamous. Instead all members of the community should be free to love one another in “complex marriage.” Noyes called his system “Bible Communism.” Tall and slender, with piercing blue eyes and reddish hair, the charismatic Noyes began voicing these ideas in his hometown of Putney, Vermont, in the 1830s. He soon attracted a group of followers who called themselves the Putney Association, a kind of extended family whose members farmed ﬁve hundred acres by day and sang and prayed together in the evenings. They sustained their spiritual intensity by submitting to “Mutual Criticism,” in which the person being criticized would sit in silence while other members frankly discussed his or her faults and merits. “I was, metaphorically, stood upon my head and allowed to drain till all the self-righteousness had dripped out of me,” one man wrote of his experience with Mutual Criticism. The Putney Association also indulged in sexual practices that outraged the surrounding community’s sense of moral propriety. Indicted for adultery in 1847, Noyes led his followers to Oneida, in the supposedly more tolerant region of New York’s Burned-Over District, the following year. Several afﬁ liated communities were also established, the most important of which was at Wallingford, Connecticut.



 The Oneidans struggled in New York until they were joined in the 1850s by Sewell Newhouse, a clever inventor of steel animal traps. The manufacture of Newhouse’s traps, and other products such as sewing silk and various types of bags, put the Oneida Community on a sound ﬁ nancial footing. By the 1860s Oneida was a ﬂourishing commonwealth of some three hundred people. Men and women shared equally in all the community’s tasks, from ﬁeld to factory to kitchen. The members lived under one roof in Mansion House, a sprawling building that boasted central heating, a wellstocked library, and a common dining hall, as well as the “Big Hall,” where members gathered nightly for prayer and entertainment. Children at the age of three were removed from direct parental care and raised communally in the Children’s House until the age of thirteen or fourteen, when they took up jobs in the community’s industries. They imbibed their religious doctrines with their school lessons: I-spirit With me never shall stay, We-spirit Makes us happy and gay. Oneida’s apparent success fed the utopian dreams of others, and for a time it became a great tourist attraction. Visitors from as far away as Europe came to picnic on the shady lawns, speculating on the sexual secrets that Mansion House guarded, while their hosts fed them strawberries and cream and entertained them with music. But eventually the same problems that had driven Noyes and his band from Vermont began to shadow their lives at Oneida. Their New York neighbors grew increasingly horriﬁed at the Oneidans’ licentious sexual practices, including the selective breeding program by which the community matched mates and gave permission—or orders—to procreate, without regard to the niceties of matrimony. “It was somewhat startling to me,” one straight-laced visitor commented, “to hear Miss ___________ speak about her baby.” Yielding to their neighbors’ criticisms, the Oneidans gave up complex marriage in 1879. Soon other “communistic” practices withered away as well. The communal dining hall became a restaurant, where meals

 were bought with money, something many Oneidans had never used before. In 1880 the Oneidans abandoned communism altogether and became a joint-stock company specializing in the manufacture of silver tableware. Led by Noyes’s son Pierrepont, Oneida Community, Ltd., grew into the world’s leading manufacturer of stainless steel knives, forks, and spoons, with annual sales by the 1990s of some half a billion dollars.

 As for Mansion House, it still stands in central New York, but it now serves as a museum and private residence. The “Big Hall” is the site of Oneida, Ltd.’s annual shareholders’ meetings. Ironically, what grew from Noyes’s religious vision was not utopia but a mighty capitalist corporation.

 Mansion House A sprawling, resplendent building, it formed the center of the Oneida Community’s life and was a stunning specimen of mid-nineteenth-century architectural and engineering achievement.

The Founding Father
John Humphrey Noyes (1811–1886).


A
Bag Bee on the Lawn of  Mansion House The ﬂedgling community supported itself in part by manufacturing bags. Men and women shared equally in the bag-making process.





Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 (left) Passenger Pigeons, by John Audubon; (right) John J. Audubon (1785–1851) An astute naturalist and a gifted artist, Audubon drew the birds of America in loving detail. Ironically, he had to go to Britain in the 1820s to ﬁnd a publisher for his pioneering depictions of the unique beauty of American wildlife. Born in Haiti and educated in France, he achieved fame as America’s greatest ornithologist. The passenger pigeons shown here once numbered in the billions in North America but were extinct by 1900, thanks to aggressive hunting and trapping. This was perhaps the greatest mass slaughter of wildlife in history.

 yellow fever epidemic of 1793 in Philadelphia took several thousand lives. “Bring out your dead!” was the daily cry of the corpse-wagon drivers. People every where complained of ill health— malaria, the “rheumatics,” the “miseries,” and the chills. Illness often resulted from improper diet, hurried eating, perspiring and cooling off too rapidly, and ignorance of germs and sanitation. “We was sick every fall, regular,” wrote the mother of future president James Garﬁeld. Life expectancy was still dismayingly short—about forty years for a white person born in 1850, and less for blacks. The suffering from decayed or ulcerated teeth was enormous; tooth extraction was often practiced by the muscular village blacksmith.

 Self-prescribed patent medicines were common (one dose for people, two for horses) and included Robertson’s Infallible Worm Destroying Lozenges. Fad diets proved popular, including the whole-wheat bread and crackers regimen of Sylvester Graham. Among home remedies was the rubbing of tumors with dead toads. The use of medicine by regular doctors was often harmful, and Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes declared in 1860 that if the medicines, as then employed, were thrown into the sea, humans would be better off and the ﬁsh worse off. Victims of surgical operations were ordinarily tied down, often after a stiff drink of whiskey. The surgeon then sawed or cut with breakneck speed, undeterred by the piercing shrieks of the patient. A priceless boon

Landmarks in Painting and Music


 Early Advertising Hawkers of patent medicines pioneered the techniques of modern advertising. Here a painkiller is promoted by invoking the totally irrelevant image of Molly Pitcher. The legendary subject of a poem by John Greenleaf Whittier, Pitcher reputedly took her fallen husband’s place at a cannon during the Revolutionary War Battle of Monmouth in 1778. What this exploit had to do with anesthetics is by no means clear, but it supposedly sold the product.

 for medical progress came in the early 1840s, when several American doctors and dentists, working independently, successfully employed laughing gas and ether as anesthetics.

Artistic Achievements
 Architecturally, America contributed little of note in the ﬁ rst half of the century. The rustic Republic, still under pressure to erect shelters in haste, was continu-



 ing to imitate European models. Public buildings and other important structures followed Greek and Roman lines, which seemed curiously out of place in a wilderness setting. A remarkable Greek revival came between 1820 and 1850, partly stimulated by the heroic efforts of the Greeks in the 1820s to wrest independence from the “terrible Turk.” About midcentury strong interest developed in a revival of Gothic forms, with their emphasis on pointed arches and large windows. Talented Thomas Jefferson, architect of revolution, was probably the ablest American architect of his generation. He brought a classical design to his Virginia hilltop home, Monticello—perhaps the most stately mansion in the nation. The quadrangle of the University of Virginia at Charlottesville, another of Jefferson’s creations, remains one of the ﬁ nest examples of classical architecture in America. The art of painting continued to be handicapped. It suffered from the dollar-grabbing of a raw civilization; from the hustle, bustle, and absence of leisure; from the lack of a wealthy class to sit for portraits—and then pay for them. Some of the earliest painters were forced to go to Eng land, where they found both training and patrons. America exported artists and imported art. Painting, like the theater, also suffered from the Puritan prejudice that art was a sinful waste of time— and often obscene. John Adams boasted that “he would not give a sixpence for a bust of Phidias or a painting by Raphael.” When Edward Everett, the eminent Boston scholar and orator, placed a statue of Apollo in his home, he had its naked limbs draped. Competent painters nevertheless emerged. Gilbert Stuart (1755–1828), a spendthrift Rhode Islander and one of the most gifted of the early group, wielded his brush in Britain in competition with the best artists. He produced several portraits of Washington, all of them somewhat idealized and dehumanized. Truth to tell, by the time he posed for Stuart, the famous general had lost his natural teeth and some of the original shape of his face. Charles Willson Peale (1741–1827), a Marylander, painted some sixty portraits of Washington, who patiently sat for about fourteen of them. John Trumbull (1756–1843), who had fought in the Revolutionary War, recaptured its scenes and spirit on scores of striking canvases. During the nationalistic upsurge after the War of 1812, American painters of portraits turned increasingly from human landscapes to romantic mirrorings of local landscapes. The Hudson River school excelled in this type of art. At the same time, portrait painters gradually encountered some unwelcome competition



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 The Oxbow, by Thomas Cole, 1836 This rendering of the oxbow of the Connecticut River near Northampton, Massachusetts, after a thunderstorm is considered one of Cole’s (1801–1848) masterpieces. A leader of the so-called Hudson River school, Cole wandered on foot over the mountains and rivers of New York State and New England, making pencil studies from which he painted in his studio during the winter. He and other members of this group transformed their realistic sketches into lyrical, romantic celebrations of the beauty of the American wilderness.

 from the invention of a crude photograph known as the daguerreotype, perfected about 1839 by a Frenchman, Louis Daguerre. Music was slowly shaking off the restraints of colonial days, when the prim Puritans had frowned upon nonreligious singing. Rhythmic and nostalgic “darky” tunes, popularized by whites, were becoming immense hits by midcentury. Special favorites were the uniquely American minstrel shows, featuring white actors with blackened faces. “Dixie,” later adopted by the Confederates as their battle hymn, was written in 1859, ironically in New York City by an Ohioan. The most famous black songs, also ironically, came from a white Pennsylvanian, Stephen C. Foster (1826–1864). His one excursion into the South occurred in 1852, after he had published “Old Folks at Home.” Foster made a valuable contribution to American folk music by capturing the plaintive spirit of the slaves. An odd and pathetic ﬁgure, he ﬁ nally lost both his art and his popularity and died in a charity ward after drowning his sorrows in drink.

The Blossoming of
 a National Literature “Who reads an American book?” sneered a British critic of 1820. The painful truth was that the nation’s roughhewn, pioneering civilization gave little encouragement to “polite” literature. Much of the reading matter was imported or plagiarized from Britain. Busy conquering a continent, the Americans poured most of their creative efforts into practical outlets. Praiseworthy were political essays, like The Federalist of Hamilton, Jay, and Madison; pamphlets, like Tom Paine’s Common Sense; and political orations, like the masterpieces of Daniel Webster. In the category of nonreligious books published before 1820, Benjamin Franklin’s Autobiography (1818) is one of the few that achieved genuine distinction. His narrative is a classic in its simplicity, clarity, and inspirational quality. Even so, it records only a fragment of “Old Ben’s” long, fruitful, and amorous life.

Leading Transcendentalists


 A genuinely American literature received a strong boost from the wave of nationalism that followed the War of Independence and especially the War of 1812. By 1820 the older seaboard areas were sufﬁciently removed from the survival mentality of tree-chopping and butter-churning that literature could be supported as a profession. The Knickerbocker Group in New York blazed brilliantly across the literary heavens, thus enabling America for the ﬁ rst time to boast of a literature to match its magniﬁcent landscapes. Washington Irving (1783–1859), born in New York City, was the ﬁ rst American to win international recognition as a literary ﬁgure. Steeped in the traditions of New Netherland, he published in 1809 his Knickerbocker’s History of New York, with its amusing caricatures of the Dutch. When the family business failed, Irving was forced to turn to the goose-feather pen. In 1819–1820 he published The Sketch Book, which brought him immediate fame at home and abroad. Combining a pleasing style with delicate charm and quiet humor, he used Eng lish as well as American themes and included such immortal Dutch American tales as “Rip Van Winkle” and “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow.” Europe was amazed to ﬁ nd at last an American with a feather in his hand, not in his hair. Later turning to Spanish locales and biography, Irving did much to interpret America to Europe and Europe to America. He was, said the Englishman William Thackeray, “the ﬁ rst ambassador whom the New World of letters sent to the Old.” James Fenimore Cooper (1789–1851) was the ﬁ rst American novelist, as Washington Irving was the ﬁrst general writer, to gain world fame and to make New World themes respectable. Marrying into a wealthy family, he settled down on the frontier of New York. Reading one day to his wife from an insipid Eng lish novel, Cooper remarked in disgust that he could write a better book himself. His wife challenged him to do so— and he did. After an initial failure, Cooper launched out upon an illustrious career in 1821 with his second novel, The Spy—an absorbing tale of the American Revolution. His stories of the sea were meritorious and popular, but his fame rests most enduringly on the Leatherstocking Tales. A dead-eye riﬂeman named Natty Bumppo, one of nature’s noblemen, meets with Indians in stirring adventures like The Last of the Mohicans. James Fenimore Cooper’s novels had a wide sale among Europeans, some of whom came to think of all American people as born with tomahawk in hand. Actually Cooper was exploring the viability and destiny of America’s republican experiment, by contrasting the



 undeﬁ led values of “natural men,” children of the wooded wilderness, with the artiﬁciality of modern civilization. A third member of the Knickerbocker group in New York was the belated Puritan William Cullen Bryant (1794–1878), transplanted from Massachusetts. At age sixteen he wrote the meditative and melancholy “Thanatopsis” (published in 1817), which was one of the ﬁ rst high-quality poems produced in the United States. Critics could hardly believe that it had been written on “this side of the water.” Although Bryant continued with poetry, he was forced to make his living by editing the inﬂuential New York Evening Post. For over ﬁ fty years, he set a model for journalism that was digniﬁed, liberal, and conscientious.

Trumpeters of
Transcendentalism
 A golden age in American literature dawned in the second quarter of the nineteenth century, when an amazing outburst shook New England. One of the mainsprings of this literary ﬂowering was transcendentalism, especially around Boston, which preened itself as “the Athens of America.” The transcendentalist movement of the 1830s resulted in part from a liberalizing of the straightjacket Puritan theology. It also owed much to foreign inﬂuences, including the German romantic philosophers and the religions of Asia. The transcendentalists rejected the prevailing theory, derived from John Locke, that all knowledge comes to the mind through the senses. Truth, rather, “transcends” the senses: it cannot be found by observation alone. Every person possesses an inner light that can illuminate the highest truth and put him or her in direct touch with God, or the “Oversoul.” These mystical doctrines of transcendentalism deﬁed precise deﬁ nition, but they underlay concrete beliefs. Foremost was a stiff-backed individualism in matters religious as well as social. Closely associated was a commitment to self-reliance, self-culture, and self-discipline. These traits naturally bred hostility to authority and to formal institutions of any kind, as well as to all conventional wisdom. Finally came exaltation of the dignity of the individual, whether black or white—the mainspring of a whole array of humanitarian reforms. Best known of the transcendentalists was Bostonborn Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882). Tall, slender,



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


Ralph Waldo Emerson
 (1803–1882) Public lecturing provided a way for Emerson to put his ideas before a larger audience than his readers and to support his family. His philosophical observations included such statements as “The less government we have, the better—the fewer laws, and the less conﬁded power”; “To be great is to be misunderstood”; “Every hero becomes a bore at last”; “Shallow men believe in luck”; and “When you strike a king, you must kill him.”

 and intensely blue-eyed, he mirrored serenity in his noble features. Trained as a Unitarian minister, he early forsook his pulpit and ultimately reached a wider audience by pen and platform. He was a never-failing favorite as a lyceum lecturer and for twenty years took a western tour every winter. Perhaps his most thrilling public effort was a Phi Beta Kappa address, “The Amer-

 In 1849 Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862) published “Resistance to Civil Government,” (later renamed “Civil Disobedience”), asserting,

“


 All men recognize the right of revolution; the right to refuse allegiance to and to resist the government, when its tyranny or its inefﬁciency are great and endurable. But almost all say that such is not the case now. . . . I say, when a sixth of the population of a nation which has undertaken to be the refuge of liberty are slaves, and a whole country is unjustly overrun and conquered by a foreign army, and subjected to military law, I think that it is not too soon for honest men to rebel and revolutionize. What makes this duty more urgent is the fact, that the country so overrun is not our own, but ours is the invading army.

”


 ican Scholar,” delivered at Harvard College in 1837. This brilliant appeal was an intellectual declaration of independence, for it urged American writers to throw off European traditions and delve into the riches of their own backyards. Hailed as both a poet and a philosopher, Emerson was not of the highest rank as either. He was more inﬂuential as a practical philosopher and through his fresh and vibrant essays enriched countless thousands of humdrum lives. Catching the individualistic mood of the Republic, he stressed self-reliance, self-improvement, self-conﬁdence, optimism, and freedom. The secret of Emerson’s popularity lay largely in the fact that his ideals reﬂected those of an expanding America. By the 1850s he was an outspoken critic of slavery, and he ardently supported the Union cause in the Civil War. Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862) was Emerson’s close associate—a poet, a mystic, a transcendentalist, and a nonconformist. Condemning a government that supported slavery, he refused to pay his Massachusetts poll tax and was jailed for a night.* A gifted prose writer, he is well known for Walden: Or Life in the Woods (1854). The book is a record of Thoreau’s two years of simple existence in a hut that he built on the edge of Walden Pond, near Concord, Massachusetts. A stiff-necked in-

 *The story (probably apocryphal) is that Emerson visited Thoreau at the jail and asked, “Why are you here?” The reply came, “Why are you not here?”

Prominent Writers


Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862), 1856
 Thoreau’s lyrical essays about nature made him a spiritual father of the later conservation movement.

 dividualist, he believed that he should reduce his bodily wants so as to gain time for a pursuit of truth through study and meditation. Thoreau’s Walden and his essay On the Duty of Civil Disobedience exercised a strong inﬂuence in furthering idealistic thought, both in Amer-

 In 1876 the London Saturday Review referred to Walt Whitman (1819–1892) as the author of a volume of

“


 so-called poems which were chieﬂy remarkable for their absurd extravagances and shameless obscenity, and who has since, we are glad to say, been little heard of among decent people.

”


 In 1888 Whitman wrote,

“


 I had my choice when I commenced. I bid neither for soft eulogies, big money returns, nor the approbation of existing schools and conventions. . . . I have had my say entirely my own way, and put it unerringly on record—the value thereof to be decided by time.

”




 Walt Whitman (1819–1892), ca. 1860 Whitman’s love affair with America and the American people inspired later poets such as Allen Ginsberg, and “Whitmanesque” came to describe any poetry that celebrates the possibilities of American life and unbridled personal freedom.

 ica and abroad. His writings later encouraged Mahatma Gandhi to resist British rule in India and, still later, inspired the development of American civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr.’s thinking about nonviolence. Bold, brassy, and swaggering was the open-collared ﬁgure of Brooklyn’s Walt Whitman (1819–1892). In his famous collection of poems Leaves of Grass (1855), he gave free rein to his gushing genius with what he called a “barbaric yawp.” Highly romantic, emotional, and unconventional, he dispensed with titles, stanzas, rhymes, and at times even regular meter. He handled sex with shocking frankness, although he laundered his verses in later editions, and his book was banned in Boston. Whitman’s Leaves of Grass was at ﬁ rst a ﬁ nancial failure. The only three enthusiastic reviews that it received were written by the author himself—anonymously. But in time the once-withered Leaves of Grass, revived and honored, won for Whitman an enormous following in both America and Europe. His fame increased immensely among “Whitmaniacs” after his death. Leaves of Grass gained for Whitman the informal title “Poet Laureate of Democracy.” Singing with



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 transcendental abandon of his love for the masses, he caught the exuberant enthusiasm of an expanding Amer ica that had turned its back on the Old World: All the Past we leave behind; We debouch upon a newer, mightier world, varied world; Fresh and strong the world we seize—world of labor and the march— Pioneers! O Pioneers! Here at last was the native art for which critics had been crying.

Glowing Literary Lights
 Certain other literary giants were not actively associated with the transcendentalist movement, though not completely immune to its inﬂuences. Professor Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1807–1882), who for many years taught modern languages at Harvard College, was one of the most popular poets ever produced in America. Handsome and urbane, he lived a generally serene life, except for the tragic deaths of two wives, the second of whom perished before his eyes when her dress caught ﬁ re. Writing for the genteel classes, he was adopted by the less cultured masses. His wide knowledge of European literature supplied him with many themes, but some of his most admired poems—“Evangeline,” “The Song of Hiawatha,” and “The Courtship of Miles Standish”—were based on American traditions. Immensely popular in Europe, Longfellow was the only American ever to be honored with a bust in the Poets’ Corner of Westminster Abbey. A ﬁghting Quaker, John Greenleaf Whittier (1807– 1892), with piercing dark eyes and swarthy complexion, was the uncrowned poet laureate of the antislavery crusade. Less talented as a writer than Longfellow, he was vastly more important in inﬂuencing social action. His poems cried aloud against inhumanity, injustice, and intolerance, against The outworn rite, the old abuse, The pious fraud transparent grown. Undeterred by insults and the stoning of mobs, Whittier helped arouse a callous America on the slavery issue. A supreme conscience rather than a sterling poet or intellect, Whittier was one of the moving forces of his generation, whether moral, humanitarian, or spiritual. Gentle and lovable, he was preeminently the poet of human freedom.

 Many-sided professor James Russell Lowell (1819– 1891), who succeeded Professor Longfellow at Harvard, ranks as one of America’s better poets. He was also a distinguished essayist, literary critic, editor, and diplomat—a diffusion of talents that hampered his poetical output. Lowell is remembered as a political satirist in his Biglow Papers, especially those of 1846 dealing with the Mexican War. Written partly as poetry in the Yankee dialect, the Papers condemned in blistering terms the alleged slavery-expansion designs of the Polk administration. The scholarly Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes (1809– 1894), who taught anatomy with a sparkle at Harvard Medical School, was a prominent poet, essayist, novelist, lecturer, and wit. A nonconformist and a fascinating conversationalist, he shone among a group of literary lights who regarded Boston as “the hub of the universe.” His poem “The Last Leaf,” in honor of the last “white Indian” of the Boston Tea Party, came to apply to himself. Dying at the age of eighty-ﬁve, he was the “last leaf” among his distinguished contemporaries.* Two women writers whose work remains enormously popular today were also tied to this New England literary world. Louisa May Alcott (1832–1888) grew up in Concord, Massachusetts, in the bosom of transcendentalism, alongside neighbors Emerson, Thoreau, and Fuller. Her philosopher father Bronson Alcott occupied himself more devotedly to ideas than earning a living, leaving his daughter to write Little Women (1868) and other books to support her mother and sisters. Not far away in Amherst, Massachusetts, poet Emily Dickinson (1830–1886) lived as a recluse but created her own original world through precious gems of poetry. In deceptively spare language and simple rhyme schemes, she explored universal themes of nature, love, death, and immortality. Although she refused during her lifetime to publish any of her poems, when she died, nearly two thousand of them were found among her papers and eventually made their way into print. The most noteworthy literary ﬁgure produced by the South before the Civil War, unless Edgar Allan Poe is regarded as a southerner, was novelist William Gilmore Simms (1806–1870). Quantitatively, at least, he was great: eighty-two books ﬂowed from his ever-moist pen, winning for him the title “the Cooper of the South.” His themes dealt with the southern frontier in colonial

 *Oliver Wendell Holmes had a son with the same name who became a distinguished justice of the Supreme Court (1902–1932) and who lived to be ninety-four less two days.

A
Literary Renaissance 

 Louisa May Alcott (1832–1888), 1856 In search of independence for herself and ﬁnancial security for her family, Alcott worked as a seamstress, governess, teacher, and housemaid until her writing ﬁnally brought her success. Her much-loved, largely autobiographical novel Little Women has remained in print continuously from 1868 until our own day.

 days and with the South during the Revolutionary War. But he was neglected by his own section, even though he married into the socially elite and became a slaveowner. The high-toned planter aristocracy would never accept the son of a poor Charleston storekeeper.

Literary Individualists
 and Dissenters Not all writers in these years believed so keenly in human goodness and social progress. Edgar Allan Poe (1809–1849), who spent much of his youth in Virginia, was an eccentric genius. Orphaned at an early age, cursed with ill health, and married to a child-wife of thirteen who fell fatally ill of tuberculosis, he suffered hunger, cold, poverty, and debt. Failing at suicide, he took refuge in the bottle and dissipated his talent early. Poe was a gifted lyric poet, as “The Raven” attests. A master stylist, he also excelled in the short story, espe-



 cially of the horror type, in which he shared his alcoholic nightmares with fascinated readers. If he did not invent the modern detective novel, he at least set new high standards in tales like “The Gold Bug.” Poe was fascinated by the ghostly and ghastly, as in “The Fall of the House of Usher” and other stories. He reﬂected a morbid sensibility distinctly at odds with the usually optimistic tone of American culture. Partly for this reason, Poe has perhaps been even more prized by Europeans than by Americans. His brilliant career was cut short when he was found drunk in a Baltimore gutter and shortly thereafter died. Two other writers reﬂected the continuing Calvinist obsession with original sin and with the neverending struggle between good and evil. In somber Salem, Massachusetts, writer Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804–1864) grew up in an at mosphere heavy with the memories of his Puritan forebears and the tragedy of his father’s premature death on an ocean voyage. His masterpiece was The Scarlet Letter (1850), which describes the Puritan practice of forcing an adulteress to wear a scarlet “A” on her clothing. The tragic tale chronicles the psychological effects of sin on the guilty heroine and her secret lover (the father of her baby), a minister of the gospel in Puritan Boston. In The Marble Faun (1860), Hawthorne dealt with a group of young American artists who witness a mysterious murder in Rome. The book explores the concepts of the omnipresence of evil and the dead hand of the past weighing upon the present. Herman Melville (1819–1891), an orphaned and illeducated New Yorker, went to sea as a youth and served eighteen adventuresome months on a whaler. “A whale ship was my Yale College and my Harvard,” he wrote. Jumping ship in the South Seas, he lived among cannibals, from whom he providently escaped uneaten. His fresh and charming tales of the South Seas were immediately popular, but his masterpiece, Moby Dick (1851), was not. This epic novel is a complex allegory of good and evil, told in terms of the conﬂ ict between a whaling captain, Ahab, and a giant white whale, Moby Dick. Captain Ahab, having lost a leg to the marine monster, lives only for revenge. His pursuit ﬁ nally ends when Moby Dick rams and sinks Ahab’s ship, leaving only one survivor. The whale’s exact identity and Ahab’s motives remain obscure. In the end the sea, like the terrifyingly impersonal and unknowable universe of Melville’s imagination, simply rolls on. Moby Dick was widely ignored at the time of its publication; people were accustomed to more straightforward and upbeat prose. A disheartened Melville



Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


 Capturing a Sperm Whale, painted by William Page from a sketch by C. B. Hulsart, 1835 This painting and Melville’s Moby Dick vividly portray the hazards of whaling. Despite the dangers, it proved to be an important industry from colonial times to the end of the nineteenth century

 continued to write unproﬁtably for some years, part of the time eking out a living as a customs inspector, and then died in relative obscurity and poverty. Ironically, his brooding masterpiece about the mysterious white whale had to wait until the more jaded twentieth century for readers and for proper recognition.

Portrayers of the Past
 A distinguished group of American historians was emerging at the same time that other writers were winning distinction. Energetic George Bancroft (1800– 1891), who as secretary of the navy helped found the Naval Academy at Annapolis in 1845, has deservedly received the title “Father of American History.” He published a spirited, superpatriotic history of the United States to 1789 in six (originally ten) volumes (1834– 1876), a work that grew out of his vast researches in dusty archives in Europe and America. Two other historians are read with greater plea sure and proﬁt today. William H. Prescott (1796–1859), who

 accidentally lost the sight of an eye while in college, conserved his remaining weak vision and published classic accounts of the conquest of Mexico (1843) and Peru (1847). Francis Parkman (1823–1893), whose eyes were so defective that he wrote in darkness with the aid of a guiding machine, penned a brilliant series of volumes beginning in 1851. In epic style he chronicled the struggle between France and Britain in colonial times for the mastery of North America. Early American historians of prominence were almost without exception New Eng landers, largely because the Boston area provided well-stocked libraries and a stimulating literary tradition. These writers numbered abolitionists among their relatives and friends and hence were disposed to view unsympathetically the slavery-cursed South. This “made in New Eng land” interpretation dominated the writing of American history until the close of the nineteenth century, when pressure for national reconciliation overcame regional bias. “The history of the United States has been written by Boston,” one pro-southern historian bitterly complained, “and largely written wrong.”

Key Terms




 CHRONOLOGY

 Shaker movement founded in Manchester, Eng land

 1770s

 First Shaker communities established in New York



 Thomas Paine publishes The Age of Reason



 University of North Carolina founded



 Second Great Awakening begins



 Jefferson founds University of Virginia



 Cooper publishes The Spy, his ﬁ rst successful novel Emma Willard establishes Troy (New York) Female Seminary



 New Harmony commune established



 American Temperance Society founded



 Noah Webster publishes dictionary American Peace Society founded

1830–


 Joseph Smith founds Mormon Church Godey’s Lady’s Book ﬁ rst published



 Lyceum movement ﬂourishes



 Oberlin College admits female students Mary Lyon establishes Mount Holyoke Seminary Emerson delivers “The American Scholar” address



 London antislavery convention refuses to recognize female delegates



 Brook Farm commune established



 Dorothea Dix petitions Massachusetts legislature on behalf of the insane

1846–


 Mormon migration to Utah



 Seneca Falls Woman’s Rights Convention held Oneida Community established



 Hawthorne publishes The Scarlet Letter



 Melville publishes Moby Dick Maine passes ﬁ rst law prohibiting liquor



 Whitman publishes Leaves of Grass

 Finney conducts revivals in eastern cities

KEY TERMS
The Age of Reason (341) Deism (341) Unitarians (341) Second Great Awakening (341) Burned-Over District (343) Mormons (343) lyceum (347) American Temperance Society (350) Maine Law of 1851 (351) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Woman’s Rights Convention at Seneca Falls (352) New Harmony (354) Brook Farm (354) Oneida Community (354) Shakers (354) Hudson River school (359) minstrel shows (360) transcendentalism (361) “The American Scholar” (362) 
Peter Cartwright
Charles Grandison
Finney
Joseph Smith
Brigham Young
Horace Mann
Dorothea Dix
Neal S. Dow
Lucretia Mott
Elizabeth Cady Stanton
Susan B. Anthony
Lucy Stone
Amelia Bloomer
Robert Owen


John J. Audubon
Stephen C. Foster
James Fenimore Cooper
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Henry David Thoreau
Walt Whitman
Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow
Louisa May Alcott
Emily Dickinson
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Herman Melville
Francis Parkman




Chapter 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790–1860


Reform: Who? What? How? and Why?


E


 arly chronicles of the antebellum period universally lauded the era’s reformers, portraying them as idealistic, altruistic crusaders intent on improving American society. After World War II, however, some historians began to detect selﬁsh and even conser vative motives underlying the apparent benevolence of the reformers. This view described the advocates of reform as anxious, upper-class men and women threatened by the ferment of life in antebellum America. The pursuit of reforms like temperance, asylums, prisons, and mandatory public education represented a means of asserting “social control.” In this vein, one historian described a reform movement as “the anguished protest of an aggrieved class against a world they never made.” In Michael Katz’s treatment of early educational reform, proponents were community leaders who sought a school system that would ease the traumas of America’s industrialization by inculcating business-oriented values and discipline in the working classes. The wave of reform activity in the 1960s prompted a reevaluation of the reputations of the antebellum reformers. These more recent interpretations found much to admire in the authentic religious commitments of reformers and especially in the participation of women, who sought various social improvements as an extension of their function as protectors of the home and family. The scholarly treatment of abolitionism is a telling example of how reformers and their campaigns have risen and fallen in the estimation of histor ians. To northern historians writing in the late nineteenth century, abolitionists were courageous men and women so devoted to uprooting the evil of slavery that they were willing to dedicate their lives to a cause that often ostracized them from their communities. By the mid-twentieth century, an interpretation more favorable to the South prevailed, one that blamed the fanaticism of the abolitionists for the Civil War. But as the racial climate in the United States began to change during the 1960s, historians once again showed sympathy for the abolitionist struggle, and by the end of the twentieth century abolitionist men and women were revered as ideologically committed individuals

 dedicated not just to freeing the enslaved but to saving the moral soul of America. Scholars animated by the modern feminist movement have inspired a reconsideration of women’s reform activity. It had long been known, of course, that women were active participants in charitable orga nizations. But not until Nancy Cott, Kathryn Sklar, Mary Ryan, and other historians began to look more closely at what Cott has called “the bonds of womanhood” did the links between women’s domestic lives and their public benevolent behavior fully emerge. Car roll Smith-Rosenberg showed in her study of the New York Female Moral Reform Society, for example, that members who set out at ﬁ rst to convert prostitutes to evangelical Protestantism and to close down the city’s many brothels soon developed an ideology of female autonomy that rejected male dominance. When men behaved in immoral or illegal ways, women reformers claimed that they had the right—even the duty—to leave the conﬁ nes of their homes and actively work to purify society. More recently, historians Nancy Hewitt and Lori Ginzberg have challenged the assumption that all women reformers embraced a single deﬁnition of female identity. Instead they have emphasized the importance of class differences in shaping women’s reform work, which led inevitably to tensions within female ranks. Giving more attention to the historical evolution of female reform ideology, Ginzberg has also detected a shift from an early focus on moral uplift to a more class-based appeal for social control. Historians of the suffrage movement have emphasized another kind of exclusivity among women reformers—the boundaries of race. Ellen DuBois has shown that after a brief alliance with the abolitionist movement, many female suffrage reformers abandoned the cause of black liberation in an effort to achieve their own goal with less controversy. Whatever historians may conclude about the liberating or leashing character of early reform, it is clear by now that they have to contend with the ways in which class, gender, and race divided reformers, making the plural—reform movements—the more accurate depiction of the impulse to “improve” that pervaded American society in the early nineteenth century.

To Learn More




To Learn More
Robert Abzug, Cosmos Crumbling: American Reform and
 the Religious Imagination (1994) Nathan O. Hatch, The Democratization of American Christianity (1989) Joseph Hawes, Children in Urban Society (1971) Paul Johnson, A Shopkeeper’s Millennium: Society and Revivals in Rochester, New York, 1815–1837 (1978) Joseph F. Kett, Rites of Passage: Adolescence in America (1976) Spencer Klaw, Without Sin: The Life and Death of the Oneida Community (1993)

Steven Mintz and Susan Kellogg, Domestic Revolutions: A
Social History of American Family Life (1988)
William Rorabaugh, The Alcoholic Republic (1979)
Ronald Walters, American Reformers, 1815–1860 (1978)


 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

 PART

 THREE

Testing the
New Nation





1820–1877


T


 he Civil War of 1861 to 1865 was the awesome trial by ﬁ re of American nationhood, and of the American soul. All Americans knew, said Abraham Lincoln, that slavery “was somehow the cause of this war.” The war tested, in Lincoln’s ringing phrase at Gettysburg, whether any nation “dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal . . . can long endure.” How did this great and bloody conﬂ ict come about? And what were its results? American slavery was by any measure a “peculiar institution.” Slavery was rooted in both racism and economic exploitation, and depended for its survival on brutal repression. Yet the American

 slave population was the only enslaved population in history that grew by means of its own biological reproduction—a fact that suggests to many historians that conditions under slavery in the United States were somehow less punitive than those in other slave societies. Indeed a distinctive and durable African American culture managed to ﬂourish under slavery, further suggesting that the slave regime provided some “space” for African American cultural development. But however benignly it might be painted, slavery still remained a cancer in the heart of American democracy, a moral outrage that mocked the nation’s claim to be a model of social and

 Returning from the Cotton Fields in South Carolina African American slaves planted and picked virtually all the cotton that formed the foundation of the nineteenth-century southern economy. The white South ferociously defended its “peculiar institution” of slavery, which ended at last only in the ﬁres of the Civil War.

Testing the New Nation




The 1st Virginia Regiment These Virginia
 militiamen were photographed in 1859 while attending the trial of the abolitionist John Brown for treason against the State of Virginia. Two years later their regiment formed part of the Confederate army that struck for southern independence.

 political enlightenment. As time went on, more and more voices called more and more stridently for its abolition. The nation lived uneasily with slavery from the outset. Thomas Jefferson was only one among many in the founding generation who felt acutely the conﬂ ict between the high principle of equality and the ugly reality of slavery. The federal government in the early Republic took several steps to check the growth of slavery. It banned slavery in the Old Northwest in 1787, prohibited the further importation of slaves after 1808, and declared in the Missouri Compromise of 1820 that the vast western territories secured in the Louisiana Purchase were forever closed to slavery north of the state of Missouri. Antislavery sentiment even abounded in the South in the immediate post-Revolutionary years. But as time progressed, and especially after Eli Whitney’s invention of the cotton gin in the 1790s, the southern planter class became increasingly dependent on slave labor to wring proﬁts from the sprawling plantations that carpeted the South. As cotton cultivation spread westward, the South’s stake in slavery grew deeper, and the abolitionist outcry grew louder. The controversy over slavery signiﬁcantly intensiﬁed following the war with Mexico in the 1840s.

 “Mexico will poison us,” predicted the philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson, and he proved to be distressingly prophetic. The lands acquired from Mexico—most of the present-day American Southwest, from Texas to Cal i fornia—reopened the question of extending slavery into the western territories. The decade and a half that followed the Mexican War—from 1846 to 1861—witnessed a series of ultimately ineffective efforts to come to grips with that question, including the ill-starred Compromise of 1850, the conﬂ ict-breeding Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854, and the Supreme Court’s inﬂammatory decision in the Dred Scott case of 1857. Ultimately, the slavery question was settled by force of arms, in the Civil War itself. The Civil War, as Lincoln observed, was assuredly about slavery. But as Lincoln also repeatedly insisted, the war was about the viability of the Union as well and about the strength of democracy itself. Could a democratic government, built on the principle of popular consent, rightfully deny some of its citizens the same right to independence that the American revolutionaries had exercised in seceding from the British Empire in 1776? Southern rebels, calling the conﬂ ict “The War for Southern Independence,” asked that question forcefully, but ultimately it, too, was answered not in the law courts or in the legislative halls but on the battleﬁeld. The Civil War unarguably established the supremacy of the Union, and it ended slavery as well. But as the victorious Union set about the task of “reconstruction” after the war’s end in 1865, a combination of weak northern will and residual southern power frustrated the goal of making the emancipated blacks full-ﬂedged American citizens. The Civil War in the end brought nothing but freedom—but over time, freedom proved a powerful tool indeed.

The South and the
Slavery Controversy





1793–1860
 Those who deny freedom to others deserve it not for themselves, and, under a just God, cannot long retain it. ABRAHAM LINCOLN, 1859

A


 t the dawn of the Republic, slavery faced an uncertain future. Touched by Revolutionary idealism, some southern leaders, including Thomas Jefferson, were talking openly of freeing their slaves. Others predicted that the iron logic of economics would eventually expose slavery’s unproﬁtability, speeding its demise. But the introduction of Eli Whitney’s cotton gin in 1793 scrambled all those predictions. Whitney’s invention made possible the wide-scale cultivation of short-staple cotton. The white ﬁber rapidly became the dominant southern crop, eclipsing tobacco, rice, and sugar. The explosion of cotton cultivation created an insatiable demand for labor, chaining the slave to the gin and the planter to the slave. As the nineteenth century opened, the reinvigoration of southern slavery carried fateful implications for blacks and whites alike—and threatened the survival of the nation itself.

“Cotton Is King!”
 As time passed, the Cotton Kingdom developed into a huge agricultural factory, pouring out avalanches of the ﬂuffy ﬁber. Quick proﬁts drew planters to the loamy bottomlands of the Gulf states. As long as the soil was still vigorous, the yield was bountiful and the rewards were high. Caught up in an economic spiral, the planters bought more slaves and land to grow more cotton, so as to buy still more slaves and land. Northern shippers reaped a large part of the proﬁts from the cotton trade. They would load bulging bales of cotton at southern ports, transport them to Eng land, sell their ﬂeecy cargo for pounds sterling, and buy needed manufactured goods for sale in the United States. To a large degree, the prosperity of both North and South—and of Eng land, too—rested on the bent backs of enslaved bondsmen.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Cotton Empire


 So did the young nation’s growing wealth. Cotton accounted for half the value of all American exports after 1840, and export earnings provided much of the capital that stoked the Republic’s economic growth. The South produced more than half of the entire world’s supply of cotton—a fact that held foreign nations in partial bondage. Britain was then the leading industrial power. Its most important single manufacture in the 1850s was cotton cloth, from which about one-ﬁ fth of its population, directly or indirectly, drew its livelihood. About 75 percent of this precious supply of ﬁber came from the white-carpeted acres of the South. Southern leaders were fully aware that Britain was tied to them by cotton threads, and this dependence gave them a heady sense of power. In their eyes “Cotton was King,” the gin was his throne, and the black bondsmen were his henchmen. If war should ever break out between North and South, northern warships would presumably cut off the outﬂow of cotton. Fiberfamished British factories would then close their gates, starving mobs would force the London government to break the blockade, and the South would triumph. Cotton was a powerful monarch indeed.

The Planter “Aristocracy”
 Before the Civil War, the South was in some respects not so much a democracy as an oligarchy—or a government



 by the few, in this case heavily inﬂuenced by a planter aristocracy. In 1850 only 1,733 families owned more than 100 slaves each, and this select group provided the cream of the political and social leadership of the section and nation. Here was the mint-julep South of the tall-columned and white-painted plantation mansion—the “big house,” where dwelt the “cottonocracy.” The planter aristocrats, with their blooded horses and Chippendale chairs, enjoyed a lion’s share of southern wealth. They could educate their children in the ﬁnest schools, often in the North or abroad. Their money provided the leisure for study, reﬂection, and statecraft, as was notably true of men like John C. Calhoun (a Yale graduate) and Jefferson Davis (a West Point graduate). They felt a keen sense of obligation to serve the public. It was no accident that Virginia and the other southern states produced a higher proportion of front-rank statesmen before 1860 than the “dollar-grubbing” North. But even in its best light, dominance by a favored aristocracy was basically undemocratic. It widened the gap between rich and poor. It hampered tax-supported public education, because the rich planters could and did send their children to private institutions. A favorite author of elite southerners was Sir Walter Scott, whose manors and castles, graced by brave Ivanhoes and fair Rowenas, helped them idealize a feudal society, even when many of their economic activities were undeniably capitalistic. Southern aristocrats, who sometimes staged jousting tournaments, strove to

Interior of the Cotton Bureau in
New Orleans, by Edgar Degas,
 1873 Although this painting dates from 1873, French impressionist painter Edgar Degas (1834–1917) captured the insouciant self-conﬁdence of cotton traders in the pre–Civil War era. As cotton cultivation spread into the new states of the trans-Appalachian Southwest, the entire Cotton Kingdom paid tribute to New Orleans, Queen City of the South, and the port through which millions of cotton bales ﬂowed out to British textile mills.



Chapter 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 1793–1860


Harvesting Cotton
 This Currier & Ives print shows slaves of both sexes harvesting cotton, which was then “ginned,” baled, carted to the riverbank, and taken by paddle wheeler downriver to New Orleans for shipment to New England or overseas.

 perpetuate a type of medievalism that had died out in Europe—or was rapidly dying out.* Mark Twain later accused Sir Walter Scott of having had a hand in starting the Civil War. The British novelist, Twain said, aroused the southerners to ﬁght for a decaying social structure—“a sham civilization.” The plantation system also shaped the lives of southern women. The mistress of a great plantation commanded a sizable household staff of mostly female slaves. She gave daily orders to cooks, maids, seamstresses, laundresses, and body servants. Relationships between mistresses and slaves ranged from affectionate to atrocious. Some mistresses showed tender regard for their bondswomen, and some slave women took pride in their status as “members” of the household. But slavery strained even the bonds of womanhood. Virtually no slaveholding women believed in abolition, and relatively few protested when the husbands and children of their slaves were sold. One plantation mistress harbored a special affection for her slave Annica but noted in her diary that “I whipt Annica” for insolence.

Slaves of the Slave System
 Unhappily, the moonlight-and-magnolia tradition concealed much that was worrisome, distasteful, and sordid. Plantation agriculture was wasteful, largely because King Cotton and his money-hungry subjects despoiled the good earth. Quick proﬁts led to excessive cultiva-

 *Oddly enough, by legislative enactment, jousting became the ofﬁcial state sport of Maryland in 1962.

 tion, or “land butchery,” which in turn caused a heavy leakage of population to the West and Northwest. The economic structure of the South became increasingly monopolistic. As the land wore thin, many small farmers sold their holdings to more prosperous neighbors and went north or west. The big got bigger and the small smaller. When the Civil War ﬁ nally erupted, a large percentage of southern farms had passed from the hands of the families that had originally cleared them. Another cancer in the bosom of the South was the ﬁ nancial instability of the plantation system. The temptation to overspeculate in land and slaves caused many planters, including Andrew Jackson in his later years, to plunge in beyond their depth. Although the black slaves might in extreme cases be fed for as little as ten cents a day, there were other expenses. The slaves

 Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826) wrote in 1786,

“


 What a stupendous, what an incomprehensible machine is man! Who can endure toil, famine, stripes, imprisonment & death itself in vindication of his own liberty, and the next moment . . . inﬂict on his fellow men a bondage, one hour of which is fraught with more misery than ages of that which he rose in rebellion to oppose.

”


 Unlike George Washington, Jefferson freed only a couple of his slaves in his will; the rest were sold to pay off his large debts.

Problems in the Cotton South


 Basil Hall (1788–1844), an Englishman, visited part of the cotton belt on a river steamer (1827–1828). Noting the preoccupation with cotton, he wrote,

“


 All day and almost all night long, the captain, pilot, crew, and passengers were talking of nothing else; and sometimes our ears were so wearied with the sound of cotton! cotton! cotton! that we gladly hailed a fresh inundation of company in hopes of some change—but alas! . . . ‘What’s cotton at?’ was the ﬁrst eager inquiry. ‘Ten cents [a pound ],’ ‘Oh, that will never do!’

”




 dug with Yankee shovels. The South furnished the corpse and the hole in the ground. The Cotton Kingdom also repelled large-scale European immigration, which added so richly to the manpower and wealth of the North. In 1860 only 4.4 percent of the southern population was foreign-born, as compared with 18.7 percent for the North. German and Irish immigration to the South was generally discouraged by the competition of slave labor, by the high cost of fertile land, and by European ignorance of cotton growing. The diverting of non-British immigration to the North caused the white South to become the most Anglo-Saxon section of the nation.

The White Majority


 represented a heavy investment of capital, perhaps $1,200 each in the case of prime ﬁeld hands, and they might deliberately injure themselves or run away. An entire slave quarter might be wiped out by disease or even by lightning, as happened in one instance to twenty ill-fated blacks. Dominance by King Cotton likewise led to a dangerous dependence on a one-crop economy, whose price level was at the mercy of world conditions. The whole system discouraged a healthy diversiﬁcation of agriculture and particularly of manufacturing. Southern planters resented watching the North grow fat at their expense. They were pained by the heavy outward ﬂow of commissions and interest to northern middlemen, bankers, agents, and shippers. True souls of the South, especially by the 1850s, deplored the fact that when born, they were wrapped in Yankee-made swaddling clothes and that they spent the rest of their lives in servitude to Yankee manufacturing. When they died, they were laid in cofﬁ ns held together with Yankee nails and were buried in graves

 Only a handful of southern whites lived in Grecianpillared mansions. Below those 1,733 families in 1850 who owned a hundred or more slaves were the less wealthy slaveowners (see Figure 16.1). They totaled in 1850 some 345,000 families, representing about 1,725,000 white persons. Over two-thirds of these families— 255,268 in all—owned fewer than ten slaves each. All told, only about one-fourth of white southerners owned slaves or belonged to a slaveowning family. The smaller slaveowners did not own a majority of the slaves, but they made up a majority of the masters. These lesser masters were typically small farmers. With the striking exception that their households contained a slave or two, or perhaps an entire slave family, the style of their lives probably resembled that of small farmers in the North more than it did that of the southern planter aristocracy. They lived in modest farmhouses and sweated beside their bondsmen in the cotton ﬁelds, laboring callus for callus just as hard as their slaves. Beneath the slaveowners on the population pyramid was the great body of whites who owned no slaves at all. By 1860 their numbers had swelled to 6,120,825—

 1,733 own 100 or more slaves 6,196 own 50–99 29,733 own 20–49 54,595 own 10 –19 80,765 own 5–9 105,683 own 2– 4 68,820 own 1 each

Figure 16.1 Slaveowning Families, 1850
 More than half of all slaveholding families owned fewer than four slaves. In contrast, 2 percent of slaveowners owned more than ﬁfty slaves each. A tiny slaveholding elite held a majority of slave property in the South. The great majority of white southerners owned no slaves at all.

Chapter 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 1793–1860


 three-quarters of all southern whites. Shouldered off the richest bottomlands by the mighty planters, they scratched a simple living from the thinner soils of the backcountry and the mountain valleys (see Maps 16.1 and 16.2). To them the riches of the Cotton Kingdom were a distant dream, and they often sneered at the

 lordly pretensions of the cotton “snobocracy.” These red-necked farmers participated in the market economy scarcely at all. As subsistence farmers, they raised corn and hogs, not cotton, and often lived isolated lives, punctuated periodically by extended socializing and sermonizing at religious camp meetings.

100°W


90°W


INDIANA O

 ILLINOIS

MISSOURI TERRITORY

 o hi

R.


80°W


 OHIO

Richmond


 VIRGINIA

 KENTUCKY

Arkansa


Memphis


LOUISIANA TEXAS
(Spain) 
30°N


Columbia


R.


N


 M issi s si ppi

R.


 TENNESSEE

 s

R.


Red


ARKANSAS TERRITORY

 MISS.

SOUTH CAROLINA

Augusta


Birmingham


Macon


 ALABAMA

Charleston


 GEORGIA

Jackson


Savannah


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

Mobile
Baton Rouge


UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

New Orleans
Ri o


Gulf of Mexico


Gr
 an

 Southern cotton production

 de

 MEX.

Raleigh


NORTH CAROLINA

Nashville


 Major production areas



 Other production areas

INDIAN TERRITORY R.

 TEXAS

R.


80°W


 OHIO

Richmond


 VIRGINIA

 KENTUCKY

A r k ans


 TENNESSEE

 as

Memphis


 ARKANSAS

Columbia


 LOUISIANA

 MISS.

Birmingham


ALABAMA
Jackson 
Augusta
Macon


 GEORGIA

SOUTH CAROLINA
Charleston Savannah 
AT L A N T I C OCEAN

Mobile


30°N


Raleigh


NORTH CAROLINA

Nashville


R.


Red


 ILLINOIS

 o hi



300 Mi.


R.


100°W


 INDIANA

 MISSOURI

300 Km.


O


KANSAS TERRITORY





90°W


 M issi s si ppi



Baton Rouge
New Orleans


 FLORIDA

Ri


Gulf of Mexico


 o

G ra
 nde

 MEXICO

 Southern cotton production Major production areas Other production areas



Map 16.1 Southern Cotton Production and Distribution of Slaves, 1820
Interactive Map


The Spread of the Slave Power


100°W




90°W


80°W


300 Km.






 PENNSYLVANIA 300 Mi.

 OHIO

 ILLINOIS

40°N


N.J.
 MD.

INDIANA O

MISSOURI TERRITORY

 hi

 o

R.


Richmond


Columbia


R.


 LOUISIANA

 M issi s si ppi

N
 TEXAS (Spain)

Memphis


R.


R.


 TENNESSEE

 as

ARKANSAS TERRITORY

 MISS.

SOUTH CAROLINA

Augusta


Birmingham


Macon


 ALABAMA

Charleston


 GEORGIA

Jackson


Savannah


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

Mobile


30°N


Baton Rouge


UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

New Orleans
Ri o
Gr


Gulf of
Mexico


 Percentage of slaves in total population (by county)

 an

 de

 MEX.

Raleigh


NORTH CAROLINA

Nashville


Arkans


Over 50%


Under 10%


30–49%


 No slaves or unsettled area

10–29%




90°W


80°W


 IOWA

 PENNSYLVANIA

100°W


N.J.


 OHIO

 INDIANA

40°N


MD. DEL.

INDIAN TERRITORY

 o

Richmond


VIRGINIA NORTH CAROLINA

Nashville


A r k ans


 TENNESSEE

 as

 ARKANSAS

 LOUISIANA

Columbia


 MISS.

Birmingham


ALABAMA
Jackson 
Augusta
Macon


 GEORGIA

SOUTH CAROLINA
Charleston Savannah 
AT L A N T I C OCEAN

Mobile


30°N


Baton Rouge


 FLORIDA

New Orleans
Ri


 o

G ra
 nde

 MEXICO

 Percentage of slaves in total population (by county) Over 50%

Under 10%


30–49%


 No slaves or unsettled area

10–29%


Raleigh


Memphis
R.


R.


 hi

R.


 KENTUCKY

 M issi s si ppi

 TEXAS

 MISSOURI

R.


Red


O


ILLINOIS KANSAS TERRITORY

 DEL.

 VIRGINIA

 KENTUCKY

Red




Gulf of
Mexico




Map 16.2 Southern Cotton
Production and Distribution of
 Slaves, 1860 The philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson, a New Englander, declared in 1856, “I do not see how a barbarous community and a civilized community can constitute a state. I think we must get rid of slavery or we must get rid of freedom.” Interactive Map



Chapter 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 1793–1860


 Some of the least prosperous nonslaveholding whites were scorned even by slaves as “poor white trash.” Known also as “hillbillies,” “crackers,” or “clay eaters,” they were often described as listless, shiftless, and misshapen. Later investigations have revealed that many of them were not simply lazy but sick, suffering from malnutrition and parasites, especially hookworm. All these whites without slaves had no direct economic stake in the preservation of slavery, yet they were among the stoutest defenders of the slave system. Why? The answer is not far to seek. The carrot on the stick ever dangling before their eyes was the hope of buying a slave or two and of parlaying their paltry holdings into riches—all in accord with the “American dream” of upward social mobility. They also took ﬁerce pride in their presumed racial superiority, which would be watered down if the slaves were freed. Many of the poorer whites were hardly better off economically than the slaves; some, indeed, were not so well-off. But even the most wretched whites could take perverse comfort from the knowledge that they outranked someone in status: the still more wretched African American slave. Thus did the logic of economics join with the illogic of racism in buttressing the slave system. In a special category among white southerners were the mountain whites, more or less marooned in the valleys of the Appalachian range that stretched from western Virginia to northern Georgia and Alabama. Civilization had largely passed them by, and they still lived under spartan frontier conditions. They were a kind of living ancestry, for some of them retained Elizabethan speech forms and habits that had long since died out in Britain. As independent small farmers, hundreds of miles distant from the heart of the Cotton Kingdom and

 “Arthur Lee, Freeman,” petitioned the General Assembly of Virginia in 1835 for permission to remain in the state despite a law against the residency of free blacks. After asserting his upstanding moral character, he implored,

“


 He therefore most respectfully and earnestly prays that you will pass a law permitting him on the score of long and meritorious service to remain in the State, together with his wife and four children, and not force him in his old age to seek a livelihood in a new Country.

”


 rarely if ever in sight of a slave, these mountain whites had little in common with the whites of the ﬂatlands. Many of them, including future president Andrew Johnson of Tennessee, hated both the haughty planters and their gangs of blacks. They looked upon the impending strife between North and South as “a rich man’s war but a poor man’s ﬁght.” When the war came, the tough-ﬁbered mountain whites constituted a vitally important peninsula of Unionism jutting down into the secessionist Southern sea. They ultimately played a signiﬁcant role in crippling the Confederacy. Their attachment to the Union party of Abraham Lincoln was such that for generations after the Civil War, the only concentrated Republican strength in the solid South was to be found in the southern highlands.

Free Blacks:
Slaves Without Masters
 Precarious in the extreme was the standing of the South’s free blacks, who numbered about 250,000 by 1860. In the upper South, the free black population traced its origins to a wavelet of emancipation inspired by the idealism of Revolutionary days. In the deeper South, many free blacks were mulattoes, usually the emancipated children of a white planter and his black mistress. Throughout the South were some free blacks who had purchased their freedom with earnings from labor after hours. Many free blacks owned property, especially in New Orleans, where a sizable mulatto community prospered. Some, such as William T. Johnson, the “barber of Natchez,” even owned slaves. He was the master of ﬁ fteen bondsmen; his diary records that in June 1848 he ﬂogged two slaves and a mule. The free blacks in the South were a kind of “third race.” These people were prohibited from working in certain occupations and forbidden from testifying against whites in court. They were always vulnerable to being hijacked back into slavery by unscrupulous slave traders. As free men and women, they were walking examples of what might be achieved by emancipation and hence were resented and detested by defenders of the slave system. Free blacks were also unpopular in the North, where about another 250,000 of them lived. Several states forbade their entrance, most denied them the right to vote, and some barred blacks from public schools. In 1835 New Hampshire farmers hitched their oxen to a small schoolhouse that had dared to enroll fourteen black children and dragged it into a swamp. Northern blacks

Slavery on the Plantation


 were especially hated by the pick-and-shovel Irish immigrants, with whom they competed for menial jobs. Much of the agitation in the North against the spread of slavery into the new territories in the 1840s and 1850s grew out of race prejudice, not humanitarianism. Antiblack feeling was in fact frequently stronger in the North than in the South. The gifted and eloquent former slave Frederick Douglass, an abolitionist and self-educated orator of rare power, was several times mobbed and beaten by northern rowdies. It was sometimes observed that white southerners, who were often suckled and reared by black nurses, liked the black as an individual but despised the race. The white northerner, on the other hand, often professed to like the race but disliked individual blacks.

Plantation Slavery
 In society’s basement in the South of 1860 were nearly 4 million black human chattels. Their numbers had A Market in People (left) Held captive in a net, a slave sits on the Congo shore, waiting to be sold and shipped. (right) Once in the United States, slaves continued to be treated like commodities. This woman suffers the humiliation of an inventory number pinned to her dress, most likely for her sale at a slave auction or transport to a new owner.



 quadrupled since the dawn of the century, as the booming cotton economy created a seemingly unquenchable demand for slave labor. Legal importation of African slaves into America ended in 1808, when Congress outlawed slave imports. Britain had abolished the slave trade (but not slavery itself) in 1807, a milestone in the continuing struggle to establish human rights as a principle of international law. In the decades thereafter, the Royal Navy’s West Africa Squadron seized hundreds of slave ships and freed thousands of grateful captives. Yet despite that effort, as many as 3 million enslaved Africans were shipped to Brazil and the West Indies in the several decades after 1807. In the United States, the price of “black ivory” was so high in the years before the Civil War that uncounted thousands of blacks were smuggled into the South, despite the death penalty for slavers. Although several slave traders were captured, southern juries repeatedly acquitted them. Only one slave trader, N. P. Gordon, was ever executed, and this took place in New York in 1862, the second year of the Civil War.



Chapter 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 1793–1860


 Ironically, the suppression of the international slave trade fostered the growth of a vigorous internal slave trade, as upper South states like Virginia became major sources of supply for the booming cotton economy of the Deep South. Most of the increase in the slave population in the United States came not from imports, but from natural reproduction—a fact that owed something to the accident of geography that the slave South lay outside the area where tropical diseases took such a grisly human toll. The natural reproduction of enslaved African Americans also distinguished North American slavery from slavery in more southerly New World societies and implied much about the tenor of the slave regime and the conditions of family life under slavery in the United States. Above all, the planters regarded their slaves as investments, into which they had sunk nearly $2 billion of their capital by 1860. Slaves were the primary form of wealth in the South, and as such they were cared for as any asset is cared for by a prudent capitalist. Accordingly, they were sometimes, though by no means always, spared dangerous work, like putting a roof on a

 house. If a neck was going to be broken, the master preferred it to be that of a wage-earning Irish laborer rather than that of a prime ﬁeld hand, worth $1,800 by 1860 (a price that had quintupled since 1800). Tunnel blasting and swamp draining were often consigned to itinerant gangs of expendable Irishmen because those perilous tasks were “death on niggers and mules.” Slavery was proﬁtable for the great planters, though it hobbled the economic development of the region as a whole. The proﬁts from the cotton boom sucked ever more slaves from the upper to the lower South, so that by 1860 the Deep South states of South Carolina, Florida, Mississippi, Alabama, and Louisiana each had a majority or near-majority of blacks and accounted for about half of all slaves in the South. Breeding slaves in the way that cattle are bred was not openly encouraged. But thousands of blacks from the soil-exhausted slave states of the Old South, espe-

A
Slave Auction  Abraham Lincoln said in 1865, “Whenever I hear anyone arguing for slavery, I feel a strong impulse to see it tried on him personally.”

Life Under Slavery


 cially tobacco-depleted Virginia, were “sold down the river” to toil as ﬁeld-gang laborers on the cotton frontier of the lower Mississippi Valley. Women who bore thirteen or fourteen babies were prized as “rattlin’ good breeders,” and some of these fecund females were promised their freedom when they had produced ten. White masters all too frequently would force their attentions on female slaves, fathering a sizable mulatto population, most of which remained enchained. Slave auctions were brutal sights. The open selling of human ﬂesh under the hammer, sometimes with cattle and horses, was among the most revolting aspects of slavery. On the auction block, families were separated with distressing frequency, usually for economic reasons such as bankruptcy or the division of “property” among heirs. The sundering of families in this fashion was perhaps slavery’s greatest psychological horror. Abolitionists decried the practice, and Harriet Beecher Stowe seized on the emotional power of

 In 1852 Maria Perkins, a woman enslaved in Virginia, wrote plaintively to her husband about the disruption that the commercial trafﬁc in slaves was visiting upon their family:

“


 I write you a letter to let you know of my distress my master has sold albert to a trader on Monday court day and myself and other child is for sale also and I want you to let hear from you very soon before next cort if you can I dont know when I dont want you to wait till Christmas I want you to tell Dr Hamelton and your master if either will buy me they can attend to it know and then I can go after-wards I dont want a trader to get me they asked me if I had got any person to buy me and I told them no they took me to the court houste too they never put me up a man buy the name of brady bought albert and is gone I dont know whare they say he lives in Scottesville my things is in several places some is in staunton and if I should be sold I dont know what will become of them I dont expect to meet with the luck to get that way till I am quite heart sick nothing more I am and ever will be your kind wife Maria Perkins.

”




 this theme by putting it at the heart of the plot of her acclaimed 1852 novel, Uncle Tom’s Cabin.

Life Under the Lash
 White southerners often romanticized about the happy life of their singing, dancing, banjo-strumming, joyful “darkies.” But how did the slaves actually live? There is no simple answer to this question. Conditions varied greatly from region to region, from large plantation to small farm, and from master to master. Everywhere, of course, slavery meant hard work, ignorance, and oppression. The slaves—both men and women—usually toiled from dawn to dusk in the ﬁelds, under the watchful eyes and ready whip-hand of a white overseer or black “driver.” They had no civil or political rights, other than minimal protection from arbitrary murder or unusually cruel punishment. Some states offered further protections, such as banning the sale of a child under the age of ten away from his or her mother. But all such laws were difﬁcult to enforce, since slaves were forbidden to testify in court or even to have their marriages legally recognized. Floggings were common, for the whip was the substitute for the wage-incentive system and the most visible symbol of the planter’s mastery. Strong-willed slaves were sometimes sent to breakers, whose technique consisted mostly in lavish laying on of the lash. As an abolitionist song of the 1850s lamented, To-night the bond man, Lord Is bleeding in his chains; And loud the falling lash is heard On Carolina’s plains! But savage beatings made sullen laborers, and lash marks hurt resale values. There are, to be sure, sadistic monsters in any population, and the planter class contained its share. But the typical planter had too much of his own prosperity riding on the backs of his slaves to beat them bloody on a regular basis. By 1860 most slaves were concentrated in the black belt of the Deep South that stretched from South Carolina and Georgia into the new southwest states of Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. This was the region of the southern frontier, into which the explosively growing Cotton Kingdom had burst in a few short decades. As on all frontiers, life was often rough and raw, and in general the lot of the slave was harder here than in the more settled areas of the Old South.



Chapter 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 1793–1860


 The Cruelty of Slavery Slaveowners used devices like this collar with bells to discipline and patrol their slaves. This female slave shown toiling in New Orleans has such a collar riveted around her neck, designed to prevent her from hiding from her master or escaping.

 A majority of blacks lived on larger plantations that harbored communities of twenty or more slaves. In some counties of the Deep South, especially along the lower Mississippi River, blacks accounted for more than 75 percent of the population. There the family life of slaves tended to be relatively stable, and a distinctive African American slave culture developed. Forced separations of spouses, parents, and children were evidently more common on smaller plantations and in the upper South. Slave marriage vows sometimes proclaimed, “Until death or distance do you part.” With impressive resilience, blacks managed to sustain family life in slavery, and most slaves were raised in stable two-parent households. Continuity of family

 Slave Nurse and Young White Master Southern whites would not allow slaves to own property or exercise civil rights, but, paradoxically, they often entrusted them with the raising of their own precious children. Many a slave “mammy” served as a surrogate mother for the offspring of the planter class.

Slave Families


 Slaves Being Marched from Staunton, Virginia, to Tennessee, by Lewis Miller, 1853 In this folk painting of slaves in transit from the upper South to the new cotton lands of the lower South, couples travel together and children accompany parents. In reality the forced movement of slaves often involved the painful separation of family members.

 identity across generations was evidenced in the widespread practice of naming children for grandparents or adopting the surname not of a current master, but of a forebear’s master. African Americans also displayed their African cultural roots when they avoided marriage between ﬁ rst cousins, in contrast to the frequent intermarriage of close relatives among the ingrown planter aristocracy. African roots were also visible in the slaves’ religious practices. Though heavily Christianized by the itinerant evangelists of the Second Great Awakening, blacks in slavery molded their own distinctive religious forms from a mixture of Christian and African elements. They emphasized those aspects of the Christian heritage that seemed most pertinent to their own situation—especially the captivity of the Israelites in Egypt. One of their most haunting spirituals implored, Tell old Pharaoh “Let my people go.” And another lamented, Nobody knows de trouble I’ve had Nobody knows but Jesus African practices also persisted in the responsorial style of preaching, in which the congregation frequently punctuated the minister’s remarks with assents and



Tag Identifying Slaves and Free
 Blacks in Charleston All slaves in Charleston, South Carolina, were reminded of their status as property by the tags they were forced to wear, marked with their skills—such as porter or mechanic or carpenter—and the year the tag was issued. After 1848 even free blacks had to wear tags, ensuring that no African American could be anonymous in the city. The badge above was issued to a freed slave in Charleston, South Carolina, sometime after 1848.

 amens—an adaptation of the give-and-take between caller and dancers in the African ringshout dance.

The Burdens of Bondage
 Slavery was intolerably degrading to the victims. They were deprived of the dignity and sense of responsibility that come from independence and the right to make choices. They were denied an education, because reading brought ideas, and ideas brought discontent. Many states passed laws forbidding their instruction, and perhaps nine-tenths of adult slaves at the beginning of the Civil War were totally illiterate. For all slaves— indeed for virtually all blacks, slave or free—the “American dream” of bettering one’s lot through study and hard work was a cruel and empty mockery. Not surprisingly, victims of the “peculiar institution” devised countless ways to throw sand in its gears. When workers are not voluntarily hired and adequately compensated, they can hardly be expected to work with alacrity. Accordingly, slaves often slowed the pace of their labor to the barest minimum that would



Chapter 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 1793–1860


 spare them the lash, thus fostering the myth of black “laziness” in the minds of whites. They ﬁ lched food from the “big house” and pilfered other goods that had been produced or purchased by their labor. They sabotaged expensive equipment, stopping the work routine altogether until repairs were accomplished. Occasionally they even poisoned their masters’ food. The slaves also universally pined for freedom. Many took to their heels as runaways, frequently in search of a separated family member. A black girl, asked if her mother was dead, replied, “Yessir, master, she is dead, but she’s free.” Others rebelled, though never successfully. In 1800 an armed insurrection led by a slave named Gabriel in Richmond, Virginia, was foiled by informers, and its leaders were hanged. Denmark Vesey, a free black, led another ill-fated rebellion in Charleston, South Carolina, in 1822. Also betrayed by informers, Vesey and more than thirty followers were publicly strung from the gallows. In 1831 the semiliterate Nat Turner, a visionary black preacher, led an uprising that slaughtered about sixty Virginians, mostly women and children. Reprisals were swift and bloody, and Nat Turner’s rebellion was soon extinguished. An especially dramatic episode involved the enslaved Africans who rebelled aboard the Spanish slave ship Amistad in 1839. They seized command of the vessel off the coast of Cuba and attempted to sail back to Africa, but were driven ashore on Long Island. After two years of imprisonment and several trials, former president John Quincy Adams ﬁ nally secured their freedom in a brilliant, moving argument before the

90°W


U.S.
Supreme Court in 1841, and the Africans returned to the British colony of Sierra Leone, in West Africa. The dark taint of slavery also left its mark on whites. It fostered the brutality of the whip, the bloodhound, and the branding iron. White southerners increasingly lived in a state of imagined siege, surrounded by potentially rebellious blacks inﬂamed by abolitionist propaganda from the North. Their fears bolstered an intoxicating theory of biological racial superiority and turned the South into a reactionary backwater in an era of progress—one of the last bastions of slavery in the Western world. The defenders of slavery were forced to degrade themselves, along with their victims. As Booker T. Washington, a distinguished black leader and former slave, later observed, whites could not hold blacks in a ditch without getting down there with them. 
Early Abolitionism
 The inhumanity of the “peculiar institution” gradually caused antislavery societies to sprout forth. Abolitionist sentiment ﬁ rst stirred at the time of the Revolution, especially among Quakers (see Map 16.3). Because of the widespread loathing of blacks, some of the earliest abolitionist efforts focused on transporting blacks bodily back to Africa. The American Colonization Society was founded for this purpose in 1817, and in 1822 the Republic of Liberia, on the fever-stricken West African coast, was established for former slaves. Its capital, Monrovia, was named after President Monroe.

80°W


Superior
Lake


70°W






400 Km.


400 Mi.


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

40°N


Lake Michi


THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE, 1803

 on Hu r

100°W


 By state statutes in force (gradual emancipation)

 tario N.Y. L. On



 rie L. E

OLD NORTHWEST
By state constitution 
 VT.

 e

 g an

La
 k

 Slavery prohibited by Ordinance of 1787

SLAVE STATES

MAINE (MASS.)

 PA.

N


N.H.


 MASS. 1780

N.J.


R.I.
 CONN.

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

Map 16.3
Early Emancipation in
 the North Interactive Map

Bellegrove Plantation, Donaldsville,
Louisiana, Built 1857
 he sugar-growing Bellegrove Plantation—on the banks of the Mississippi River ninety-ﬁve miles north of New Orleans—was laid out on a grander scale than many southern plantations. In this rendering from an advertisement for Bellegrove’s sale in 1867, the planter John Orr’s home was identiﬁed as a “mansion,” and quarters for his ﬁeld hands proved extensive: twenty double cabins built for slaves (now for “Negroes”) and a dormitory, described in the ad but not pictured here, housing 150 laborers. Because of the unhealthy work involved in cultivating sugar cane, such as the constant digging of drainage canals to keep the cane from rotting in standing water, many planters hired immigrant (usually Irish) labor to keep their valuable slaves out of physical danger. The presence of a hospital between the slave cabins and the mansion indicates the very real threat to health. The layout of Bellegrove reﬂects the organi-

T


 zation of production as well as the social relations on a sugar plantation. The storehouse where preserved sugar awaited shipping stood closest to the Mississippi River, the principal transportation route, whereas the sugar house, the most important building on the plantation, with its mill, boilers, and cooking vats for converting syrup into sugar, dominated the caneﬁelds. Although the “big house” and slave quarters stood in close proximity, hedges surrounding the planter’s home shut out views of both sugar production and labor. Within the slave quarters, the overseer’s larger house signiﬁed his superior status, while the arrangement of cabins ensured his supervision of domestic as well as work life. What else does the physical layout of the plantation reveal about settlement patterns, sugar cultivation, and social relationships along the Mississippi?





Chapter 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 1793–1860


I
Not a Man and a Brother? Am I Not a Woman  and a Sister?” A popular appeal.

 American abolitionists against the sin of slavery. Prominent among them was lanky, tousle-haired Theodore Dwight Weld, who had been evangelized by Charles Grandison Finney in New York’s Burned-Over District in the 1820s. Self-educated and simple in manner and speech, Weld appealed with special power and directness to his rural audiences of untutored farmers. Spiritually inspired by Finney, Weld was materially aided by two wealthy and devout New York merchants, the brothers Arthur and Lewis Tappan. In 1832 they paid his way to Lane Theological Seminary in Cincinnati, Ohio, which was presided over by the formidable Lyman Beecher, father of a remarkable brood, including novelist Harriet Beecher Stowe, reformer Catharine Beecher, and preacher-abolitionist Henry Ward Beecher. Expelled along with several other students in 1834 for organizing an eighteen-day debate on slavery, Weld and his fellow “Lane Rebels”—full of the energy and idealism of youth—fanned out across the Old Northwest preaching the antislavery gospel. Humorless and deadly earnest, Weld also assembled a potent propaganda pamphlet, American Slavery as It Is (1839). Its compelling arguments made it among the most effective abolitionist tracts and greatly inﬂuenced Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin.

Radical Abolitionism
 Some ﬁ fteen thousand freed blacks were transported there over the next four decades. But most blacks had no wish to be transplanted into a strange civilization after having become partially Americanized. By 1860 virtually all southern slaves were no longer Africans, but native-born African Americans, with their own distinctive history and culture. Yet the colonization idea appealed to some antislaveryites, including Abraham Lincoln, until the time of the Civil War. In the 1830s the abolitionist movement took on new energy and momentum, mounting to the proportions of a crusade. American abolitionists took heart in 1833 when their British counterparts, inspired by the redoubtable William Wilberforce, a member of Parliament and an evangelical Christian reformer whose family had been touched by the preaching of George Whiteﬁeld (see Chapter 5), unchained the slaves in the West Indies (see “Thinking Globally: The Struggle to Abolish Slavery,” pp. 488–489). (Wilberforce University in Ohio, an African American college that later sent many missionaries to Africa, is named for him.) As with Wilberforce, the religious spirit of the Second Great Awakening now inﬂamed the hearts of many

 On New Year’s Day, 1831, a shattering abolitionist blast came from the bugle of William Lloyd Garrison, a mild-looking reformer of twenty-six. The emotionally high-strung son of a drunken father and a spiritual child of the Second Great Awakening, Garrison published in Boston the ﬁ rst issue of his militantly antislavery newspaper, The Liberator. With this mighty paper broadside, Garrison triggered a thirty-year war of words and in a sense ﬁ red one of the opening barrages of the Civil War. Stern and uncompromising, Garrison nailed his colors to the masthead of his weekly. He proclaimed in strident tones that under no circumstances would he tolerate the poisonous weed of slavery, but would stamp it out at once, root and branch: I will be as harsh as truth and as uncompromising as justice. . . . I am in earnest—I will not equivocate—I will not excuse—I will not retreat a single inch—and I WILL BE HEARD! Other dedicated abolitionists rallied to Garrison’s standard, and in 1833 they founded the American Anti-

The Abolitionist Crusade




 William Lloyd Garrison (1805–1879) The most conspicuous and most viliﬁed of the abolitionists, Garrison was a nonresistant paciﬁst and a poor organizer. He favored northern secession from the South and antagonized both sections with his intemperate language.

 Sojourner Truth Also known simply as “Isabella,” she held audiences spellbound with her deep, resonant voice and the religious passion with which she condemned the sin of slavery. This photo was taken about 1870.

 Slavery Society. Prominent among them was Wendell Phillips, a Boston patrician known as “abolition’s golden trumpet.” A man of strict principle, he would eat no cane sugar and wear no cotton cloth, since both were produced by southern slaves. Black abolitionists distinguished themselves as living monuments to the cause of African American freedom. Their ranks included David Walker, whose incendiary Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World (1829) advocated a bloody end to white supremacy. Also noteworthy were Sojourner Truth, a freed black woman in New York who fought tirelessly for black emancipation and women’s rights, and Martin Delany, one of the few black leaders to take seriously the notion of the mass recolonization of Africa. In 1859 he visited West Africa’s Niger Valley seeking a suitable site for relocation.

 The greatest of the black abolitionists was Frederick Douglass. Escaping from bondage in 1838 at the age of twenty-one, he was “discovered” by the abolitionists in 1841 when he gave a stunning impromptu speech at an antislavery meeting in Massachusetts. Thereafter he lectured widely for the cause, despite frequent beatings and threats against his life. In 1845 he published his classic autobiography, Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass. It depicted his remarkable origins as the son of a black slave woman and a white father, his struggle to learn to read and write, and his eventual escape to the North. Douglass was as ﬂexibly practical as Garrison was stubbornly principled. Garrison often appeared to be more interested in his own righteousness than in the substance of the slavery evil itself. He repeatedly

THINKING GLOBALLY

The Struggle to Abolish Slavery


W


 hen slaves in the French Caribbean colony of Haiti, inspired by the Revolutionary fervor that had seized mainland France, rose up and demanded “liberty, equality, and fraternity” for themselves, they became, in 1794, the ﬁrst enslaved people in the New World to win their freedom. Although Napoleon would rip it from them again when he reinstated slavery in 1802, another revolution in France in 1848 would ensure their permanent freedom. Table 16.1 documents the long, 250-year struggle to abolish slavery throughout the world. Agitators outraged by the scourge of human bondage and committed to ending it, known as abolitionists, shared antislavery sentiments and strategies across national boundaries. From the late seventeenth through the mid-nineteenth century, British and American abolitionists wove dense networks of mutual support. They shared writings, lecturers, and funding and jointly sponsored conferences such as the World’s Anti-

 Slavery Convention of 1840 in London, which became famous for inspiring the American women’s rights movement when it refused to seat female delegates. But the political fortunes of abolitionist movements, and hence the timing of the longed-for day of freedom, varied sharply from nation to nation. In France emancipation was twice tied to revolutions. In Great Britain massive citizens’ petition campaigns, orchestrated by venerable lifelong abolitionist leaders such as William Wilberforce, brought enormous popular pressure to bear on the government. Parliament eventually responded by outlawing the slave trade in 1807 and then, three days before Wilberforce died in 1833, prohibiting slavery itself throughout most of the British Empire. In the United States as in Britain, abolitionism became a robust social movement, propelled not least by women and free blacks. But the roots of the “peculiar institution” in

 World’s Anti-Slavery Convention, London, 1840 The convention assembled antislavery advocates from around the world, but it refused to seat female delegates. Women were allowed to observe, but not to take part in, the ofﬁcial proceedings. The frustrations of the unseated American representatives led to the historic Woman’s Rights Convention at Seneca Falls, New York, in 1848 (see p. 352).



 the United States ran wide and deep. Even though the American slave trade was ended in 1808, it took the Union’s victory in a bloody Civil War in 1865 to eradicate slavery once and for all. Elsewhere in the Americas, enslaved peoples secured their freedom gradually and, in stark contrast to

 the United States, peacefully. Emancipation typically became possible only after the achievement of independence from Spain, where abolitionism never gained much traction. Cuba, still a Spanish colony into the 1890s, was among the last places in the New World to set its slaves free.

Table 16.1 Comparative Abolition of Slavery
Country


Date Abolished


Mexico




Great Britain




France




Bolivia




Ecuador




Peru




Argentina
Venezuela




Russia




Netherlands
United States




Paraguay
Cuba




Brazil




Korea




China




Saudi Arabia




Yemen




Notes
 The slave trade was prohibited in 1824, but slavery itself was not abolished until 1829, eight years after Mexico gained independence from Spain. The slave trade was ended in 1807, but slavery was not abolished until 1833. The abolition of slavery did not apply to British India, where slavery persisted until 1860.* Slavery was ﬁrst abolished in 1794 but was reestablished by Napoleon Bonaparte in 1802. In 1848 the Second Republic replaced the July Monarchy and abolished slavery in all French colonies. All slaves born since independence (1825) were freed in 1831, but slavery was not abolished entirely until 1851. At the time of independence in 1821, all children born to slaves after that date were declared free, but slavery persisted until 1852. At the time of independence in 1821, all children born to slaves after that date were declared free, but slavery was not abolished entirely until 1854. Emancipation, ﬁrst begun in 1813, was completed in 1854. Gradual emancipation began when independence was fully secured in 1821, but slavery was not completely abolished until 1854. Peter the Great ﬁrst abolished slavery in 1723 by converting household slaves into serfs. Tsar Alexander II freed Russia’s 22 million serfs in 1861. Slavery was abolished in all Dutch colonies. The slave trade was ended in 1808, but slavery was not abolished entirely until after the Civil War, with the ratiﬁcation of the Thirteenth Amendment. Slavery was abolished earlier in the North, in the decades after the Revolution, often through gradual emancipation. Gradual emancipation began in 1842, but slavery was not abolished until 1869. Gradual emancipation began in 1870; the Spanish government freed the remaining slaves in 1886. The slave trade was abolished in 1851. A gradual emancipation law was ﬁrst passed in 1871, but slavery was not abolished entirely until 1888. State-owned slaves were emancipated in 1801. Although slavery was formally abolished in 1894, it persisted in some regions until the 1930s. The emperor abolished slavery toward the end of the Xing dynasty, in 1910, but it persisted until the communist government proclaimed abolition in 1949. Slavery was abolished under pressure from the United Nations and moderate Arab states. Leaders of the newly proclaimed Yemen Arab Republic abolished slavery after overthrowing the imamate in 1962.

 *The British East India Company had sovereignty over India until 1858, when the British government took over—and abolished slavery shortly thereafter. [Sources: Martin A. Klein, Historical Dictionary of Slavery and Abolition (2002); Robert Fogel, Without Consent of Contract (1994); Herbert Klein, African Slavery in Latin America and the Caribbean (1986); Edward Alpers, Gwyn Campbell, and Michael Salman, eds., Slavery and Resistance in Africa and Asia (2005); Jerome Alan Cohen, R. Randle Edwards, and Fu-mei Chang Chen, Essays on China’s Legal Tradition (1980).]





Chapter 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 1793–1860


 Frederick Douglass (1817?–1895), the remarkable ex-slave, told of Mr. Covey, a white owner who bought a single female slave “as a breeder.” She gave birth to twins at the end of the year:

“


 At this addition to the human stock Covey and his wife were ecstatic with joy. No one dreamed of reproaching the woman or ﬁnding fault with the hired man, Bill Smith, the father of the children, for Mr. Covey himself had locked the two up together every night, thus inviting the result.

”


 Frederick Douglass (1817?–1895) Born a slave in Maryland, Douglass escaped to the North and became the most prominent of the black abolitionists. Gifted as an orator, writer, and editor, he continued to battle for the civil rights of his people after emancipation. Near the end of a distinguished career, he served as U.S. minister to Haiti.

 demanded that the “virtuous” North secede from the “wicked” South. Yet he did not explain how the creation of an independent slave republic would bring an end to the “damning crime” of slavery. Renouncing politics, on the Fourth of July, 1854, he publicly burned a copy of the Constitution as “a covenant with death and an agreement with hell” (a phrase he borrowed from a Shaker condemnation of marriage). Critics, including some of his former supporters, charged that Garrison was cruelly probing the moral wound in America’s underbelly but offering no acceptable balm to ease the pain. Douglass, on the other hand, along with other abolitionists, increasingly looked to politics to end the blight of slavery. These political abolitionists backed the Liberty party in 1840, the Free Soil party in 1848,

 and eventually the Republican party in the 1850s. In the end, most abolitionists, including even the paciﬁ stic Garrison himself, followed the logic of their beliefs and supported a frightfully costly fratricidal war as the price of emancipation. High-minded and courageous, the abolitionists were men and women of goodwill and various colors who faced the cruel choice that people in many ages have had thrust upon them: when is evil so enormous that it must be denounced, even at the risk of precipitating bloodshed and butchery?

 After hearing Frederick Douglass speak in Bristol, England, in 1846, Mary A. Estlin wrote to an American abolitionist,

“


 [T]here is but one opinion of him. Wherever he goes he arouses sympathy in your cause and love for himself. . . . Our expectations were highly roused by his narrative, his printed speeches, and the eulogisms of the friends with whom he has been staying: but he far exceeds the picture we had formed both in outward graces, intellectual power and culture, and eloquence. *

”


 *From Clare Taylor, ed., British and American Abolitionists: An Episode in Transatlantic Understanding (Edinburgh University Press, 1974), p. 282.

White Southerners on the Defensive


The South Lashes Back
 Antislavery sentiment was not unknown in the South, and in the 1820s antislavery societies were more numerous south of the Mason-Dixon line* than north of it. But after about 1830, the voice of white southern abolitionism was silenced. In a last gasp of southern questioning of slavery, the Virginia legislature debated and eventually defeated various emancipation proposals in 1831–1832. That debate marked a turning point. Thereafter all the slave states tightened their slave codes and moved to prohibit emancipation of any kind, voluntary or compensated. Nat Turner’s rebellion in 1831 sent a wave of hysteria sweeping over the snowy cotton ﬁelds, and planters in growing numbers, recollecting the massive slave revolt that had erupted in Haiti in the 1790s, slept with pistols by their pillows. Although Garrison had no demonstrable connection with the Turner conspiracy, his Liberator appeared at about the same time, and he was bitterly condemned as a terrorist and an inciter of murder. The State of Georgia offered $5,000 for his arrest and conviction. The nulliﬁcation crisis of 1832 further implanted haunting fears in white southern minds, conjuring up nightmares of black incendiaries and abolitionist devils. Jailings, whippings, and lynchings now greeted rational efforts to discuss the slavery problem in the South. Proslavery whites responded by launching a massive defense of slavery as a positive good. In doing so, they forgot their own section’s previous doubts about the morality of the “peculiar institution.” Slavery, they claimed, was supported by the authority of the Bible and the wisdom of Aristotle. It was good for the Africans, who were lifted from the barbarism of the jungle and clothed with the blessings of Christian civilization. Slavemasters strongly encouraged religion in the slave quarters. A catechism for blacks contained such passages as Q. Who gave you a master and a mistress? A. God gave them to me. Q. Who says that you must obey them? A. God says that I must. White apologists also claimed that master-slave relationships really resembled those of a family. On

 *Originally the southern boundary of colonial Pennsylvania.



 many plantations, especially those of the Old South of Virginia and Maryland, this argument had a certain plausibility. A slave’s tombstone bore this touching inscription: JOHN: A faithful servant: and true friend: Kindly, and considerate: Loyal, and affectionate: The family he served Honours him in death: But, in life they gave him love: For he was one of them Southern whites were quick to contrast the “happy” lot of their “servants” with that of the overworked northern wage slaves, including sweated women and stunted children. The blacks mostly toiled in the fresh air and sunlight, not in dark and stuffy factories. They did not have to worry about slack times or unemployment, as did the “hired hands” of the North. Provided with a jail-like form of Social Security, they were cared for in sickness and old age, unlike northern workers, who were set adrift when they had outlived their usefulness. These curious proslavery arguments only widened the chasm between a backward-looking South and a forward-looking North—and indeed much of the rest of the Western world. The southerners reacted defensively to the pressure of their own fears and bristled before the merciless nagging of the northern abolitionists. Increasingly the white South turned in upon itself and grew hotly intolerant of any embarrassing questions about the status of slavery. Regrettably, also, the controversy over free people endangered free speech in the entire country. Piles of petitions poured in upon Congress from the antislavery reformers, and in 1836 sensitive southerners drove through the House the so-called Gag Resolution. It required all such antislavery appeals to be tabled without debate. This attack on the right of petition aroused the sleeping lion in the aged ex-president, Representative John Quincy Adams, and he waged a successful eightyear ﬁght for its repeal. Southern whites likewise resented the ﬂooding of their mails with incendiary abolitionist literature. Even if blacks could not read, they could interpret the inﬂammatory drawings, such as those that showed masters knocking out slaves’ teeth with clubs. In 1835 a mob in Charleston, South Carolina, looted the post



Chapter 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 1793–1860


 In Defense of Slavery This pair of illustrations contrasts the supposedly benevolent slave regime of the South with the harshness of working life in England, where starvation wages and unemployment blighted workers’ lives. Apologists for slavery frequently invoked this comparison between allegedly paternalistic slavemasters and the uncaring capitalists who captained the Industrial Revolution.

 ofﬁce and burned a pile of abolitionist propaganda. Capitulating to southern pressures, the Washington government in 1835 ordered southern postmasters to destroy abolitionist material and called on southern state ofﬁcials to arrest federal postmasters who did not comply. Such was “freedom of the press” as guaranteed by the Constitution.

The Abolitionist Impact
 in the North Abolitionists—especially the extreme Garrisonians— were for a long time unpopular in many parts of the North. Northerners had been brought up to revere the Constitution and to regard the clauses on slavery as a lasting bargain. The ideal of Union, hammered home by the thundering eloquence of Daniel Webster and others, had taken deep root, and Garrison’s wild talk of secession grated harshly on northern ears.

 The North also had a heavy economic stake in Dixieland. By the late 1850s, southern planters owed northern bankers and other creditors about $300 million, and much of this immense sum would be lost—as, in fact, it later was—should the Union dissolve. New England textile mills were fed with cotton raised by the slaves, and a disrupted labor system might cut off this vital supply and bring unemployment. The Union during these critical years was partly bound together with cotton threads, tied by lords of the loom in collaboration with the so-called lords of the lash. It was not surprising that strong hostility developed in the North against the boat-rocking tactics of the radical antislaveryites. Repeated tongue-lashings by the extreme abolitionists provoked many mob outbursts in the North, some led by respectable gentlemen. A gang of young toughs broke into Lewis Tappan’s New York house in 1834 and demolished its interior, while a crowd in the street cheered. In 1835 Garrison, with a rope tied around him,

Chronology


 was dragged through the streets of Boston by the socalled Broadcloth Mob but escaped almost miraculously. Reverend Elijah P. Lovejoy of Alton, Illinois, not content to assail slavery, impugned the chastity of Catholic women. His printing press was destroyed four times, and in 1837 he was killed by a mob and became “the martyr abolitionist.” So unpopular were the antislavery zealots that ambitious politicians, like Lincoln, usually avoided the taint of Garrisonian abolition like the plague.



 Yet by the 1850s the abolitionist outcry had made a deep dent in the northern mind. Many citizens had come to see the South as the land of the unfree and the home of a hateful institution. Few northerners were prepared to abolish slavery outright, but a growing number, including Lincoln, opposed extending it to the western territories. People of this stamp, commonly called “free-soilers,” swelled their ranks as the Civil War approached.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Whitney’s cotton gin transforms southern economy



 British abolish slavery in West Indies American Anti-Slavery Society founded



 Gabriel slave rebellion in Virginia





 Abolitionist students expelled from Lane Theological Seminary

 Britain abolishes slave trade



 Congress outlaws slave trade Royal Navy forms West Africa Squadron

U.S.
Post Ofﬁce orders destruction of abolitionist mail “Broadcloth Mob” attacks Garrison 


 American Colonization Society formed





 House of Representatives passes “Gag Resolution”

Missouri Compromise






 Mob kills abolitionist Lovejoy in Alton, Illinois

 Vesey slave rebellion in Charleston, South Carolina Republic of Liberia established in Africa



 Weld publishes American Slavery as It Is Slave revolt aboard Amistad



 Walker publishes Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World



 Douglass publishes Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass



 Nat Turner slave rebellion in Virginia Garrison begins publishing The Liberator



 Free Soil party orga nized

1831–


 Virginia legislature debates slavery and emancipation



Chapter 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 1793–1860


KEY TERMS
West Africa Squadron (379) breakers (381) black belt (381) responsorial (383) Nat Turner’s rebellion (384) Amistad (384) American Colonization Society (384) Liberia (384) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
The Liberator (386) American Anti-Slavery Society (386) Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World (387) Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass (387) Mason-Dixon line (391) Gag Resolution (391) 
William T. Johnson
Nat Turner
William Wilberforce
Theodore Dwight Weld
William Lloyd Garrison


David Walker
Sojourner Truth
Martin Delany
Frederick Douglass


What Was the True Nature of Slavery?


B


 y the early twentieth century, the predictable accounts of slavery written by partisans of the North or South had receded in favor of a romantic vision of the Old South conveyed through popular literature, myth, and, increasingly, scholarship. That vision was persuasively validated by the publication of Ulrich Bonnell Phillips’s landmark study, American Negro Slavery (1918). Phillips made three key arguments. First, he claimed that slavery was a dying economic institution, unproﬁtable to the slaveowner and an obstacle to the economic development of the South as a whole. Second, he contended that slavery was a rather benign institution and that the planters, contrary to abolitionist charges of ruthless exploitation, treated their chattels with kindly paternalism. Third, he reﬂected the dominant racial attitudes of his time in his belief that blacks were inferior and submissive by nature and did not abhor the institution that enslaved them. For nearly a century, historians have debated these assertions, sometimes heatedly. More sophisticated economic analysis has refuted Phillips’s claim that slavery would have withered away without a war. Economic historians have demonstrated that slavery was a viable, proﬁtable, expanding economic system and that slaves constituted a worthwhile investment for their owners. The price of a prime ﬁeld hand rose dramatically, even in the 1850s.

 No such deﬁnitive conclusion has yet been reached in the disputes over slave treatment. Frank Tannenbaum’s classic comparative study, Slave and Citizen (1947), argued that slavery was more humane in Latin America than in the United States, leaving a legacy of less sharply deﬁ ned racial castes there. Beginning in the late 1950s, historians came increasingly to emphasize the harshness of the U.S. slave system. One study, Stanley Elkins’s Slavery (1959), went so far as to compare the “peculiar institution” to the Nazi concentration camps of World War II. Both were “total institutions,” Elkins contended, which “infantilized” their victims. More recently, scholars such as Eugene Genovese have moved beyond debating whether slavery was kind or cruel. Without diminishing the deprivations and pains of slavery, Genovese has conceded that slavery embraced a strange form of paternalism, a system that reﬂected not the benevolence of southern slaveholders, but their need to control and coax work out of their reluctant and often recalcitrant “investments.” Furthermore, within this paternalistic system, black slaves were able to make reciprocal demands of their white owners and to protect a “cultural space” of their own in which family and religion particu larly could ﬂourish. The crowning paradox of slaveholder paternalism was that in treating their property more humanely, slaveowners implicitly recognized the hu-

To Learn More


 manity of their slaves and thereby subverted the racist underpinnings upon which their slave society existed. The revised conceptions of the master-slave relationship also spilled over into the debate about slave personality. Elkins accepted Phillips’s portrait of the slave as a childlike “Sambo” but saw it as a consequence of slavery rather than a congenital attribute of African Americans. Kenneth Stampp, rejecting the Sambo stereotype, stressed the frequency and variety of slave resistance, both mild and militant. A third view, imaginatively documented in the work of Lawrence Levine, argued that the Sambo character was an act, an image that slaves used to confound their masters without incurring punishment. Levine’s Black Culture and Black Consciousness (1977) shares with books by John Blassingame and Herbert Gutman an emphasis on the tenacity with which slaves maintained their own culture and kin relations, despite the hardships of bondage. Most recently, historians have attempted to avoid the polarity of repression versus autonomy. They assert the debasing oppression of slavery, while also acknowledging slaves’ ability to resist the dehumanizing effects of enslavement. The challenge before historians today is to capture the vibrancy of slave culture and its legacy for African American society after emancipation, without diminishing the brutality of life under the southern slave regime. A new sensitivity to gender, spurred by the growing ﬁeld of women’s history, has also expanded the horizons of slavery studies. Historians such as Eliza-



 beth Fox-Genovese, Jacqueline Jones, and Catherine Clinton have focused on the ways in which slavery differed for men and women, both slaves and slaveholders. Enslaved black women, for example, had the unique task of negotiating an identity out of their dual responsibilities as plantation laborer, even sometimes caretaker of white women and children, and anchor of the black family. By tracing the interconnectedness of race and gender in the American South, these historians have also shown how slavery shaped conceptions of masculinity and femininity within southern society, further distinguishing its culture from that of the North. Scholarship on slavery continues to grow. The newest work by Philip D. Morgan and Ira Berlin has drawn attention to how both the institution of slavery and the experience of the enslaved changed over time. They have contended that slavery was far from monolithic. Rather, it adapted to particular geographic and environmental factors, which inﬂuenced the diet and work routines of slaves and shaped the degree of autonomy in family life and culture that slaves were able to carve out. Slavery also changed from one generation to the next. As southern slaveholders responded to new social and economic conditions, they gradually altered the legal status of slaves, making slavery a hereditary condition, outlawing manumission in many places, rendering freedom for the enslaved increasingly difﬁcult to attain, and placing onerous restrictions on the work opportunities and mobility of free African Americans.

To Learn More
Erskine Clarke, Dwelling Place: A Plantation Epic (2005)
Frederick Douglass, Narrative of the Life of Frederick
Douglass (1845)
 John Hope Franklin, From Slavery to Freedom (8th ed., 2000) Anya Jabour, Scarlett’s Sisters: Young Women in the Old South (2007) Julie Roy Jeffrey, The Great Silent Army of Abolitionism: Ordinary Women in the Antislavery Movement (1998) Walter Johnson, Soul by Soul: Life Inside the Antebellum Slave Market (2001) Melton Alonza McLaurin, Celia, a Slave (1991) Joshua Rothman, Notorious in the Neighborhood: Sex and Families Across the Color Line in Virginia, 1787–1861 (2003)

James B. Stewart, Holy Warriors (1976)
Gavin Wright, Slavery and American Economic
Development (2006)
Bertram Wyatt-Brown, Honor and Violence in the Old South
(1986)


 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Manifest Destiny
 and Its Legacy




1841–1848
 Our manifest destiny [is] to overspread the continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions.

T


 erritorial expansion dominated American diplomacy and politics in the 1840s. Settlers swarming into the still-disputed Oregon Country aggravated relations with Britain, which had staked its own claims in the Paciﬁc Northwest. The clamor to annex Texas to the Union provoked bitter tension with Mexico, which continued to regard Texas as a Mexican province in revolt. And when Americans began casting covetous eyes on Mexico’s northernmost province, the great prize of Cal i fornia, open warfare erupted between the United States and its southern neighbor. Victory over Mexico added vast new domains to the United States, but it also raised thorny questions about the status of slavery in the newly acquired territories—questions that would be answered in blood in the Civil War of the 1860s.

 *Earliest known use of the term Manifest Destiny, sometimes called “Manifest Desire.”

The Accession of “Tyler Too”
 A horde of hard-ciderites descended upon Washington early in 1841, clamoring for the spoils of ofﬁce. Newly elected President Harrison, bewildered by the uproar, was almost hounded to death by Whig spoilsmen. The real leaders of the Whig party regarded “Old Tippecanoe” as little more than an impressive ﬁgurehead. Daniel Webster, as secretary of state, and Henry Clay, the uncrowned king of the Whigs and their ablest spokesman in the Senate, would grasp the helm. The aging general was ﬁ nally forced to rebuke the overzealous Clay and pointedly remind him that he, William Henry Harrison, was president of the United States. Unluckily for Clay and Webster, their schemes soon hit a fatal snag. Before the new term had fairly started, Harrison contracted pneumonia. Wearied by ofﬁcial functions and plagued by ofﬁce seekers, the enfeebled

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



John Tyler, Accidental President


 old warrior died after only four weeks in the White House—by far the shortest administration in American history, following by far the longest inaugural address. The “Tyler too” part of the Whig ticket, hitherto only a rhyme, now claimed the spotlight. What manner of man did the nation now ﬁ nd in the presidential chair? Six feet tall, slender, blue-eyed, and fair-haired, with classical features and a high forehead, John Tyler was a Virginia gentleman of the old school—gracious and kindly, yet stubbornly attached to principle. He had earlier resigned from the Senate, quite unnecessarily, rather than accept distasteful instructions from the Virginia legislature. Still a lone wolf, he had forsaken the Jacksonian Democratic fold for that of the Whigs, largely because he could not stomach the dictatorial tactics of Jackson. Tyler’s enemies accused him of being a Democrat in Whig clothing, but this charge was only partially true. The Whig party, like the Democratic party, was something of a catchall, and the accidental president belonged to the minority wing, which embraced a number of Jeffersonian states’ righters. Tyler had in fact been put on the ticket partly to attract the vote of this fringe group, many of whom were inﬂuential southern gentry. Yet Tyler, high-minded as he was, should never have consented to run on the ticket. Although the dominant Clay-Webster group had published no platform, every alert politician knew what the unpublished platform contained. And on virtually every major issue, the obstinate Virginian was at odds with the majority of his adoptive Whig party, which was pro-bank, pro–protective tariff, and pro–internal improvements. “Tyler too” rhymed with “Tippecanoe,” but there the harmony ended. As events turned out, President Harrison, the Whig, served for only 4 weeks, whereas Tyler, the ex-Democrat who was still largely a Democrat at heart, served for 204 weeks.

John Tyler: A President
Without a Party
 After their hard-won, hard-cider victory, the Whigs brought their not-so-secret platform out of Clay’s waistcoat pocket. To the surprise of no one, it outlined a strongly nationalistic program. Financial reform came ﬁ rst. The Whig Congress hastened to pass a law ending the independent treasury system, and President Tyler, disarmingly agreeable, signed it. Clay next drove through Congress a bill for a



 “Fiscal Bank,” which would establish a new Bank of the United States. Tyler’s hostility to a centralized bank was notorious, and Clay—the “Great Compromiser”—would have done well to conciliate him. But the Kentuckian, robbed repeatedly of the presidency by lesser men, was in an imperious mood and riding for a fall. When the bank bill reached the presidential desk, Tyler ﬂatly vetoed it on both practical and constitutional grounds. A drunken mob gathered late at night near the White House and shouted insultingly, “Huzza for Clay!” “A Bank! A Bank!” “Down with the Veto!” The stunned Whig leaders tried once again. Striving to pacify Tyler’s objections to a “Fiscal Bank,” they passed another bill providing for a “Fiscal Corporation.” But the president, still unbending, vetoed the offensive substitute. The Democrats were jubilant: they had been saved from another ﬁ nancial “monster” only by the pneumonia that had felled Harrison. Whig extremists, seething with indignation, condemned Tyler as “His Accidency” and as an “Executive Ass.” Widely burned in efﬁgy, he received numerous letters threatening him with death. A wave of inﬂuenza then sweeping the country was called the “Tyler grippe.” To the delight of Democrats, the stiff-necked Virginian was formally expelled from his party by a caucus of Whig congressmen, and a serious attempt to impeach him was broached in the House of Representatives. His entire cabinet resigned in a body, except Secretary of State Webster, who was then in the midst of delicate negotiations with Eng land. The proposed Whig tariff also felt the prick of the president’s well-inked pen. Tyler appreciated the necessity of bringing additional revenue to the Treasury. But old Democrat that he was, he looked with a frosty eye on the major tariff scheme of the Whigs because it provided, among other features, for a distribution among the states of revenue from the sale of public lands in the West. Tyler could see no point in squandering federal money when the federal Treasury was not overﬂowing, and he again wielded an emphatic veto. Chastened Clayites redrafted their tariff bill. They chopped out the offensive dollar-distribution scheme and pushed down the rates to about the moderately protective level of 1832, roughly 32 percent on dutiable goods. Tyler had no fondness for a protective tariff, but realizing the need for additional revenue, he reluctantly signed the Tariff of 1842. In subsequent months the pressure for higher customs duties slackened as the country gradually edged its way out of the depression. The Whig slogan, “Harrison, Two Dollars a Day and



Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


 Roast Beef,” was reduced by unhappy Democrats to “Ten Cents a Day and Bean Soup.”

A
War of Words with Britain Hatred of Britain during the nineteenth century came to a head periodically and had to be lanced by treaty settlement or by war. The poison had festered ominously by 1842. Anti-British passions were composed of many ingredients. At bottom lay the bitter, red-coated memories of the two Anglo-American wars. In addition, the genteel pro-British Federalists had died out, eventually yielding to the boisterous Jacksonian Democrats. British travelers, snifﬁ ng with aristocratic noses at the crude scene, wrote acidly of American tobacco spitting, slave auctioneering, lynching, eye gouging, and other 
 Frances Trollope (1780–1863), an English writer disillusioned by the failure of a utopian community she had joined in Tennessee, wrote scathingly of the Americans in 1832,

“


 Other nations have been called thinskinned, but the citizens of the Union have, apparently, no skins at all; they wince if a breeze blows over them unless it be tempered with adulation.

”


 unsavory features of the rustic Republic. Travel books penned by these critics, whose views were avidly read on both sides of the Atlantic, stirred up angry outbursts in America. But the literary ﬁ reworks did not end there. British magazines added fuel to the ﬂames when, enlarging on the travel books, they launched sneering attacks on Yankee shortcomings. American journals struck back with “you’re another” arguments, thus touching off the “Third War with Eng land.” Fortunately, this BritishAmerican war was fought with paper broadsides, and only ink was spilled. British authors, including Charles Dickens, entered the fray with gall-dipped pens, for they were being denied rich royalties by the absence of an American copyright law.* Sprawling America, with expensive canals to dig and railroads to build, was a borrowing nation in the nineteenth century. Imperial Britain, with its overﬂowing coffers, was a lending nation. The well-heeled creditor is never popular with the down-at-the-heels debtor, and the phrase “bloated British bond-holder” rolled bitterly from many an American tongue. When the panic of 1837 broke and several states defaulted on their bonds or repudiated them openly, honest Englishmen assailed Yankee trickery. One of them offered a new stanza for an old song: Yankee Doodle borrows cash, Yankee Doodle spends it, And then he snaps his ﬁngers at The jolly ﬂat [simpleton] who lends it. Troubles of a more dangerous sort came closer to home in 1837 when a short-lived insurrection erupted

 The Land of Liberty, 1847 This British cartoon reﬂected the contemptuous view of American culture, politics, and diplomacy that was common in earlynineteenth-century Britain.

 *Not until 1891 did Congress extend copyright privileges to foreign authors.



 Tensions with Britain

Manipulating the
Maine Maps
 An explosive controversy of the early 1840s involved the Maine boundary dispute. The St. Lawrence River is icebound several months of the year, as the British, remembering the War of 1812, well knew. They were determined, as a defensive precaution against the Yankees, to build a road westward from the seaport of Halifax to Québec. But the proposed route ran through

 QUÉBEC

70°W


N


65°W


50 100 Km.






100 Mi.


 aw

 n re

 ce

 k oo

R.


R.


Ar


 oo

 st

NEW BRUNSWICK
St. John 
R


St


.L


 Québec

.


 in Canada. It was supported by such a small minority of Canadians that it never had a real chance of success. Yet hundreds of hot-blooded Americans, hoping to strike a blow for freedom against the hereditary enemy, furnished military supplies or volunteered for armed ser vice. The Washington regime tried arduously, though futilely, to uphold its weak neutrality regulations. But again, as in the case of Texas, it simply could not enforce unpopular laws in the face of popular opposition. A provocative incident on the Canadian frontier brought passions to a boil in 1837. An American steamer, the Caroline, was carrying supplies to the insurgents across the swift Niagara River. It was ﬁ nally attacked on the New York shore by a determined British force, which set the vessel on ﬁ re. Lurid American illustrators showed the ﬂaming ship, laden with shrieking souls, plummeting over Niagara Falls. The craft in fact sank short of the plunge, and only one American was killed. This unlawful invasion of American soil—a counterviolation of neutrality—had alarming aftermaths. Washington ofﬁcials lodged vigorous but ineffective protests. Three years later, in 1840, the incident was dramatically revived in the state of New York. A Canadian named McLeod, after allegedly boasting in a tavern of his part in the Caroline raid, was arrested and indicted for murder. The London Foreign Ofﬁce, which regarded the Caroline raiders as members of a sanctioned armed force and not as criminals, made clear that his execution would mean war. Fortunately, McLeod was freed after establishing an alibi. It must have been airtight, for it was good enough to convince a New York jury. The tension forthwith eased, but it snapped taut again in 1841, when British ofﬁcials in the Bahamas offered asylum to 130 Virginia slaves who had rebelled and captured the American ship Creole. Britain had abolished slavery within its empire in 1833, raising southern fears that its Caribbean possessions would become Canada-like havens for escaped slaves.

45°N


 Montréal

Halifax


MAINE NOVA SCOTIA

VT. N.H.

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

 Proposed road route Webster-Ashburton treaty line Given up by United States Acquired by United States

Map 17.1 Maine Boundary Settlement, 1842
Interactive Map


 disputed territory—claimed also by Maine under the misleading peace treaty of 1783. Tough-knuckled lumberjacks from both Maine and Canada entered the disputed no-man’s-land of the tall-timbered Aroostook River valley. Ugly ﬁghts ﬂared up, and both sides summoned the local militia. The small-scale lumberjack clash, which was dubbed the Aroostook War, threatened to widen into a full-dress shooting war. As the crisis deepened in 1842, the London Foreign Ofﬁce took an unusual step. It sent to Washington a nonprofessional diplomat, the conciliatory ﬁ nancier Lord Ashburton, who had married a wealthy American woman. He speedily established cordial relations with Secretary Webster, who had recently been lionized during a visit to Britain. The two statesmen, their nerves frayed by protracted negotiations in the heat of a Washington summer, ﬁ nally agreed to compromise on the Maine boundary (see Map 17.1). On the basis of a rough, splitthe-difference arrangement, the Americans were to retain some 7,000 square miles of the 12,000 square miles of wilderness in dispute. The British got less land but won the desired Halifax-Québec route. During the negotiations the Caroline affair, malingering since 1837, was patched up by an exchange of diplomatic notes.



Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


 An overlooked bonus sneaked by in the small print of the same treaty: the British, in adjusting the U.S.Canadian boundary farther west, surrendered 6,500 square miles. The area was later found to contain the priceless Mesabi iron ore of Minnesota.

The Lone Star of
Texas Shines Alone
 During the uncertain eight years since 1836, Texas had led a precarious existence. Mexico, refusing to recognize Texas’s independence, regarded the Lone Star Republic as a province in revolt, to be reconquered in the future. Mexican ofﬁcials loudly threatened war if the American eagle should ever gather the ﬂedgling republic under its protective wings. The Texans were forced to maintain a costly military establishment. Vastly outnumbered by their Mexican foe, they could not tell when he would strike again. Mexico actually did make two halfhearted raids that, though ineffectual, foreshadowed more fearsome efforts. Confronted with such perils, Texas was driven to open negotiations with Britain and France, in the hope of securing the defensive shield of a protectorate. In 1839 and 1840, the Texans concluded treaties with France, Holland, and Belgium. Britain was intensely interested in an independent Texas. Such a republic would check the southward surge of the American colossus, whose bulging biceps posed a constant threat to nearby British possessions in the New World. A puppet Texas, dancing to strings pulled by Britain, could be turned upon the Yankees. Subsequent clashes would create a smoke-screen diversion, behind which foreign powers could move into the Americas and challenge the insolent Monroe Doctrine. French schemers were likewise attracted by the hoary game of divide and conquer. These actions would result, they hoped, in the fragmentation and militarization of America. Dangers threatened from other foreign quarters. British abolitionists were busily intriguing for a foothold in Texas. If successful in freeing the few blacks there, they presumably would inﬂame the nearby slaves of the South. In addition, British merchants regarded Texas as a potentially important free-trade area—an offset to the tariff-walled United States. British manufacturers likewise perceived that those vast Texas plains constituted one of the great cottonproducing areas of the future. An independent Texas would relieve British looms of their chronic depen-

 dence on American ﬁber—a supply that might be cut off in time of crisis by embargo or war.

The Belated Texas Nuptials
 Partly because of the fears aroused by British schemers, Texas became a leading issue in the presidential campaign of 1844. The foes of expansion assailed annexation, while southern hotheads cried, “Texas or Disunion.” The pro-expansion Democrats under James K. Polk ﬁ nally triumphed over the Whigs under Henry Clay, the hardy perennial candidate. Lame duck president Tyler thereupon interpreted the narrow Democratic victory, with dubious accuracy, as a “mandate” to acquire Texas. Eager to crown his troubled administration with this splendid prize, Tyler deserves much of the credit for shepherding Texas into the fold. Many Conscience Whigs feared that Texas in the Union would be red meat to nourish the lusty “slave power.” Aware of their opposition, Tyler despaired of securing the needed two-thirds vote for a treaty in the Senate. He therefore arranged for annexation by a joint resolution. This solution required only a simple majority in both houses of Congress. After a spirited debate, the resolution passed early in 1845, and Texas was formally invited to become the twenty-eighth star on the American ﬂag. Mexico angrily charged that the Americans had despoiled it of Texas. This was to some extent true in 1836, but hardly true in 1845, for the area was no longer

 Thomas J. Green (1801–1863), who served as a brigadier general in the Texas Revolution, published a pamphlet in 1845 to make the case for American support of an independent Texas:

“


 Both the government of the United States and Texas are founded upon the same political code. They have the same common origin—the same language, laws, and religion—the same pursuits and interests; and though they may remain independent of each other as to government, they are identiﬁed in weal and wo’—they will ﬂourish side by side and the blight which affects the one will surely reach the other.

”


 Trouble over Texas

 Mexico’s to be despoiled of. As the years stretched out, realistic observers could see that the Mexicans would not be able to reconquer their lost province. Yet Mexico left the Texans dangling by denying their right to dispose of themselves as they chose. By 1845 the Lone Star Republic had become a danger spot, inviting foreign intrigue that menaced the American people. The continued existence of Texas as an independent nation threatened to involve the United States in a series of ruinous wars, both in America and in Europe. Americans were in a “lick all creation” mood when they sang “Uncle Sam’s Song to Miss Texas”: If Mexy back’d by secret foes, Still talks of getting you, gal; Why we can lick ’em all you know And then annex ’em too, gal. What other power would have spurned the imperial domain of Texas? The bride was so near, so rich, so fair, so willing. Whatever the peculiar circumstances of the Texas Revolution, the United States can hardly be accused of unseemly haste in achieving annexation. Nine long years were surely a decent wait between the beginning of the courtship and the consummation of the marriage.



Oregon Fever
Populates Oregon
 The so-called Oregon Country was an enormous wilderness. It sprawled magniﬁcently west of the Rockies to the Paciﬁc Ocean, and north of Cal i fornia to the line of 54° 40?—the present southern tip of the Alaska panhandle. All or substantial parts of this immense area were claimed at one time or another by four nations: Spain, Russia, Britain, and the United States. Two claimants dropped out of the scramble. Spain, though the ﬁ rst to raise its banner in Oregon, bartered away its claims to the United States in the so-called Florida Treaty of 1819. Russia retreated to the line of 54° 40' by the treaties of 1824 and 1825 with America and Britain. These two remaining rivals now had the ﬁeld to themselves. British claims to Oregon were strong—at least to that portion north of the Columbia River. They were based squarely on prior discovery and exploration, on treaty rights, and on actual occupation. The most important colonizing agency was the far-ﬂung Hudson’s Bay Company, which was trading proﬁtably with the Indians of the Paciﬁc Northwest for furs.

 St. Louis in 1846, by Henry Lewis Thousands of pioneers like these pulling away from St. Louis said farewell to civilization as they left the Mississippi River and headed across the untracked plains to Oregon in the 1840s.



Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


 Pundt and Koenig’s General Store, Omaha City, Nebraska, 1858 Settlers bound for Colorado and California stopped here for provisions before venturing farther west across the open plains.

 Americans, for their part, could also point pridefully to exploration and occupation. Captain Robert Gray in 1792 had stumbled upon the majestic Columbia River, which he named after his ship; and the famed Lewis and Clark expedition of 1804–1806 had ranged overland through the Oregon Country to the Paciﬁc. This shaky American toehold was ultimately strength-

 In winning Oregon, the Americans had great faith in their procreative powers. Boasted one congressman in 1846,

“


 Our people are spreading out with the aid of the American multiplication table. Go to the West and see a young man with his mate of eighteen; after the lapse of thirty years, visit him again, and instead of two, you will ﬁnd twenty-two. That is what I call the American multiplication table.

”


 ened by the presence of missionaries and other settlers, a sprinkling of whom reached the grassy Willamette River valley, south of the Columbia, in the 1830s. These men and women of God, in saving the soul of the Indian, were instrumental in saving the soil of Oregon for the United States. They stimulated interest in a faraway domain that countless Americans had earlier assumed would not be settled for centuries. Scattered American and British pioneers in Oregon continued to live peacefully side by side. At the time of negotiating the Anglo-American Convention of 1818 (see pp. 265–266), the United States had sought to divide the vast domain at the forty-ninth parallel. But the British, who regarded the Columbia River as the St. Lawrence of the West, were unwilling to yield this vital artery. A scheme for peaceful “joint occupation” was thereupon adopted, pending future settlement. The handful of Americans in the Willamette Valley was suddenly multiplied in the early 1840s, when “Oregon fever” seized hundreds of restless pioneers. In increasing numbers, their creaking covered wagons jolted over the two-thousand-mile Oregon Trail as the

The Oregon Controversy


 human rivulet widened into a stream.* By 1846 about ﬁve thousand Americans had settled south of the Columbia River, some of them tough “border rufﬁans,” expert with bowie knife and “revolving pistol.” The British, in the face of this rising torrent of humanity, could muster only seven hundred or so subjects north of the Columbia. Losing out lopsidedly in the population race, they were beginning to see the wisdom of arriving at a peaceful settlement before being engulfed by their neighbors. A curious fact is that only a relatively small segment of the Oregon Country was in actual controversy by 1845. The area in dispute consisted of the rough quadrangle between the Columbia River on the south and east, the forty-ninth parallel on the north, and the Paciﬁc Ocean on the west. Britain had repeatedly offered the line of the Columbia; America had repeatedly offered the forty-ninth parallel. The whole fateful issue was now tossed into the presidential election of 1844, where it was largely overshadowed by the question of annexing Texas.

A
Mandate (?) for Manifest Destiny
 The two major parties nominated their presidential standard-bearers in May 1844. Ambitious but often frustrated Henry Clay, easily the most popular man in the country, was enthusiastically chosen by the Whigs at Baltimore. The Democrats, meeting there later, seemed hopelessly deadlocked. Van Buren’s opposition to annexing Texas ensured his defeat, given domination of the party by southern expansionists. Finally party delegates trotted out and nominated James K. Polk of Tennessee, America’s ﬁ rst “dark-horse” or “surprise” presidential candidate. Polk may have been a dark horse, but he was hardly an unknown or decrepit nag. Speaker of the House of Representatives for four years and governor of Tennessee for two terms, he was a determined, industrious, ruthless, and intelligent public servant. Sponsored by Andrew Jackson, his friend and neighbor, he was rather implausibly touted by Democrats as yet another “Young Hickory.” Whigs attempted to jeer him into oblivion

 *The average rate of progress in covered wagons was one to two miles an hour. This amounted to about one hundred miles a week, or about ﬁve months for the entire journey. Thousands of humans, in addition to horses and oxen, died en route. One estimate is seventeen deaths a mile for men, women, and children.



 Manifest Destiny: A Caricature The spirit of Manifest Destiny swept the nation in the 1840s, and threatened to sweep it to extremes. This cartoon from 1848 lampoons proslavery Democratic presidential candidate Lewis Cass as a veritable war machine, bent on the conquest of territory ranging from New Mexico to Cuba and even Peru.

 with the taunt, “Who is James K. Polk?” They soon found out. The campaign of 1844 was in part an expression of the mighty emotional upsurge known as Manifest Destiny. Countless citizens in the 1840s and 1850s, feeling a sense of mission, believed that Almighty God had “manifestly” destined the American people for a hemispheric career. They would irresistibly spread their uplifting and ennobling democratic institutions over at least the entire continent, and possibly over South America as well. Land greed and ideals—“empire” and “liberty”—were thus conveniently conjoined. Expansionist Democrats were strongly swayed by the intoxicating spell of Manifest Destiny. They came out ﬂat-footedly in their platform for the “Reannexation of Texas”* and the “Reoccupation of Oregon,” all the way to 54° 40'. Outbellowing the Whig logcabinites in the game of slogans, they shouted “All of Oregon or None.” (The slogan “Fifty-four forty or ﬁght” was not coined until two years later, in 1846.) They also condemned Clay as a “corrupt bargainer,” a dissolute

 *The United States had given up its claims to Texas in the so-called Florida Purchase Treaty (Adams-Onís Treaty) with Spain in 1819 (see p. 267).



Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


 Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way This romantic tribute to the spirit of Manifest Destiny was commissioned by Congress in 1860 and may still be seen in the Capitol.

 character, and a slaveowner. (Their own candidate, Polk, also owned slaves—a classic case of the pot calling the kettle black.) The Whigs, as noisemakers, took no backseat. They countered with such slogans as “Hooray for Clay” and “Polk, Slavery, and Texas, or Clay, Union, and Liberty.” They also spread the lie that a gang of Tennessee slaves had been seen on their way to a southern market branded with the initials J. K. P. (James K. Polk). On the crucial issue of Texas, the acrobatic Clay tried to ride two horses at once. The “Great Compromiser” appears to have compromised away the presidency when he wrote a series of confusing letters. They seemed to say that while he personally favored annexing slaveholding Texas (an appeal to the South), he also favored postponement (an appeal to the North). He might have lost more ground if he had not “straddled,” but he certainly alienated the more ardent antislaveryites. In the stretch drive, “Dark Horse” Polk nipped Henry Clay at the wire, 170 to 105 votes in the Electoral College and 1,338,464 to 1,300,097 in the popular column. Clay would have won if he had not lost New York State by a scant 5,000 votes. There the tiny antislavery Liberty party absorbed nearly 16,000 votes, many of which would otherwise have gone to the unlucky Kentuckian. Ironically, the anti-Texas Liberty party, by spoiling Clay’s chances and helping to ensure the elec-

 tion of pro-Texas Polk, hastened the annexation of Texas. Land-hungry Democrats, ﬂushed with victory, proclaimed that they had received a mandate from the voters to take Texas. But a presidential election is seldom, if ever, a clear-cut mandate on anything. The only way to secure a true reﬂection of the voters’ will is to hold a special election on a given issue. The picture that emerged in 1844 was one not of mandate but of muddle. What else could there have been when the results were so close, the personalities so colorful, and the issues so numerous—including Oregon, Texas, the tariff, slavery, the bank, and internal improvements? Yet this unclear “mandate” was interpreted by President Tyler as a crystal-clear charge to annex Texas— and he signed the joint resolution three days before leaving the White House.

Polk the Purposeful
 “Young Hickory” Polk, unlike “Old Hickory” Jackson, was not an impressive ﬁgure. Of middle height (ﬁve feet eight inches), lean, white-haired (worn long), grayeyed, and stern-faced, he took life seriously and drove himself mercilessly into a premature grave. His burdens were increased by an unwillingness to delegate authority. Methodical and hard-working but not bril-



Polk Takes Command


 total

Against










130°W


60°N






120°W




110°W


 Focus of dispute by 1846

300 Km.


 Area of original dispute over Oregon

300 Mi.


 ALASKA (Russia)

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

54°4


'N


.


Treat y of 1818


 MO

 b i a R.

 OREGON

 UN

Ft.
COUNTRY
Vancouver 
TA I

Ore


 NS

 a Tr

 il

Ad a m s


 n

Willamette
Valley


 go

42°N


Y


 rI

PAC I F IC OCEAN

N


 CK

 ve

 u Compromise line, 1846

 r R.

 co

49°N


 RO

Frase


50°N
 n Va

 liant, he was shrewd, narrow-minded, conscientious, and persistent. “What he went for he fetched,” wrote a contemporary. Purposeful in the highest degree, he developed a positive four-point program and with remarkable success achieved it completely in less than four years. One of Polk’s goals was a lowered tariff. His secretary of the Treasury, wispy Robert J. Walker, devised a tariff-for-revenue bill that reduced the average rates of the Tariff of 1842 from about 32 percent to 25 percent. With the strong support of low-tariff southerners, the Walker Tariff bill made its way through Congress, though not without loud complaints from the Clayites, especially in New Eng land and the middle states, who cried that American manufacturing would be ruined (see Table 17.1). But these prophets of doom missed the mark. The Walker Tariff of 1846 proved to be an excellent revenue producer, largely because it was followed by boom times and heavy imports. A second objective of Polk was the restoration of the independent treasury, unceremoniously dropped by the Whigs in 1841. Pro-bank Whigs in Congress raised a storm of opposition, but victory at last rewarded the president’s efforts in 1846. The third and fourth points on Polk’s “must list” were the acquisition of Cal i fornia and the settlement of the Oregon dispute (see Map 17.2). “Reoccupation” of the “whole” of Oregon had been promised northern Democrats in the campaign of 1844. But southern Democrats, once they had annexed Texas, rapidly cooled off. Polk, himself a southerner, had no intention of insisting on the 54° 40' pledge of his own platform. But feeling bound by the three offers of his predecessors to London, he again proposed the compromise line of 49°. The British minister in Washington, on his own initiative, brusquely spurned this olive branch. The next move on the Oregon chessboard was up to Britain. Fortunately for peace, the ministry began to experience a change of heart. British anti-expansionists

R


 New Eng land Middle states West and Northwest South and Southwest

For


.


M i s s o u r i R.
Yellow


 sto

 ne R.

UNITED STATES

 k

 e

Region


 (“Little Eng landers”) were now persuaded that the Columbia River was not after all the St. Lawrence of the West and that the turbulent American hordes might one day seize the Oregon Country. Why ﬁght a hazardous war over this wilderness on behalf of an unpopular monopoly, the Hudson’s Bay Company, which had already “furred out” much of the area anyhow? Early in 1846 the British, hat in hand, came around and themselves proposed the line of 49°. President Polk, irked by the previous rebuff, threw the decision squarely into the lap of the Senate. The senators speedily accepted the offer and approved the subsequent treaty, despite a few diehard shouts of “Fifty-four forty forever!” and “Every foot or not an inch!” The fact that the United States was then a month deep in a war with Mexico doubtless inﬂuenced the Senate’s ﬁ nal vote. Satisfaction with the Oregon settlement among Amer icans was not unanimous. The northwestern states, hotbed of Manifest Destiny and “ﬁ fty-four fortyism,” joined the antislavery forces in condemning what they regarded as a base betrayal by the South. Why all

Colu m


Table 17.1 House Vote on Tariff of 1846


 - Onís Tr e a t y o f 18 1

Sna


40°N


 MEXICO

Map 17.2 The Oregon Controversy, 1846
Interactive Map




Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


Fort Vancouver, Oregon Country, ca. 1846 Fort Vancouver, on the Columbia
 River near its conﬂuence with the Willamette River, was the economic hub of the Oregon Country during the early years of settlement. Founded as a Hudson’s Bay Company fur-trading outpost, the fort was handed over to the Americans when Britain ceded the Oregon Country to the United States in 1846.

 of Texas but not all of Oregon? Because, retorted the expansionist Senator Benton of Missouri, “Great Britain is powerful and Mexico is weak.” So Polk, despite all the campaign bluster, got neither “ﬁ fty-four forty” nor a ﬁght. But he did get something that in the long run was better: a reasonable compromise without a riﬂe being raised.

Misunderstandings
 with Mexico Faraway California was another worry of Polk’s. He and other disciples of Manifest Destiny had long coveted its verdant valleys, and especially the spacious bay of San Francisco. This splendid harbor was widely regarded as America’s future gateway to the Paciﬁc Ocean.

 The population of Cal i fornia in 1845 was curiously mixed. It consisted of perhaps thirteen thousand sunblessed Spanish Mexicans and as many as seventy-ﬁve thousand dispirited Indians. There were fewer than a thousand “foreigners,” mostly Americans, some of whom had “left their consciences” behind them as they rounded Cape Horn. Given time, these transplanted Yankees might yet bring Cal i fornia into the Union by “playing the Texas game.” Polk was eager to buy Cal i fornia from Mexico, but relations with Mexico City were dangerously embittered. Among other friction points, the United States had claims against the Mexicans for some $3 million in damages to American citizens and their property. The revolution-riddled regime in Mexico had formally agreed to assume most of this debt but had been forced to default on its payments.

Causes of the Mexican War




The Landowner and
His Foreman, by Julio
Michard, 1839
This California
 ranchero’s way of life was soon to be extinguished when California became part of the United States in 1848 and thousands of American gold-seekers rushed into the state the following year.

 A more serious bone of contention was Texas. The Mexican government, after threatening war if the United States should acquire the Lone Star Republic, had recalled its minister from Washington following annexation. Diplomatic relations were completely severed. Deadlock with Mexico over Texas was further tightened by a question of boundaries. During the long era of Spanish Mexican occupation, the southwestern boundary of Texas had been the Nueces River. But the expansive Texans, on rather far-fetched grounds, were claiming the more southerly Rio Grande instead. Polk, for his part, felt a strong moral obligation to defend Texas in its claim, once it was annexed. The Mexicans were far less concerned about this boundary quibble than was the United States. In their eyes all of Texas was still theirs, although temporarily in revolt, and a dispute over the two rivers seemed pointless. Yet Polk was careful to keep American troops out of virtually all of the explosive no-man’s-land between the Nueces and the Rio Grande, as long as there was any real prospect of peaceful adjustment. The golden prize of Cal i fornia continued to cause Polk much anxiety. Disquieting rumors (now known to have been ill-founded) were circulating that Britain was about to buy or seize Cal i fornia—a grab that Americans could not tolerate under the Monroe Doctrine. In a last desperate throw of the dice, Polk dispatched John Slidell to Mexico City as minister late in 1845. The

 new envoy, among other alternatives, was instructed to offer a maximum of $25 million for Cal i fornia and territory to the east. But the proud Mexican people would not even permit Slidell to present his “insulting” proposition.

American Blood on
American (?) Soil
 A frustrated Polk was now prepared to force a showdown. On January 13, 1846, he ordered four thousand men, under General Zachary Taylor, to march from the Nueces River to the Rio Grande, provocatively near Mexican forces. Polk’s presidential diary reveals that he expected at any moment to hear of a clash. When none occurred after an anxious wait, he informed his cabinet on May 9, 1846, that he proposed to ask Congress to declare war on the basis of (1) unpaid claims and (2) Slidell’s rejection. These, at best, were rather ﬂ imsy pretexts. Two cabinet members spoke up and said that they would feel better satisﬁed if Mexican troops should ﬁ re ﬁ rst. That very evening, as fate would have it, news of bloodshed arrived. On April 25, 1846, Mexican troops had crossed the Rio Grande and attacked General Taylor’s command, with a loss of sixteen Americans killed or wounded.



Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


 Polk, further aroused, sent a vigorous war message to Congress. He declared that despite “all our efforts” to avoid a clash, hostilities had been forced upon the country by the shedding of “American blood upon the American soil.” A patriotic Congress overwhelmingly voted for war, and enthusiastic volunteers cried, “Ho for the Halls of the Montezumas!” and “Mexico or Death!” Inﬂamed by the war fever, even antislavery Whig bastions melted and joined with the rest of the nation, though they later condemned “Jimmy Polk’s war.” As James Russell Lowell of Massachusetts lamented, Massachusetts, God forgive her, She’s akneelin’ with the rest. In his message to Congress, Polk was making history—not writing it. Like many presidents with ambitious foreign-policy goals, he felt justiﬁed in bending the truth if that was what it took to bend a reluctant public toward war. If he had been a historian, Polk would have explained that American blood had been shed on soil that the Mexicans had good reason to regard as their own. A gangling, rough-featured Whig congressman from Illinois, one Abraham Lincoln, introduced certain resolutions that requested information as to the precise “spot” on American soil where American blood had been shed. He pushed his spot resolutions with such persistence that he came to be known as the “spotty Lincoln,” who could die of “spotted fever.” The more extreme antislavery agitators of the North, many of them Whigs, branded the president a liar—“Polk the Mendacious.” Did Polk provoke war? Cal i fornia was an imperative point in his program, and Mexico would not sell it at any price. The only way to get it was to use force or wait for an internal American revolt. Yet delay seemed dangerous, for the claws of the British lion might snatch the ripening Cal i fornia fruit from the talons of the

 On June 1, 1860, less than a year before he became president, Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865) wrote,

“


 The act of sending an armed force among the Mexicans was unnecessary, inasmuch as Mexico was in no way molesting or menacing the United States or the people thereof; and . . . it was unconstitutional, because the power of levying war is vested in Congress, and not in the President.

”


 American eagle. Grievances against Mexico were annoying yet tolerable; in later years America endured even worse ones. But in 1846 patience had ceased to be a virtue, as far as Polk was concerned. Bent on grasping Cal i fornia by fair means or foul, he pushed the quarrel to a bloody showdown. Both sides, in fact, were spoiling for a ﬁght. Feisty Americans, especially southwestern expansionists, were eager to teach the Mexicans a lesson. The Mexicans, in turn, were burning to humiliate the “Bullies of the North.” Possessing a considerable standing army, heavily overstaffed with generals, they boasted of invading the United States, freeing the black slaves, and lassoing whole regiments of Americans. They were hoping that the quarrel with Britain over Oregon would blossom into a full-dress war, as it came near doing, and further pin down the hated yanquis. A conquest of Mexico’s vast and arid expanses seemed fantastic, especially in view of the bungling American invasion of Canada in 1812. Both sides were ﬁ red by moral indignation. The Mexican people could ﬁght with the ﬂaming sword of righteousness, for had not the “insolent” Yankee picked a ﬁght by polluting their soil? Many earnest Americans, on the other hand, sincerely believed that Mexico was the aggressor.

The Mastering of Mexico
 Polk wanted Cal i fornia—not war. But when war came, he hoped to ﬁght it on a limited scale and then pull out when he had captured the prize. The dethroned Mexican dictator Santa Anna, then exiled with his teenage bride in Cuba, let it be known that if the American blockading squadron would permit him to slip into Mexico, he would sell out his country. Incredibly, Polk agreed to this discreditable intrigue. But the doublecrossing Santa Anna, once he returned to Mexico, proceeded to rally his countrymen to a desperate defense of their soil. American operations in the Southwest and in Cal ifornia were completely successful (see Map 17.3). In 1846 General Stephen W. Kearny led a detachment of seventeen hundred troops over the famous Santa Fe Trail from Fort Leavenworth to Santa Fe. This sunbaked outpost, with its drowsy plazas, was easily captured. But before Kearny could reach Cal i fornia, the fertile province was won. When war broke out, Captain John C. Frémont, the dashing explorer, just “happened” to be there with several dozen well-armed men. In help-



Causes of the Mexican War


 ing to overthrow Mexican rule in 1846, he collaborated with American naval ofﬁcers and with the local Americans, who had hoisted the banner of the short-lived California Bear Flag Republic. General Zachary Taylor meanwhile had been spearheading the main thrust. Known as “Old Rough and Ready” because of his iron constitution and incredibly unsoldierly appearance—he sometimes wore a Mexican straw hat—he fought his way across the Rio Grande into Mexico. After several gratifying victories, he reached Buena Vista. There, on February 22–23, 1847, his weakened force of ﬁve thousand men was attacked by some twenty thousand march-weary troops under Santa Anna. The Mexicans were ﬁ nally repulsed with extreme difﬁculty, and overnight Zachary Taylor

 became the “Hero of Buena Vista.” One Kentuckian was heard to say that “Old Zack” would be elected president in 1848 by “spontaneous combustion.” Sound American strategy now called for a crushing blow at the enemy’s vitals—Mexico City. General Taylor, though a good leader of modest-sized forces, could not win decisively in the semideserts of northern Mexico. The command of the main expedition, which pushed inland from the coastal city of Veracruz early in 1847, was entrusted to General Winﬁeld Scott. A handsome giant of a man, Scott had emerged as a hero from the War of 1812 and had later earned the nickname “Old Fuss and Feathers” because of his resplendent uniforms and strict discipline. He was severely handicapped in the Mexican campaign by inadequate Interactive Map

Map 17.3 Major Campaigns of the Mexican War
120°W


100°W


110°W


 WISCONSIN

 t

R.


 m



 de

N


Woo
 l1

Sl o


 FL.

Nuece


 sR . Corpus Christi

 at

LOUISIANA
New Orleans 
Sc


San Luis
Potosí


 Mexican victory 20°N





N


Gulf of
Mexico


Monterrey
Sept. 19–24, 1846


Mexico City
Sept. 13–14, 1847


Tampico
Occupied
Nov. 14,1846


Sc


 Mazatlán

 U.S. movements

 t ot

San ta Anna


 Mexican movements

 Mexican cession, 1848



 GA.

 MISS.

Fort
Sam Houston


Buena Vista
Feb. 22–23, 1847




 U.S. naval blockade

 ALA.

Matamoros


 Disputed area

 U.S. victory

 ARKANSAS

(San Antonio)


Chihuahua


400 Km.
400 Mi.


 TENNESSEE

R
 INDIAN . TERRITORY

T E X AS
 an

Donipha
 n

Ri o


Gr


 EA

Sacramento
Feb. 28, 1847




UNITED STATES

El Brazito
Dec. 25, 1846




30°N


 as

 KENTUCKY

R.


 OC

San San Pasqual
Diego Dec. 6, 1846


Santa Fe
Occupied Aug. 18, 1846
Valverde
Dec. 12, 1846


 ns

 pi



Kearny


 sip

 MEXICO

 sis

Taos Revolt
Feb. 3–4, 1847


 IND.

 MISSOURI

R.


 ka

Los Angeles
San Gabriel
Jan. 8, 1847


 ra

 rny 1848 Ar

Colo


 do

 a Ke

 OHIO

M


 is

 Bent’s Fort

 n to ck Sto

FIC PACI

ILLINOIS
Fort Leavenworth 
Monterey
Occupied July 7, 1846




 IOWA

Fr é


Yerba Buena
(San Francisco)
Occupied July 10, 1846




 e R.

 on

Platt


 ri

4 5–


 sou

Bear Flag Revolt
June 14, 1845


MIC H. TER R.

UNORGANIZED TERRITORY
Mis 
 Frémont 1846

OREGON TERRITORY
(1846) 
40°N


90°W


 Mérida

 ott 1847

Cerro Gordo
April 17–18, 1847


Veracruz
Occupied
March 29,1847




Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


 numbers of troops, by expiring enlistments, by a more numerous enemy, by mountainous terrain, by disease, and by political backbiting at home. Yet he succeeded in battling his way up to Mexico City by September 1847 in one of the most brilliant campaigns in American military annals. He proved to be the most distinguished general produced by his country between the Revolution and the Civil War.

Fighting Mexico for Peace
 Polk was anxious to end the shooting as soon as he could secure his territorial goals. Accordingly, he sent along with Scott’s invading army the chief clerk of the State Department, Nicholas P. Trist, who among other weaknesses was afﬂ icted with an overﬂuid pen. Trist and Scott arranged for an armistice with Santa Anna, at a cost of $10,000. The wily dictator pocketed the bribe and then used the time to bolster his defenses.

 War News from Mexico, by Richard Caton Woodville The newfangled telegraph kept the nation closely informed of events in far-off Mexico.

 Negotiating a treaty with a sword in one hand and a pen in the other was ticklish business. Polk, disgusted with his blundering envoy, abruptly recalled Trist. The wordy diplomat then dashed off a sixty-ﬁve-page letter explaining why he was not coming home. The president was furious. But Trist, grasping a ﬂeeting opportunity to negotiate, signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo on February 2, 1848, and forwarded it to Washington. The terms of the treaty were breathtaking. They conﬁ rmed the American title to Texas and yielded the enormous area stretching westward to Oregon and the ocean and embracing coveted Cal i fornia. This total expanse, including Texas, was about one-half of Mexico. The United States agreed to pay $15 million for the land and to assume the claims of its citizens against Mexico in the amount of $3,250,000 (see “Makers of America: The Californios,” pp. 412–413). Polk submitted the treaty to the Senate. Although Trist had proved highly annoying, he had generally

 The Peace Settlement with Mexico

 followed his original instructions. And speed was imperative. The antislavery Whigs in Congress—dubbed “Mexican Whigs” or “Conscience Whigs”—were denouncing this “damnable war” with increasing heat. Having secured control of the House in 1847, they were even threatening to vote down supplies for the armies in the ﬁeld. If they had done so, Scott probably would have been forced to retreat, and the fruits of victory might have been tossed away. Another peril impended. A swelling group of expansionists, intoxicated by Manifest Destiny, was clamoring for all of Mexico. If America had seized it, the nation would have been saddled with an expensive and vexatious policing problem. Farseeing southerners like Calhoun, alarmed by the mounting anger of antislavery agitators, realized that the South would do well not to be too greedy. The treaty was ﬁ nally approved by the Senate, 38 to 14. Oddly enough, it was condemned both by those opponents who wanted all of Mexico and by opponents who wanted none of it. Victors rarely pay an indemnity, especially after a costly conﬂ ict has been “forced” on them. Yet Polk, who had planned to offer $25 million before ﬁghting the war, arranged to pay $18,250,000 after winning it. Cynics have charged that the Americans were pricked by guilty consciences; apologists have pointed proudly to the “Anglo-Saxon spirit of fair play.” A decisive factor was the need for haste, while there was still a responsible Mexican government to carry out the treaty and before political foes in the United States, notably the antislavery zealots, sabotaged Polk’s expansionist program.

 Early in 1848 the New York Evening Post demanded,

“


 Now we ask, whether any man can coolly contemplate the idea of recalling our troops from the [Mexican] territory we at present occupy . . . and . . . resign this beautiful country to the custody of the ignorant cowards and proﬂigate rufﬁans who have ruled it for the last twenty-ﬁve years? Why, humanity cries out against it. Civilization and Christianity protest against this reﬂux of the tide of barbarism and anarchy.

 Such was one phase of Manifest Destiny.

”




 Proﬁt and Loss in Mexico As wars go, the Mexican War was a small one. It cost some thirteen thousand American lives, most of them taken by disease. But the fruits of the ﬁghting were enormous. America’s total expanse, already vast, was increased by about one-third (counting Texas)—an addition even greater than that of the Louisiana Purchase. A sharp stimulus was given to the spirit of Manifest Destiny, for as the proverb has it, the appetite comes with eating. The Mexican War proved to be the blood-spattered schoolroom of the Civil War. The campaigns provided priceless ﬁeld experience for most of the ofﬁcers destined to become leading generals in the forthcoming conﬂ ict, including Captain Robert E. Lee and Lieutenant Ulysses S. Grant. The Military Academy at West Point, founded in 1802, fully justiﬁed its existence through the well-trained ofﬁcers. Useful also was the navy, which did valuable work in throwing a crippling blockade around Mexican ports. A new academy at Annapolis had just been established by Navy Secretary and historian George Bancroft in 1845. The Marine Corps, in existence since 1798, won new laurels and to this day sings in its stirring hymn about the “Halls of Montezuma.” The army waged war without defeat and without a major blunder, despite formidable obstacles and a half-dozen or so achingly long marches. Chagrined British critics, as well as other foreign skeptics, reluctantly revised upward their estimate of Yankee military prowess. Opposing armies, moreover, emerged with increased respect for each other. The Mexicans, though poorly led, fought heroically. At Chapultepec, near Mexico City, the teenage lads of the military academy there (los niños) perished to a boy. Long-memoried Mexicans have never forgotten that their northern enemy tore away about half of their country. The argument that they were lucky not to lose all of it, and that they had been paid something for their land, has scarcely lessened their bitterness. The war also marked an ugly turning point in relations between the United States and Latin America as a whole. Hitherto, Uncle Sam had been regarded with some complacency, even friendliness. Henceforth, he was increasingly feared as the “Colossus of the North.” Suspicious neighbors to the south condemned him as a greedy and untrustworthy bully, who might next despoil them of their soil.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Californios American Migration 
I


 n 1848 the United States, swollen with the spoils of war, reckoned the costs and beneﬁts of the conﬂ ict with Mexico. Thousands of Americans had fallen in battle, and millions of dollars had been invested in a war machine. For this expenditure of blood and money, the nation was repaid with ample land—and with people, the former citizens of Mexico who now became, whether willingly or not, Americans. The largest single addition to American territory in history, the Mexican Cession stretched the United States from sea to shining sea. It secured Texas, brought in vast tracts of the desert Southwest, and included the great prize— the fruited valleys and port cities of Cal i fornia. There, at the conclusion of the Mexican War, dwelled some thirteen thousand Californios—descendants of the Spanish and Mexican conquerors who had once ruled Cal i fornia. The Spanish had ﬁ rst arrived in Cal i fornia in 1769, extending their New World empire and outracing Russian traders to bountiful San Francisco Bay. Father Junipero Serra, an enterprising Franciscan friar, soon

Mission San Gabriel, Founded in 1771




 established twenty-one missions along the coast (see Map 17.4). Indians in the iron grip of the missions were encouraged to adopt Christianity and were often forced to toil endlessly as farmers and herders, in the process suffering disease and degradation. These frequently maltreated mission Indians occupied the lowest rungs on the ladder of Spanish colonial society. Upon the loftiest rungs perched the Californios. Pioneers from the Mexican heartland of New Spain, they had trailed Serra to Cal i fornia, claiming land and civil ofﬁces in their new home. Yet even the proud Californios had deferred to the all-powerful Franciscan missionaries until Mexico threw off the Spanish colonial yoke in 1821, whereupon the infant Mexican government turned an anxious eye toward its frontier outpost. Mexico now emptied its jails to send settlers to the sparsely populated north, built and garrisoned fortresses, and, most important, transferred authority from the missions to secular (that is, governmental) authorities. This “secularization” program attacked and

38°
N


San Rafael
San Francisco


E
S I


San Francisco Solano
 San Francisco de Asís

R
R


San José


A


Santa Clara


Santa Cruz
San Juan Bautista


San Carlos
Borromeo


Soledad


D A
V A
N E


36°
N


Monterey


San Antonio
 de Padua San Miguel

PAC I F IC OCEAN

Mission
Presidio (Fort)


San Luis Obispo


California Indians Dancing at the Mission in San José,
 by Sykes, 1806

 eroded the immense power of the missions and of their Franciscan masters—with their bawling herds of cattle, debased Indian workers, millions of acres of land, and lucrative foreign trade. The frocked friars had commanded their ﬁefdoms so self-conﬁdently that earlier reform efforts had dared to go no further than levying a paltry tax on the missions and politely requesting that the missionaries limit their ﬂoggings of Indians to ﬁ fteen lashes per week. But during the 1830s, the power of the missions weakened, and much of their land and their assets were conﬁscated by the Californios. Vast ranchos (ranches) formed, and from those citadels the Californios ruled in their turn until the Mexican War. The Californios’ glory faded in the wake of the American victory, even though in some isolated places they clung to their political ofﬁces for a decade or two. Overwhelmed by the inrush of Anglo gold-diggers— some eighty-seven thousand after the discovery at Sutter’s Mill in 1848—and undone by the waning of the pastoral economy, the Californios saw their recently acquired lands and their recently established political power slip through their ﬁ ngers. When the Civil War broke out in 1861, so harshly did the word Yankee ring in their ears that many Californios supported the South. By 1870 the Californios’ brief ascendancy had utterly vanished—a short and sad tale of riches to rags in

 La Purísima Concepción 34° N



Santa Ynez


Santa Barbara




 El Camino Réal (Royal Road)

San Buenaventura
San Fernando Rey


60 Km.


San Gabriel


60 Mi.


122°W


N


San Juan Capistrano
San Luis Rey
San Diego de Alcalá
120°W


Map 17.4 Spanish Missions and Presidios
Interactive Map


 the face of the Anglo onslaught. Half a century later, beginning in 1910, hundreds of thousands of young Mexicans would ﬂock into Cal i fornia and the Southwest. They would enter a region liberally endowed with Spanish architecture and artifacts, bearing the names of Spanish missions and Californio ranchos. But they would ﬁ nd it a land dominated by Anglos, a place far different from that which their Californio ancestors had settled so hopefully in earlier days.





Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


Storming the Fortress of
Chapultepec, Mexico, 1847
 The American success at Chapultepec contributed heavily to the ﬁnal victory over Mexico. One American commander lined up several Irish American deserters on a gallows facing the castle and melodramatically dropped the trapdoors beneath them just as the United States ﬂag was raised over the captured battlement. According to legend, the ﬂag was raised by First Lieutenant George Pickett, later immortalized as the leader of “Pickett’s charge” in the Civil War Battle of Gettysburg, 1863.

 Most ominous of all, the war rearoused the snarling dog of the slavery issue, and the beast did not stop yelping until drowned in the blood of the Civil War. Abolitionists assailed the Mexican conﬂ ict as one provoked by the southern “slavocracy” for its own evil purposes. As James Russell Lowell had Hosea Biglow drawl in his Yankee dialect, They jest want this Californy So’s to lug new slave-states in To abuse ye, an’ to scorn ye, An’ to plunder ye like sin. In line with Lowell’s charge, the bulk of the American volunteers were admittedly from the South and Southwest. But, as in the case of the Texas Revolution, the basic explanation was proximity rather than conspiracy. Quarreling over slavery extension also erupted on the ﬂoors of Congress. In 1846, shortly after the shooting started, Polk had requested an appropriation of $2 million with which to buy a peace. Representative David Wilmot of Pennsylvania, fearful of the southern “slavocracy,” introduced a fateful amendment. It stipulated that slavery should never exist in any of the territory to be wrested from Mexico.

 The disruptive Wilmot amendment twice passed the House, but not the Senate. Southern members, unwilling to be robbed of prospective slave states, fought the restriction tooth and nail. Antislavery men, in Congress and out, battled no less bitterly for the exclusion of slaves. The Wilmot Proviso never became federal law, but it was eventually endorsed by the legislatures of all but one of the free states, and it came to symbolize the burning issue of slavery in the territories. In a broad sense, the opening shots of the Mexican War were the opening shots of the Civil War. President Polk left the nation the splendid physical heritage of Cal i fornia and the Southwest but also the ugly moral heritage of an embittered slavery dispute. “Mexico will poison us,” said the philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson. Even the great champion of the South, John C. Calhoun, had prophetically warned that “Mexico is to us the forbidden fruit . . . the penalty of eating it would be to subject our institutions to political death.” Mexicans could later take some satisfaction in knowing that the territory wrenched from them had proved to be a venomous apple of discord that could well be called Santa Anna’s revenge.

To Learn More




 CHRONOLOGY

 Canadian rebellion and Caroline incident



 Aroostook War breaks out over Maine boundary



 Antislavery Liberty party orga nized



 Harrison dies after four weeks in ofﬁce Tyler assumes presidency





Walker Tariff
 Independent treasury restored United States settles Oregon dispute with Britain United States and Mexico clash over Texas boundary Kearny takes Santa Fe Frémont conquers Cal i fornia Wilmot Proviso passes House of Representatives

 Webster-Ashburton treaty

1846–


Mexican War




 Polk defeats Clay in “Manifest Destiny” election



Battle of Buena Vista
 Scott takes Mexico City



 United States annexes Texas



Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo


KEY TERMS
Tariff of 1842 (397) Caroline (399) Creole (399) Aroostook War (399) Manifest Destiny (403) “Fifty-four forty or ﬁght” (403) Liberty party (404) Walker Tariff (405) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
spot resolutions (408) California Bear Flag Republic (409) Buena Vista, Battle of (409) Guadalupe Hidalgo, Treaty of (410) Conscience Whigs (411) Wilmot Proviso (414) 
John Tyler
James K. Polk
Stephen W. Kearny
 John C. Frémont

 Winﬁeld Scott Nicholas P. Trist David Wilmot

To Learn More
 Iris Engstrand et al., Culture y Cultura: Consequences of the U.S.-Mexican War, 1846–1848 (1998) John Mack Faragher, Sugar Creek: Life on the Illinois Prairie (1986) Sam W. Haynes and Christopher Morris, eds., Manifest Destiny and Empire: American Antebellum Expansionism (1997) Robert W. Johannsen, To the Halls of the Montezumas: The Mexican War in the American Imagination (1985) Theodore J. Karamanski, Fur Trade and Exploration: Opening the Far Northwest, 1821–1852 (1983) James McCaffrey, Army of Manifest Destiny: The American Soldier in the Mexican War (1992) Dale Morgan, ed., Overland in 1846: Diaries and Letters of the California-Oregon Trail (1963)

Martha Sandweiss, Print and Legend: Photography and the
American West (2002)
Michael L. Tate, Indians and Emigrants: Encounters on the
Overland Trails (2006)
 Joseﬁ na Zoraida Vázquez, The United States and Mexico (1985) Richard Bruce Winders, Crisis in the Southwest: The United States, Mexico, and the Struggle over Texas (2002)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Renewing the
Sectional Struggle





1848–1854
 Secession! Peaceable secession! Sir, your eyes and mine are never destined to see that miracle.

T


 he year 1848, highlighted by a rash of revolutions in Europe, was ﬁ lled with unrest in America. The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo had ofﬁcially ended the war with Mexico, but it had initiated a new and perilous round of political warfare in the United States. The vanquished Mexicans had been forced to relinquish an enormous tract of real estate, including Texas, Cal ifornia, and all the area between. The acquisition of this huge domain raised anew the burning issue of extending slavery into the territories. Northern antislaveryites had rallied behind the Wilmot Proviso, which ﬂatly prohibited slavery in any territory acquired in the Mexican War. Southern senators had blocked the passage of the proviso, but the issue would not die. Ominously, debate over slavery in the area of the Mexican Cession threatened to disrupt the ranks of both Whigs and Democrats and split national politics along NorthSouth sectional lines.

The Popular Sovereignty
Panacea
 Each of the two great political parties was a vital bond of national unity, for each enjoyed powerful support in both North and South. If they should be replaced by two purely sectional groupings, the Union would be in peril. To politicians, the wisest strategy seemed to be to sit on the lid of the slavery issue and ignore the boiling beneath. Even so, the cover bobbed up and down ominously in response to the agitation of zealous northern abolitionists and impassioned southern “ﬁ re-eaters.” Anxious Democrats were forced to seek a new standard-bearer in 1848. President Polk, broken in health by overwork and chronic diarrhea, had pledged himself to a single term. The Democratic National Convention at Baltimore turned to an aging leader,

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Election of 1848




 General Lewis Cass, a veteran of the War of 1812. Although a senator and diplomat of wide experience and considerable ability, he was sour-visaged and somewhat pompous. His enemies dubbed him General “Gass” and quickly noted that Cass rhymed with jackass. The Democratic platform, in line with the lid-sitting strategy, was silent on the burning issue of slavery in the territories. But Cass himself had not been silent. His views on the extension of slavery were well known because he was the reputed father of popular sovereignty. This was the doctrine that stated that the sovereign people of a territory, under the general principles of the Constitution, should themselves determine the status of slavery. Popular sovereignty had a persuasive appeal. The public liked it because it accorded with the democratic tradition of self-determination. Politicians liked it because it seemed a comfortable compromise between the free-soilers’ bid for a ban on slavery in the territories and southern demands that Congress protect slavery in the territories. Popular sovereignty tossed the slavery problem into the laps of the people in the various territories. Advocates of the principle thus hoped to dissolve the most stubborn national issue of the day into a series of local issues. Yet popular sovereignty had one fatal defect: it might serve to spread the blight of slavery.

Political Triumphs for
General Taylor
 The Whigs, meeting in Philadelphia, cashed in on the “Taylor fever.” They nominated frank and honest Zachary Taylor, the “Hero of Buena Vista,” who had never held civil ofﬁce or even voted for president. Henry Clay, the living embodiment of Whiggism, should logically have been nominated. But Clay had made too many speeches—and too many enemies. As usual, the Whigs pussyfooted in their platform. Eager to win at any cost, they dodged all troublesome issues and merely extolled the homespun virtues of their candidate. The self-reliant old frontier ﬁghter had not committed himself on the issue of slavery extension. But as a wealthy resident of Louisiana, living on a sugar plantation, he owned scores of slaves. Ardent antislavery men in the North, distrusting both Cass and Taylor, orga nized the Free Soil party. Aroused by the conspiracy of silence in the Democratic and Whig platforms, the Free-Soilers made no bones

General Zachary Taylor (1784–1850) This Democratic
 campaign cartoon of 1848 charges that Taylor’s reputation rested on Mexican skulls.

 about their own stand. They came out foursquare for the Wilmot Proviso and against slavery in the territories. Going beyond other antislavery groups, they broadened their appeal by advocating federal aid for internal improvements and by urging free government homesteads for settlers. The new party assembled a strange assortment of new fellows in the same political bed. It attracted industrialists miffed at Polk’s reduction of protective tariffs. It appealed to Democrats resentful of Polk’s settling for part of Oregon while insisting on all of Texas—a disparity that suggested a menacing southern dominance in the Democratic party. It harbored many northerners whose hatred was directed not so much at slavery as at blacks and who gagged at the prospect of sharing the

Chapter 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 1848–1854


 Gold! Gold!” they began tearing frantically at the yellow-graveled streams and hills. A fortunate few of the bearded miners “struck it rich” at the “diggings.” But the luckless many, who netted blisters instead of nuggets, probably would have been money well ahead if they had stayed at home unaffected by “gold fever,” which was often followed by more deadly fevers. The most reliable proﬁts were made by those who mined the miners, notably by charging outrageous rates for laundry and other personal ser vices. Some soiled clothing was even sent as far away as the Hawaiian Islands for washing. Many of the “forty-niners” who ﬂopped in Cal i fornia kept chasing their dream of gold in even more distant places, notably Australia in 1851.





40°N


Nor
 t

Negro
Bar


French
Corral
R.
Yuba
Rough
 and Ready

R.


You
Bet
Dutch
Flat


R


.


R.


Bear


Damascus
Coloma
 (Sutter's Mill) Placerville (Hangtown)

A


Texas
Hill
 Sutter's Michigan R. Bar Ft. n es m R. su ne Jésus k e lu m Maria o M

E
V


A


Co


D


R.
 ver a s Rawhide Cala slaus R. i n Sta . Tuolumne R

Angels Camp
Sonora


38°N


Chinese
Camp


 n

.


 ui aq Jo

R


.


Sa
 n

R.


E S
N G
R A
122°W


 dR rce Me

A


San Francisco
N


PAC I F I C OCEAN

Lake
Tahoe


N


CALIFORNIA
Sacramento 
UTAH TERRITORY

 God’s Country

 er i ca n

 m

 en to

Pyramid
Lake


50 Mi.


 k For

 m

Sacra


Clear
Lake


50 Km.


R A
E R
S I


 h

“Californy Gold”
 Tobacco-chewing President Taylor—with his stumpy legs, rough features, heavy jaw, black hair, ruddy complexion, and squinty gray eyes—was a military square peg in a political round hole. He would have been spared much turmoil if he could have continued to sit on the slavery lid. But the discovery of gold on the American River near Sutter’s Mill, Cal i fornia, early in 1848, blew the cover off (see Map 18.1). A horde of adventurers poured into the valleys of Cal i fornia. Singing “O Susannah!” and shouting “Gold!





T
A S
C O


 newly acquired western territories with African Americans. It also contained a large element of “Conscience Whigs,” heavily inﬂuenced by the abolitionist crusade, who condemned slavery on moral grounds. The FreeSoilers trotted out wizened former president Van Buren and marched into the fray, shouting, “Free soil, free speech, free labor, and free men.” These freedoms provided the bedrock on which the Free-Soilers built their party. They condemned slavery not so much for enslaving blacks but for destroying the chances of free white workers to rise up from wage-earning dependence to the esteemed status of self-employment. They argued that only with free soil in the West could a traditional American commitment to upward mobility continue to ﬂourish. If forced to compete with slave labor, more costly wage labor would inevitably wither away, and with it the chance for the American worker to own property. As the ﬁ rst widely inclusive party orga nized around the issue of slavery and conﬁ ned to a single section, the Free Soil party foreshadowed the emergence of the Republican party six years later. With the slavery issue ofﬁcially shoved under the rug by the two major parties, the politicians on both sides opened ﬁ re on personalities. The amateurish Taylor had to be carefully watched, lest his indiscreet pen puncture the reputation won by his sword. His admirers puffed him up as a gallant knight and a Napoleon, and sloganized his remark, allegedly uttered during the Battle of Buena Vista, “General Taylor never surrenders.” Taylor’s wartime popularity pulled him through. He harvested 1,360,967 popular and 163 electoral votes, as compared with Cass’s 1,222,342 popular and 127 electoral votes. Free-Soiler Van Buren, although winning no state, polled 291,263 ballots and apparently diverted enough Democratic strength from Cass in the crucial state of New York to throw the election to Taylor.

Feather R.




M


 a os arip

Mormon
Bar


120°W


 Extent of gold mining region, 1849 Gold mine

Map 18.1 California Gold Rush Country
 Miners from all over the world swarmed over the rivers that drained the western slope of California’s Sierra Nevada. Their nationalities and religions, their languages and their ways of life, are recorded in the colorful place names they left behind. Interactive Map

The California Gold Rush




Placer Miners in California
 Cheap but effective, placer mining consisted of literally “washing” the gold out of surface deposits. No deep excavation was required. This crew of male and female miners in California in 1852 was using a “long tom” sluice that washed relatively large quantities of ore.

 The California gold rush attracted tens of thousands of people to the future Golden State almost overnight, completely overwhelming the one-horse territorial government. A distressingly high proportion of the newcomers were lawless men, accompanied or followed by virtueless women. A contemporary song ran, Oh what was your name in the States? Was it Thompson or Johnson or Bates? Did you murder your wife, And ﬂy for your life? Say, what was your name in the States?

 A married woman wrote from the California goldﬁelds to her sister in New England in 1853,

“


 i tell you the woman are in great demand in this country no matter whether they are married or not you need not think strange if you see me coming home with some good looking man some of these times with a pocket full of rocks. . . . it is all the go here for Ladys to leave there Husbands two out of three do it there is a ﬁrst rate Chance for a single woman she can have her choice of thousands i wish mother was here she could marry a rich man and not have to lift her hand to do her work.

”


 An outburst of crime inevitably resulted from the presence of so many miscreants and outcasts. Robbery, claim jumping, and murder were commonplace, and such violence was only partly discouraged by rough vigilante justice. In San Francisco, from 1848 to 1856, there were scores of lawless kill ings but only three semilegal hangings. A majority of Cal i fornians, as decent and lawabiding citizens needing protection, grappled earnestly with the problem of erecting an adequate state government. Privately encouraged by President Taylor, they drafted a constitution in 1849 that excluded slavery and then boldly applied to Congress for admission. Cal ifornia would thus bypass the usual territorial stage, thwarting southern congressmen seeking to block free soil. Southern politicians, alarmed by the Cal i fornians’ “impertinent” stroke for freedom, arose in violent opposition. Would Cal i fornia prove to be the golden straw that broke the back of the Union?

 The idea that many ne’er-do-wells went west is found in the Journals (January 1849) of Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882):

“


 If a man is going to California, he announces it with some hesitation; because it is a confession that he has failed at home.

”




Chapter 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 1848–1854


Sectional Balance and the
Underground Railroad
 The South of 1850 was relatively well-off. It then enjoyed, as it had from the beginning, more than its share of the nation’s leadership. It had seated in the White House the war hero Zachary Taylor, a Virginia-born, slaveowning planter from Louisiana. It boasted a majority in the cabinet and on the Supreme Court. If outnumbered in the House, the South had equality in the Senate, where it could at least neutralize northern maneuvers. Its cotton ﬁelds were expanding, and cotton prices were proﬁtably high. Few sane people, North or South, believed that slavery was seriously threatened where it already existed below the Mason-Dixon line. The ﬁ fteen slave states could easily veto any proposed constitutional amendment. Yet the South was deeply worried, as it had been for several decades, by the ever-tipping political balance. There were then ﬁ fteen slave states and ﬁ fteen free states. The admission of Cal i fornia would destroy the delicate equilibrium in the Senate, perhaps forever. Potential slave territory under the American ﬂag was run-

 ning short, if it had not in fact disappeared. Agitation had already developed in the territories of New Mexico and Utah for admission as nonslave states. The fate of Cal i fornia might well establish a precedent for the rest of the Mexican Cession territory—an area purchased largely with southern blood. Texas nursed an additional grievance of its own. It claimed a huge area east of the Rio Grande and north to the forty-second parallel, embracing in part about half the territory of present-day New Mexico (see Map 18.2). The federal government was proposing to detach this prize, while hot-blooded Texans were threatening to descend upon Santa Fe and seize what they regarded as rightfully theirs. The explosive quarrel foreshadowed shooting. Many southerners were also angered by the nagging agitation in the North for the abolition of slavery in the District of Columbia. They looked with alarm on the prospect of a ten-mile-square oasis of free soil thrust between slaveholding Maryland and slaveholding Virginia. Even more disagreeable to the South was the loss of runaway slaves, many of whom were assisted north by the Underground Railroad. This virtual freedom train

A
Stop on the Underground Railroad Sliding shelves in the wall of the Reverend Alexander Dobbin’s home in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, concealed a crawl space large enough to hide several escaping slaves. 


The Underground Railroad


 consisted of an informal chain of “stations” (antislavery homes), through which scores of “passengers” (runaway slaves) were spirited by “conductors” (usually white and black abolitionists) from the slave states to the free-soil sanctuary of Canada. The most amazing of these “conductors” was an illiterate runaway slave from Maryland, fearless Harriet Tubman. During nineteen forays into the South, she rescued more than three hundred slaves, including her aged parents, and deservedly earned the title “Moses.” Lively imaginations later exaggerated the reach of the Underground Railroad and its “stationmasters,” but its importance was undisputed. By 1850 southerners were demanding a new and more stringent fugitive-slave law. The old one, passed by Congress in 1793, had proved inadequate to cope with runaways, especially since unfriendly state authorities failed to provide needed cooperation. Unlike cattle thieves, the abolitionists who ran the Underground Railroad did not gain personally from their lawlessness. But to the slaveowners, the loss was infuriating, whatever the motives. The moral judgments of the abolitionists seemed, in some ways, more galling than outright theft. They reﬂected not only a

100°W


110°W


42°N


 WYOMING

40°N


 COLORADO

KANSAS 90°W

Santa Fe


OKLAHOMA N

NEW MEXICO TEXAS 30°N

200 Km.
200 Mi.


 Disputed area Present-day state boundaries

Gul f of
M exi c o


Map 18.2 Texas and the Disputed Area Before the
Compromise of 1850


 Harriet Tubman (on left) with Some of the Slaves She Helped to Free John Brown called her “General Tubman” for her effective work in helping slaves escape to Canada on the Underground Railroad. During the Civil War, she served as a Union spy behind Confederate lines. Herself illiterate, she worked after the war to bring education to the freed slaves in North Carolina.

Interactive Map




Chapter 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 1848–1854


 holier-than-thou attitude but a refusal to obey the laws solemnly passed by Congress. Estimates indicate that the South in 1850 was losing perhaps 1,000 runaways a year out of its total of some 4 million slaves. In fact, more blacks probably gained their freedom by self-purchase or voluntary emancipation than ever escaped. But the principle weighed heavily with the slavemasters. They rested their argument on the Constitution, which protected slavery, and on the laws of Congress, which provided for slave-catching. “Although the loss of property is felt,” said a southern senator, “the loss of honor is felt still more.”

Twilight of the
Senatorial Giants
 Southern fears were such that Congress was confronted with catastrophe in 1850. Free-soil Cal i fornia was banging on the door for admission. “Fire-eaters” in the South were voicing ominous threats of secession. In October 1849 southerners had announced their intention to convene the following year in Nashville, Tennessee, to consider withdrawing from the Union. The failure of Congress to act could easily mean the failure of the United States as a country. The crisis brought into the congressional forum the most distinguished assemblage of statesmen since the Constitutional Convention of 1787—the Old Guard of the dying generation and the young gladiators of the new. That “immortal trio”—Clay, Calhoun, and Webster—appeared together for the last time on the public stage. Henry Clay, now seventy-three years of age, played a crucial role. The “Great Compromiser” had come to the Senate from Kentucky to reprise the role he had played twice before, in the Missouri and nulliﬁcation crises. The once-glamorous statesman—though disillusioned, enfeebled, and racked by a cruel cough—was still eloquent, conciliatory, and captivating. He proposed and skillfully defended a series of compromises. He was ably seconded by thirty-seven-year-old Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois, the “Little Giant” (ﬁve feet four inches), whose role was less spectacular but even more important. Clay urged with all his persuasiveness that the North and South both make concessions and that the North partially yield by enacting a more feasible fugitive-slave law. Senator John C. Calhoun, the “Great Nulliﬁer,” then sixty-eight and dying of tuberculosis, championed the South in his last formal speech. Too weak to deliver it

 himself, he sat bundled up in the Senate chamber, his eyes glowing within a stern face, while a younger colleague read his fateful words. “I have, Senators, believed from the ﬁ rst that the agitation on the subject of slavery would, if not prevented by some timely and effective mea sure, end in disunion.” Although approving the purpose of Clay’s proposed concessions, Calhoun rejected them as not providing adequate safeguards for southern rights. His impassioned plea was to leave slavery alone, return runaway slaves, give the South its rights as a minority, and restore the political balance. He had in view, as was later revealed, an utterly unworkable scheme of electing two presidents, one from the North and one from the South, each wielding a veto. Calhoun died in 1850, before the debate was over, murmuring the sad words, “The South! The South! God knows what will become of her!” Appreciative fellow citizens in Charleston erected to his memory an imposing monument, which bore the inscription “Truth, Justice, and the Constitution.” Calhoun had labored to preserve the Union and had taken his stand on the Constitution, but his proposals in their behalf almost undid both. Daniel Webster next took the Senate spotlight to uphold Clay’s compromise measures in his last great speech, a three-hour effort. Now sixty-eight years old and suffering from a liver complaint aggravated by high living, he had lost some of the ﬁ re in his magniﬁcent voice. Speaking deliberately and before overﬂowing galleries, he urged all reasonable concessions to the South, including a new fugitive-slave law with teeth. As for slavery in the territories, asked Webster, why legislate on the subject? To do so was an act of sacrilege, for Almighty God had already passed the Wilmot Proviso. The good Lord had decreed—through climate, topography, and geography—that a plantation economy, and hence a slave economy, could not proﬁtably exist in the Mexican Cession territory.* Webster sanely concluded that compromise, concession, and sweet reasonableness would provide the only solutions. “Let us not be pygmies,” he pleaded, “in a case that calls for men.” If mea sured by its immediate effects, Webster’s famed Seventh of March speech of 1850 was his ﬁ nest. It helped turn the tide in the North toward compromise. The clamor for printed copies became so great that Webster mailed out more than 100,000, remarking that 200,000 would not satisfy the demand. His tre-

 *Webster was wrong here; within one hundred years, California had become one of the great cotton-producing states of the Union.

The Compromise of 1850


 Ralph Waldo Emerson, the philosopher and moderate abolitionist, was outraged by Webster’s support of concessions to the South in the Fugitive Slave Act. In February 1851 he wrote in his journal,

“


 I opened a paper to-day in which he [Webster] pounds on the old strings [of liberty] in a letter to the Washington Birthday feasters at New York. ‘Liberty! liberty!’ Pho! Let Mr. Webster, for decency’s sake, shut his lips once and forever on this word. The word liberty in the mouth of Mr. Webster sounds like the word love in the mouth of a courtesan.

”


 mendous effort visibly strengthened Union sentiment. It was especially pleasing to the banking and commercial centers of the North, which stood to lose millions of dollars by secession. One prominent Washington banker canceled two notes of Webster’s totaling $5,000 and sent him a personal check for $1,000 and a message of congratulations. But the Free-Soilers and abolitionists, who had assumed Webster was one of them, upbraided him as a traitor, worthy of bracketing with Benedict Arnold. The poet John Greenleaf Whittier lamented, So fallen! so lost! the light withdrawn Which once he wore! The glory from his gray hairs gone For evermore! These reproaches were most unfair. Webster had long regarded slavery as evil but disunion as worse.

Deadlock and Danger
 on Capitol Hill The stormy congressional debate of 1850 was not ﬁ nished, for the Young Guard from the North were yet to have their say. This was the group of newer leaders who, unlike the aging Old Guard, had not grown up with the Union. They were more interested in purging and purifying it than in patching and preserving it. William H. Seward, the wiry and husky-throated freshman senator from New York, was the able spokesman for many of the younger northern radicals. A strong antislaveryite, he came out unequivocally against concession. He seemed not to realize that com-



 promise had brought the Union together and that when the sections could no longer compromise, they would have to part company. Seward argued earnestly that Christian legislators must obey God’s moral law as well as man’s mundane law. He therefore appealed, with reference to excluding slavery in the territories, to an even “higher law” than the Constitution. This alarming phrase, wrenched from its context, may have cost him the presidential nomination and the presidency in 1860. As the great debate in Congress ran its heated course, deadlock seemed certain. Blunt old President Taylor, who had allegedly fallen under the inﬂuence of men like “Higher Law” Seward, seemed bent on vetoing any compromise passed by Congress. His military ire was aroused by the threats of Texas to seize Santa Fe. He appeared to be doggedly determined to “Jacksonize” the dissenters, if need be, by leading an army against the Texans in person and hanging all “damned traitors.” If troops had begun to march, the South probably would have rallied to the defense of Texas, and the Civil War might have erupted in 1850.

Breaking the Congressional
Logjam
 At the height of the controversy in 1850, President Taylor unknowingly helped the cause of concession by dying suddenly, probably of an acute intestinal disorder. Portly, round-faced Vice President Millard Fillmore, a colorless and conciliatory New York lawyer-politician, took over the reins. As presiding ofﬁcer of the Senate, he had been impressed with the arguments for conciliation, and he gladly signed the series of compromise mea sures that passed Congress after seven long months of stormy debate. The balancing of interests in the Compromise of 1850 was delicate in the extreme (see Table 18.1). The struggle to get these mea sures accepted by the country was hardly less heated than in Congress. In the northern states, “Union savers” like Senators Clay, Webster, and Douglas orated on behalf of the compromise. The ailing Clay himself delivered more than seventy speeches, as a powerful sentiment for acceptance gradually crystallized in the North. It was strengthened by a growing spirit of goodwill, which sprang partly from a feeling of relief and partly from an upsurge of prosperity enriched by Cal i fornia gold. But the “ﬁ re-eaters” of the South were still violently opposed to concessions. One extreme South Carolina



Chapter 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 1848–1854


Table 18.1 Compromise of 1850
Concessions to the North


Concessions to the South


 Cal i fornia admitted as a free state

 The remainder of the Mexican Cession area to be formed into the territories of New Mexico and Utah, without restriction on slavery, hence open to popular sovereignty Texas to receive $10 million from the federal government as compensation A more stringent fugitive-slave law going beyond that of 1793

 Territory disputed by Texas and New Mexico to be surrendered to New Mexico Abolition of the slave trade (but not slavery) in the District of Columbia

 newspaper avowed that it loathed the Union and hated the North as much as it did Hell itself. A movement in the South to boycott northern goods gained some headway, but in the end the southern Unionists, assisted by the warm glow of prosperity, prevailed. In June 1850 the assemblage of southern extremists met in Nashville, ironically near the burial place of Andrew Jackson. The delegates not only took a strong position in favor of slavery but condemned the compromise mea sures then being hammered out in Con-

Henry Clay Proposing
 the Compromise of 1850 This engraving captures one of the most dramatic moments in the history of the United States Senate. Vice President Millard Fillmore presides, while on the ﬂoor sit several of the “Senatorial Giants” of the era, including Daniel Webster, Stephen A. Douglas, and John C. Calhoun.

 gress. Meeting again in November after the bills had passed, the convention proved to be a dud. By that time southern opinion had reluctantly accepted the verdict of Congress. Like the calm after a storm, a second Era of Good Feelings dawned. Disquieting talk of secession subsided. Peace-loving people, both North and South, were determined that the compromises should be a “ﬁ nality” and that the explosive issue of slavery should be buried. But this placid period proved all too brief.

The Fugitive Slave Law


 was a modest sum. The immense area in dispute had been torn from the side of slaveholding Texas and was almost certain to be free. The South had halted the drive toward abolition in the District of Columbia, at least temporarily, by permitting the outlawing of the slave trade in the federal district. But even this move was an entering wedge toward complete emancipation in the nation’s capital. Most alarming of all, the drastic new Fugitive Slave Law of 1850—“the Bloodhound Bill”—stirred up a storm of opposition in the North. The ﬂeeing slaves could not testify in their own behalf, and they were denied a jury trial. These harsh practices, some citizens feared, threatened to create dangerous precedents for white Americans. The federal commissioner who handled the case of a fugitive would receive ﬁve dollars if the runaway were freed and ten dollars if not—an arrangement that strongly resembled a bribe. Freedomloving northerners who aided the slave to escape were

Balancing the
Compromise Scales
 Who got the better deal in the Compromise of 1850? The answer is clearly the North (see Map 18.3). Cal ifornia, as a free state, tipped the Senate balance permanently against the South. The territories of New Mexico and Utah were open to slavery on the basis of popular sovereignty. But the iron law of nature—the “highest law” of all—had loaded the dice in favor of free soil. Southerners urgently needed more slave territory to restore the “sacred balance.” If they could not carve new states out of the recent conquests from Mexico, where else might they get them? The Caribbean was one answer. Even the apparent gains of the South rang hollow. Disgruntled Texas was to be paid $10 million toward discharging its indebtedness, but in the long run this

Map 18.3 Slavery After the Compromise of 1850 Regarding the Fugitive Slave Law
 provisions of the Compromise of 1850, Ralph Waldo Emerson declared in May 1851 at Concord, Massachusetts, “The act of Congress . . . is a law which every one of you will break on the earliest occasion—a law which no man can obey, or abet the obeying, without loss of self-respect and forfeiture of the name of gentleman.” Privately he wrote in his journal, “This ﬁlthy enactment was made in the nineteenth century, by people who could read and write. I will not obey it, by God.” 120°W

110°W




100°W


90°W


Interactive Map


80°W


70°W


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

PENNSYLVANIA OHIO INDIANA ILLINOIS VIRGINIA MISSOURI KENTUCKY NORTH CAROLINA TENNESSEE INDIAN SOUTH TERRITORY ARKANSAS CAROLINA GEORGIA 6 MISS. 5 ALABAMA TEXAS LOUISIANA FLORIDA

I C
P A C I F


 IOWA

UTAH TERRITORY CALIFORNIA

E A
O C


NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

N


30°N


 Free state or territory (141 representatives, 32 senators) Slave state or territory (90 representatives, 30 senators) Territory open to slavery

Gadsden
Purchase


 Gu lf o f M exic o MEXICO





400 Km.


 Number of representatives



400 Mi.


MASS. R.I. CONN. 2 NEW JERSEY DEL. MD.

N


O C
E A N


 MICHIGAN

 VT. 3 N.H. NEW YORK

AT L A N T I C

 WISCONSIN

UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

40°N




 MAINE

MINNESOTA TERRITORY

OREGON TERRITORY



Chapter 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 1848–1854


Protesting the Fugitive
Slave Law, 1850
 The cartoonist makes bitter sport of the hated law and heaps scorn on Daniel Webster, on his hands and knees at the right, who voted for the law as part of the Compromise of 1850. The outspoken abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison is depicted much more favorably on the left.

 liable to heavy ﬁ nes and jail sentences. They might even be ordered to join the slave-catchers, and this possibility rubbed salt into old sores. So abhorrent was this “Man-Stealing Law” that it touched off an explosive chain reaction in the North. Many shocked moderates, hitherto passive, were driven into the swelling ranks of the antislaveryites. When a runaway slave from Virginia was captured in Boston in 1854, he had to be removed from the city under heavy federal guard through streets lined with sullen Yankees and shadowed by black-draped buildings festooned with ﬂags ﬂying upside down. One prominent Bostonian who witnessed this grim spectacle wrote that “we went to bed one night old-fashioned, conser vative, Compromise Union Whigs and waked up stark mad Abolitionists.” The Underground Railroad stepped up its timetable, and infuriated northern mobs rescued slaves from their pursuers. Massachusetts, in a move toward nulliﬁcation suggestive of South Carolina in 1832, made it a penal offense for any state ofﬁcial to enforce the new federal statute. Other states passed “personal liberty laws,” which denied local jails to federal ofﬁcials and otherwise hampered enforcement. The abolitionists

 rent the heavens with their protests against the manstealing statute. A meeting presided over by William Lloyd Garrison in 1851 declared, “We execrate it, we spit upon it, we trample it under our feet.” Beyond question, the Fugitive Slave Law was an appalling blunder on the part of the South. No single irritant of the 1850s was more persistently galling to both sides, and none did more to awaken in the North a spirit of antagonism against the South. The southerners in turn were embittered because the northerners would not in good faith execute the law—the one real and immediate southern “gain” from the Great Compromise. Slave-catchers, with some success, redoubled their efforts. Should the shooting showdown have come in 1850? From the standpoint of the secessionists, yes; from the standpoint of the Unionists, no. Time was ﬁghting for the North. With every passing decade, this huge section was forging further ahead in population and wealth— in crops, factories, foundries, ships, and railroads. Delay also added immensely to the moral strength of the North—to its will to ﬁght for the Union. In 1850 countless thousands of northern moderates were unwilling to pin the South to the rest of the nation with



The Election of 1852


Defeat and Doom
 for the Whigs Meeting in Baltimore, the Democratic nominating convention of 1852 startled the nation. Hopelessly deadlocked, it ﬁ nally stampeded to the second “dark-horse” candidate in American history, an unrenowned lawyerpolitician, Franklin Pierce, from the hills of New Hampshire. The Whigs tried to jeer him back into obscurity with the cry “Who is Frank Pierce?” Democrats replied, “The Young Hickory of the Granite Hills.”

 Pierce was a weak and indecisive ﬁgure. Youngish, handsome, militarily erect, smiling, and convivial, he had served without real distinction in the Mexican War. As a result of a painful groin injury that caused him to fall off a horse, he was known as the “Fainting General,” though scandalmongers pointed to a fondness for alcohol. But he was enemyless because he had been inconspicuous, and as a prosouthern northerner, he was acceptable to the slavery wing of the Democratic party. His platform revived the Democrats’ commitment to territorial expansion as pursued by President Polk and emphatically endorsed the Compromise of 1850, Fugitive Slave Law and all. The Whigs, also convening in Baltimore, missed a splendid opportunity to capitalize on their record in statecraft. Able to boast of a praiseworthy achievement in the Compromise of 1850, they might logically have nominated President Fillmore or Senator Webster, both of whom were associated with it. But having won in the past only with military heroes, they turned

 Map 18.4 The Legal Status of Slavery, from the Revolution to the Civil War 120°W

110°W


100°W


90°W


80°W


N
EA OC

 Open to slavery by Act of Annexation to N.M. Terr.

 PENNSYLVANIA (1780–1850)

 ARKANSAS

O
SOUTH CAROLINA

 GEORGIA

LA. FLORIDA

 Free state by admission to Union Free state by gradual abolition

G ul f of M ex i c o


 Free territory by Act of Congress Slave state by admission to Union Territory open to slavery by Act of Congress (1803) Date of abolition by State Constitution

TI C

NORTH CAROLINA

ALABAMA TEXAS

 MEXICO



R.I.
(1784–
 CONN. 1842) N.J. (1784– (1804– 1848) 1846) DEL. MD.

 VIRGINIA

 TENNESSEE

 MISS.

 MASS. (1780)

N


INDIAN TERRITORY (UNORGANIZED)

NEW YORK
(1799–1827) 
 LA

Public
 land

N.H.
(1783)


T


NEW MEXICO TERRITORY
Open to slavery by Compromise of 1850 
 MAINE (1780)

 VT. (1777)

A


F IC
PAC I

UNORGANIZED TERR. MINNESOTA
Free by TERRITORY OREGON NEBRASKA Missouri Free by (1859) TERRITORY Compromise Missouri Free by Free by Compromise Oregon Act 1848 Free by Missouri Compromise Oregon Act WISCONSIN (1848) Open to slavery MICHIGAN by Kansas-Nebraska IOWA (1846) (1837) Act 1854 Free by Missouri OHIO Compromise UTAH TERRITORY ILLINOIS INDIANA (1803) Open to slavery by (1818) (1816) Compromise of 1850 Free by Northwest Ordinance KANSAS TERRITORY Free by Missouri Compromise 1820 Free by Act CALIFORNIA annexing Texas 1845 Open to slavery by Kansas-Nebraska Act 1854 Free by Territorial Constitution 1859 (1850) MISSOURI KENTUCKY 
30°N


70°W


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

WASHINGTON TERRITORY

40°N


Interactive Map


400 Km.


CE AN

 bayonets. But the inﬂammatory events of the 1850s did much to bolster the Yankee will to resist secession, whatever the cost. This one feverish decade gave the North time to accumulate the material and moral strength that provided the margin of victory. Thus the Compromise of 1850, from one point of view, won the Civil War for the Union (see Map 18.4).

400 Mi.


N




Chapter 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 1848–1854


 to another, “Old Fuss and Feathers” Winﬁeld Scott, perhaps the ablest American general of his generation. Although he was a huge and impressive ﬁgure, his manner bordered on haughtiness. His personality not only repelled the masses but eclipsed his genuinely statesmanlike achievements. The Whig platform praised the Compromise of 1850 as a lasting arrangement, though less enthusiastically than the Democrats. With slavery and sectionalism to some extent softpedaled, the campaign again degenerated into a dull and childish attack on personalities. Democrats ridiculed Scott’s pomposity; Whigs charged that Pierce was the hero of “many a well-fought bottle.” Democrats cried exultantly, “We Polked ’em in ’44; we’ll Pierce ’em in ’52.” Luckily for the Democrats, the Whig party was hopelessly split. Antislavery Whigs of the North swallowed Scott as their nominee but deplored his platform, which endorsed the hated Fugitive Slave Law. The current phrase ran, “We accept the candidate but spit on the platform.” Southern Whigs, who doubted Scott’s loyalty to the Compromise of 1850 and especially the Fugitive Slave Law, accepted the platform but spat on the candidate. More than ﬁve thousand Georgia Whigs—“ﬁ nality men”—voted in vain for Webster, although he had died nearly two weeks before the election. General Scott, victorious on the battleﬁeld, met defeat at the ballot box. His friends remarked whimsically that he was not used to “running.” Actually, he was stabbed in the back by his fellow Whigs, notably in the South. In addition, Free Soil party candidate John P. Hale, senator from New Hampshire, siphoned off northern Whig votes that might have gone to Scott. Hale walked away with a respectable 5 percent of the popular vote. The pliant Pierce won in a landslide, 254 electoral votes to 42, although the popular count was closer, 1,601,117 to 1,385,453. The election of 1852 was fraught with frightening signiﬁcance, though it may have seemed tame at the time. It marked the effective end of the disorga nized Whig party and, within a few years, its complete death. The Whigs’ demise augured the eclipse of national parties and the worrisome rise of purely sectional political alignments. The Whigs were governed at times by the crassest opportunism, and they won only two presidential elections (1840, 1848) in their colorful career, both with war heroes. They ﬁ nally choked to death trying to swallow the distasteful Fugitive Slave Law. But their great contribution—and a noteworthy one indeed—was to help uphold the ideal of the Union

 through their electoral strength in the South and through the eloquence of leaders like Henry Clay and Daniel Webster. Both of these statesmen, by unhappy coincidence, died during the 1852 campaign. But the good they had done lived after them and contributed powerfully to the eventual preservation of a united United States.

Expansionist Stirrings
South of the Border
 The intoxicating victory in the Mexican War, coupled with the discovery of gold in Cal i fornia just nine days before the war’s end, reinvigorated the spirit of Manifest Destiny. The rush to the Sierra Nevada goldﬁelds aroused particular concerns about the fate of Central America. Since the days of Balboa, this narrow neck of land had stimulated dreams of a continuous Atlanticto-Paciﬁc transportation route that would effectively sever the two American continents (see Map 18.5). Whoever controlled that route would hold imperial sway over all maritime nations, especially the United States. Increasing British encroachment into the area— including the British seizure of the port of San Juan del Norte (renamed Greytown) on Nicaragua’s “Mosquito Coast”—drove the governments of both the United States and New Granada (later Colombia) to conclude an important treaty in 1848. It guaranteed the American right of transit across the isthmus in return for Washington’s pledge to maintain the “perfect neutrality” of the route so that the “free transit of trafﬁc might not be interrupted.” The agreement later provided a ﬁg leaf of legal cover for Theodore Roosevelt’s assertion of American control of the Panama Canal Zone in 1903. It also led to the construction of the ﬁ rst “transcontinental” railroad. Completed in 1855 at a cost of thousands of lives lost to pestilence and accident, it ran forty-eight miles from coast to coast through the green hell of the Panamanian jungle. A full-blown confrontation with Britain was avoided by the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty in 1850, which stipulated that neither America nor Britain would fortify or seek exclusive control over any future isthmian waterway (later rescinded by the HayPauncefote Treaty of 1901; see p. 691). Southern “slavocrats” cast especially covetous eyes southward in the 1850s. They lusted for new slave territory after the Compromise of 1850 seemingly closed most of the Mexican Cession to the “peculiar institution.” In 1856 a Texan proposed a toast that was drunk with gusto: “To the Southern republic bounded on the

Caribbean Diplomacy




Tropic of Cancer


Cuba
(Spain)


Gulf of
Mexico
20°N


Caribbean Sea
 MEXICO

BRITISH HONDURAS

Isthmus of
Tehuantepec
 GUATEMALA

Jamaica
(Gr. Br.)


N


 British agents and traders influence natives

HONDURAS
Mosquito Coast 
 SALVADOR

PAC I F IC OC EAN

 Proposed canal route, then a land-and-water route 10°N



100°W






Greytown


Future
Panama Canal


COSTA RICA

400 Km.


 NICARAGUA

400 Mi.


COLOMBIA (NEW GRANADA) 90°W

80°W


Map 18.5 Central America, ca. 1850, Showing British Possessions and
 Proposed Canal Routes Until President Theodore Roosevelt swung into action with his big stick in 1903, a Nicaraguan canal, closer to the United States, was generally judged more desirable than a canal across Panama. Interactive Map

 north by the Mason and Dixon line and on the South by the Isthmus of Tehuantepec [southern Mexico], including Cuba and all other lands on our Southern shore.” Nicaragua beckoned beguilingly. A brazen American adventurer, William Walker, tried repeatedly to grab control of this Central American country. (He had earlier tried and failed to seize Baja Cal i fornia from Mexico and turn it into a slave state.) Backed by an armed force recruited largely in the South, he installed himself as president in July 1856 and promptly legalized slavery. One southern newspaper proclaimed to the planter aristocracy that Walker—the “gray-eyed man of destiny”—“now offers Nicaragua to you and your slaves, at a time when you have not a friend on the face of the earth.” But a coalition of Central American nations formed an alliance to overthrow him. President Pierce withdrew diplomatic recognition, and the grayeyed man’s destiny was to crumple before a Honduran ﬁ ring squad in 1860. Sugar-rich Cuba, lying just off the nation’s southern doorstep, was also an enticing prospect for annexation. This remnant of Spain’s once-mighty New World empire already held a large population of enslaved blacks, and it might be carved into several states, re-

 storing the political balance in the Senate. President Polk had considered offering Spain $100 million for Cuba, but the proud Spaniards replied that they would sooner see the island sunk into the sea than in the hands of the hated Yankees. Rebuffed as buyers, some southern adventurers now undertook to shake the tree of Manifest Destiny. During 1850–1851 two “ﬁlibustering” (from the Spanish ﬁlibustero, meaning “freebooter” or “pirate”) expeditions, each numbering several hundred armed men, descended upon Cuba. Both feeble efforts were repelled, and the last one ended in tragedy when the leader and ﬁ fty followers—some of them from the “best families” of the South—were summarily shot or strangled. So outraged were the southerners that an angry mob sacked Spain’s consulate in New Orleans. Spanish ofﬁcials in Cuba rashly forced a showdown in 1854, when they seized the American steamer Black Warrior on a technicality. Now was the time for President Pierce, dominated as he was by the South, to provoke a war with Spain and seize Cuba. The major powers of Europe—Eng land, France, and Russia—were about to become bogged down in the Crimean War and hence were unable to aid Spain.



Chapter 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 1848–1854


 The ﬁrst platform of the newly born (antislavery) Republican party in 1856 lashed out at the Ostend Manifesto, with its transparent suggestion that Cuba be seized. The plank read,

“


 Resolved, That the highwayman’s plea, that ‘might makes right,’ embodied in the Ostend Circular, was in every respect unworthy of American diplomacy, and would bring shame and dishonor upon any Government or people that gave it their sanction.

”


 An incredible cloak-and-dagger episode followed. The secretary of state instructed the American ministers in Spain, Eng land, and France to prepare conﬁdential recommendations for the acquisition of Cuba. Meeting initially at Ostend, Belgium, the three envoys drew up a top-secret dispatch, soon known as the Ostend Manifesto. This startling document urged that the administration offer $120 million for Cuba. If Spain refused, and if its continued ownership endangered American interests, the United States would “be justiﬁed in wresting” the island from the Spanish. The secret Ostend Manifesto quickly leaked out. Northern free-soilers, already angered by the Fugitive Slave Law and other gains for slavery, rose up in wrath against the “manifesto of brigands.” The shackled black hands of Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom, whose plight had already stung the conscience of the North, now held the South back. The red-faced Pierce administration hurriedly dropped its reckless schemes for Cuba. The slavery issue thus checked territorial expansion in the 1850s.

The Allure of Asia
 The acquisition of Cal i fornia and Oregon had made the United States a Paciﬁc power—or would-be power. How could Americans now tap more deeply the supposedly rich markets of Asia? Rivalry with the British lion once again played a role. Britain had recently humbled China in the Opium War, fought to secure the right of British traders to peddle opium in the Celestial Kingdom. At the war’s conclusion in 1842, Britain gained free access to ﬁve so-called treaty ports, as well as outright control of the island of Hong Kong (where it remained for another century and a half).

 Prodded by Boston merchants fearful of seeing Britain horn in on their lucrative trade with China, President Tyler thereupon dispatched Caleb Cushing, a dashing Massachusetts lawyer-scholar, to secure comparable concessions for the United States. Cushing’s four warships arrived at Macao, in southern China, in early 1844, bearing gifts that included a weathervane and a pair of six-shooters. Impressed by Cushing’s charm and largesse—and also eager for a counterweight to the meddlesome British—silk-gowned Chinese diplomats signed the Treaty of Wanghia, the ﬁ rst formal diplomatic agreement between the United States and China, on July 3, 1844. Cushing was interested in commerce, not colonies, and he secured some vital rights and privileges from the Chinese. “Most favored nation” status afforded the United States any and all trading terms accorded to other powers. “Extraterritoriality” provided for trying Americans accused of crimes in China before American ofﬁcials, not in Chinese courts. (Cushing was prompted to seek this particular immunity by the memory of a seaman on a U.S. vessel who had been strangled to death by Chinese authorities for what was apparently the accidental drowning of a Chinese woman.) American trade with China ﬂourished thanks to Cushing’s treaty, though it never reached the proportions his backers had dreamed of. More immediately important was the opportunity it opened for American missionaries, thousands of whom soon ﬂooded prayerfully through the treaty ports to convert the “heathen Chinese.” Fatefully, America had now aligned itself with the Western powers that chronically menaced China’s cultural integrity. All of them would one day reap a bitter harvest of resentment. Success in China soon inspired a still more consequential mission to pry open the bamboo gates of Japan. After some disagreeable experiences with the European world, Japan, at about the same time Jamestown was settled, withdrew into an almost airtight cocoon of isolationism and remained there for more than two centuries. The long-ruling warrior dynasty known as the Tokugawa Shogunate was so protective of Japan’s insularity that it prohibited shipwrecked foreign sailors from leaving and refused to readmit Japa nese sailors who had been washed up on foreign shores. Meanwhile, industrial and democratic revolutions were convulsing the Western world, while Japan remained placidly secluded. By 1853 Japan was ready to emerge from its self-imposed quarantine. In 1852 President Millard Fillmore dispatched to Japan a ﬂeet of warships commanded by Commodore

Americans in Asia




 Commodore Matthew Perry in Japan, 1853 Among Perry’s gifts to the Japanese was a miniature railway, complete with engine, cars, and track, which made a vivid impression on the Japanese artist who created this work.

 Matthew C. Perry. The brother of the hero of the Battle of Lake Erie in 1813, Perry prepared diligently for his mission, voraciously reading about Japan, querying whalers about Paciﬁc Ocean currents, and collecting specimens of American technology with which to impress the Japa nese. His four awesome, smoke-belching “black ships” steamed into Edo (later Tokyo) Bay on July 8, 1853, inciting near-panic among the shocked Japa nese. After tense negotiations, during which Perry threatened to blast his way ashore if necessary, Perry stepped onto the beach, preceded by two conspicuously tall African American ﬂag bearers. From elaborately carved gold-trimmed boxes, Perry produced silk-bound letters requesting free trade and friendly relations. He handed them to the wary Japa nese delegation and then tactfully withdrew, promising to return the following year to receive the Japa nese reply. True to his word, Perry returned in February 1854 with an even larger force of seven men-of-war. Once again he combined bluster and grace, plying the Japanese with gifts, including a miniature steam locomotive and 350 feet of track. With this display of pomp and bravado, he persuaded the Japa nese to sign the landmark Treaty of Kanagawa on March 31, 1854. It provided for proper treatment of shipwrecked sailors, American coaling rights in Japan, and the establishment of consular relations. Perry had inserted only a commercial toe in the door, but he had cracked Japan’s

 two-century shell of isolation wide-open. Within little more than a decade, the “Meiji Restoration” would end the era of the Shogunate and propel the Land of the Rising Sun headlong into the modern world—and an eventual epochal military clash with the United States.

 Paciﬁc Railroad Promoters and the Gadsden Purchase Acute transportation problems were another legacy of the Mexican War. The newly acquired prizes of Cal ifornia and Oregon might just as well have been islands some eight thousand miles west of the nation’s capital. The sea routes to and from the Isthmus of Panama, to say nothing of those around South America, were too long. Covered-wagon travel past bleaching animal bones was possible, but slow and dangerous. A popular song recalled, They swam the wide rivers and crossed the tall peaks, And camped on the prairie for weeks upon weeks. Starvation and cholera and hard work and slaughter, They reached California spite of hell and high water.



Chapter 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 1848–1854


120°W


110°W


100°W


.
Colorado R


 CALIFORNIA

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

 PAC

Los Angeles


Gil
 a R.

C
 IFI

Tucson


 TEXAS

El Paso


Se
 f a o

Houston
 z

N


 e

 Future route of the Southern Pacific Railroad (1882)

 MEXICO

 d an Gr

N
Gadsden Purchase, 1853


 o Ri

 rte

 EA

Co


 OC

30°N






300 Km.


Gu lf o f
 M exic o

300 Mi.


Map 18.6 The Gadsden Purchase, 1853
Interactive Map


 Feasible land transportation was imperative—or the newly won possessions on the Paciﬁc Coast might break away. Camels were even proposed as the answer. Several score of these temperamental beasts—“ships of the desert”—were imported from the Near East, but mule-driv ing Americans did not adjust to them. A transcontinental railroad was clearly the only real solution to the problem. Railroad promoters, both North and South, had projected many drawing-board routes to the Paciﬁc Coast. But the estimated cost in all cases was so great that for many years there could obviously be only one line. Should its terminus be in the North or in the South? The favored section would reap rich rewards in wealth, population, and inﬂuence. The South, losing the economic race with the North, was eager to extend a railroad through adjacent southwestern territory all the way to Cal i fornia. Another chunk of Mexico now seemed desirable, because the campaigns of the recent war had shown that the best railway route ran slightly south of the Mexican border. Secretary of War Jefferson Davis, a Mississippian, arranged to have James Gadsden, a prominent South Carolina railroad man, appointed minister to Mexico. Finding Santa Anna in power for the sixth and last time, and as usual in need of money, Gadsden made gratifying headway. He negotiated a treaty in 1853, which ceded to the United States the Gadsden Purchase for $10 million (see Map 18.6). The

 transaction aroused much criticism among northerners, who objected to paying a huge sum for a cactusstrewn desert nearly the size of Gadsden’s South Carolina. Undeterred, the Senate approved the pact, in the process shortsightedly eliminating a window on the Sea of Cortez. No doubt the Gadsden Purchase enabled the South to claim the coveted railroad with even greater insistence. A southern track would be easier to build because the mountains were less high and because the route, unlike the proposed northern lines, would not pass through unorga nized territory. Texas was already a state at this point, and New Mexico (with the Gadsden Purchase added) was a formally organized territory, with federal troops available to provide protection against marauding tribes of Indians. Any northern or central railroad line would have to be thrust through the unorga nized territory of Nebraska, where the buffalo and Indians roamed. Northern railroad boosters quickly replied that if orga nized territory were the test, then Nebraska should be orga nized. Such a move was not premature, because thousands of land-hungry pioneers were already poised on the Nebraska border. But all schemes proposed in Congress for organizing the territory were greeted with apathy or hostility by many southerners. Why should the South help create new free-soil states and thus cut its own throat by facilitating a northern railroad?



The Kansas-Nebraska Act


 ries, Kansas and Nebraska (see Map 18.7). Their status regarding slavery would be settled by popular sovereignty—a democratic concept to which Douglas and his western constituents were deeply attached. Kansas, which lay due west of slaveholding Missouri, would presumably choose to become a slave state. But Nebraska, lying west of free-soil Iowa, would presumably become a free state. Douglas’s Kansas-Nebraska scheme ﬂatly contradicted the Missouri Compromise of 1820, which had forbidden slavery in the proposed Nebraska Territory north of the sacred 36° 30' line. The only way to open the region to popular sovereignty was to repeal the ancient compact outright. This bold step Douglas was now prepared to take, even at the risk of shattering the uneasy truce patched together by the Compromise of 1850. Many southerners, who had not conceived of Kansas as slave soil, rose to the bait. Here was a chance to gain one more slave state. The pliable President Pierce, under the thumb of southern advisers, threw his full weight behind the Kansas-Nebraska Bill.

 Douglas’s KansasNebraska Scheme At this point in 1854, Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois delivered a counterstroke to offset the Gadsden thrust for southern expansion westward. A squat, bullnecked, and heavy-chested ﬁgure, the “Little Giant” radiated the energy and breezy optimism of the selfmade man. An ardent booster for the West, he longed to break the North-South deadlock over westward expansion and stretch a line of settlements across the continent. He had also invested heavily in Chicago real estate and in railway stock and was eager to have the Windy City become the eastern terminus of the proposed Paciﬁc railroad. He would thus endear himself to the voters of Illinois, beneﬁt his section, and enrich his own purse. A veritable “steam engine in breeches,” Douglas threw himself behind a legislative scheme that would enlist the support of a reluctant South. The proposed Territory of Nebraska would be sliced into two territo-

110°W


 IN

100°W


G


N
TO OREGON TERRITORY

 TERR.

PAC I F IC

WAS H

MINNESOTA TERRITORY

O C EAN


NEBRASKA TERRITORY

MICH. IOWA

Ogden


Omaha


UTAH TERRITORY

N


KANSAS TERRITORY

 CALIFORNIA

 Free state or territory Slave state or territory Opened to slavery by principle of popular sovereignty, Compromise of 1850 Opened to slavery by principle of popular sovereignty, Kansas-Nebraska Act, 1854 Future Union Pacific Railroad (1869)

 KY.



 TENN.

 ARK.

Missouri Compromise
Line, 36˚30’


 TEXAS

40°N


 MO.

INDIAN TERRITORY

N. MEX. TERR.

IND. ILL.

 MISS.

 ALA.

 LA.

400 Km.


30°N




400 Mi.


 Map 18.7 Kansas and Nebraska, 1854 The future Union Paciﬁc Railroad (completed in 1869) is shown. Note the Missouri Compromise line of 36° 30' (1820). Interactive Map



Chapter 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 1848–1854


 Douglas Hatches a Slavery Problem Note the already hatched Missouri Compromise, Squatter Sovereignty, and Filibuster (in Cuba), and the about-to-hatch Free Kansas and Dred Scott decision. So bitter was the outcry against Douglas at the time of the KansasNebraska controversy that he claimed with exaggeration that he could have traveled from Boston to Chicago at night by the light from his burning efﬁgies.

 But the Missouri Compromise, then thirty-four years old, could not be brushed aside lightly. Whatever Congress passes it can repeal, but by this time the North had come to regard the sectional pact as almost as sacred as the Constitution itself. Free-soil members of Congress struck back with a vengeance. They met their match in the violently gesticulating Douglas, who was the ablest rough-and-tumble debater of his generation. Employing twisted logic and oratorical ﬁ reworks, he rammed the bill through Congress, with strong support from many southerners. So heated were political passions that bloodshed was barely averted. Some members carried a concealed revolver or a bowie knife—or both. Douglas’s motives in prodding anew the snarling dog of slavery have long puzzled historians. His personal interests have already been mentioned. In addition, his foes accused him of angling for the presidency

 in 1856. Yet his admirers have argued plausibly in his defense that if he had not championed the ill-omened bill, someone else would have. The truth seems to be that Douglas acted somewhat impulsively and recklessly. His heart did not bleed over the issue of slavery, and he declared repeatedly that he did not care whether it was voted up or down in the territories. What he failed to perceive was that hundreds of thousands of his fellow citizens in the North did feel deeply on this moral issue. They regarded the repeal of the Missouri Compromise as an intolerable breach of faith, and they would henceforth resist to the last trench all future southern demands for slave territory. As Abraham Lincoln said, the North wanted to give to pioneers in the West “a clean bed, with no snakes in it.” Genuine leaders, like skillful chess players, must foresee the possible effects of their moves. Douglas predicted a “hell of a storm,” but he grossly underestimated its proportions. His critics in the North, branding him a “Judas” and a “traitor,” greeted his name with frenzied boos, hisses, and “three groans for Doug.” But he still enjoyed a high degree of popularity among his following in the Democratic party, especially in Illinois, a stronghold of popular sovereignty.

Congress Legislates
 a Civil War The Kansas-Nebraska Act—a curtain-raiser to a terrible drama—was one of the most momentous measures ever to pass Congress. By one way of reckoning, it greased the slippery slope to Civil War. Antislavery northerners were angered by what they condemned as an act of bad faith by the “Nebrascals” and their “Nebrascality.” All future compromise with the South would be immeasurably more difﬁcult, and without compromise there was bound to be conﬂ ict. Henceforth the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850, previously enforced in the North only halfheartedly, was a dead letter. The Kansas-Nebraska Act wrecked two compromises: that of 1820, which it repealed speciﬁcally, and that of 1850, which northern opinion repealed indirectly. Emerson wrote, “The Fugitive [Slave] Law did much to unglue the eyes of men, and now the Nebraska Bill leaves us staring.” Northern abolitionists and southern “ﬁ re-eaters” alike saw less and less they could live with. The growing legion of antislaveryites gained numerous recruits, who resented the grasping move by the “slavocracy” for Kansas. The southerners,

Chronology


 Massachusetts senator Charles Sumner (1811–1874) described the Kansas-Nebraska Bill as “at once the worst and the best Bill on which Congress ever acted.” It was the worst because it represented a victory for the slave power in the short run. But it was the best, he said prophetically, because it

“


 annuls all past compromises with slavery, and makes all future compromises impossible. Thus it puts freedom and slavery face to face, and bids them grapple. Who can doubt the result?

”


 in turn, became inﬂamed when the free-soilers tried to control Kansas, contrary to the presumed “deal.” The proud Democrats—a party now over half a century old—were shattered by the Kansas-Nebraska Act. They did elect a president in 1856, but he was the last one they were to boost into the White House for twenty-eight long years.



 Undoubtedly the most durable offspring of the Kansas-Nebraska blunder was the new Republican party. It sprang up spontaneously in the Middle West, notably in Wisconsin and Michigan, as a mighty moral protest against the gains of slavery. Gathering together dissatisﬁed elements, it soon included disgruntled Whigs (among them Abraham Lincoln), Democrats, Free-Soilers, Know-Nothings, and other foes of the Kansas-Nebraska Act. The hodgepodge party spread eastward with the swiftness of a prairie ﬁ re and with the zeal of a religious crusade. Unheard-of and unheralded at the beginning of 1854, when the nativist KnowNothings instead seemed to be the rising party of the North, it elected a Republican Speaker of the House of Representatives within two years. Never really a thirdparty movement, its wide wingspan gave it ﬂ ight overnight as the second major political party—and a purely sectional one at that. At long last the dreaded sectional rift had appeared. The new Republican party would not be allowed south of the Mason-Dixon line. Countless southerners subscribed wholeheartedly to the sentiment that it was “a nigger stealing, stinking, putrid, abolition party.” The Union was in dire peril.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Caleb Cushing signs Treaty of Wanghia with China



 British seize port of San Juan del Norte in Nicaragua Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ends Mexican War Taylor defeats Cass and Van Buren for presidency



 Cal i fornia gold rush



 Fillmore assumes presidency after Taylor’s death Compromise of 1850, including Fugitive Slave Law Clayton-Bulwer Treaty with Britain



 Australian gold rush



 Pierce defeats Scott for presidency



 Gadsden Purchase from Mexico



 Commodore Perry opens Japan Ostend Manifesto proposes seizure of Cuba Kansas-Nebraska Act repeals Missouri Compromise of 1820 Republican party orga nized



 William Walker becomes president of Nicaragua and legalizes slavery



Meiji Restoration in Japan




Chapter 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 1848–1854


KEY TERMS
popular sovereignty (417) Free Soil party (417) California gold rush (417) Underground Railroad (420) Seventh of March speech (422) Compromise of 1850 (423) Fugitive Slave Law (425) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Clayton-Bulwer Treaty (428) Ostend Manifesto (430) Opium War (430) Wanghia, Treaty of (430) Kanagawa, Treaty of (431) Gadsden Purchase (432) Kansas-Nebraska Act (434) 
Lewis Cass
Zachary Taylor
Harriet Tubman
Millard Fillmore


Franklin Pierce
William Walker
Caleb Cushing
Matthew C. Perry


To Learn More
William J. Cooper, Liberty and Slavery: Southern Politics to
1860 (1983)
David H. Donald, Jean H. Baker, and Michael F. Holt, The
 Civil War and Reconstruction (rev. ed., 2001) Kenneth S. Greenberg, Masters and Statesmen: The Political Culture of American Slavery (1985) Bruce Levine, Half Slave and Half Free: The Roots of the Civil War (1992) James M. McPherson, Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era (1988) David M. Potter, The Impending Crisis, 1848–1861 (1976)

Richard H. Sewell, A House Divided: Sectionalism and Civil
War, 1848–1860 (1988)
Robert Trennert, Alternative to Extinction: Federal Indian
Policy and the Beginnings of the Reservation System,
1846–1851 (1975)
 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Drifting Toward
Disunion





1854–1861
 A house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free.

T


 he slavery question continued to churn the cauldron of controversy throughout the 1850s. As moral temperatures rose, prospects for a peaceful political solution to the slavery issue simply evaporated. Kansas Territory erupted in violence between proslavery and antislavery factions in 1855. Two years later the Supreme Court’s incendiary Dred Scott decision extended formal protection to slavery in all the territories of the West. Attitudes on both sides progressively hardened. When in 1860 the newly formed Republican party nominated for president Abraham Lincoln, an outspoken opponent of the further expansion of slavery, the stage was set for all-out civil war.

Stowe and Helper: Literary
Incendiaries
 Sectional tensions were further strained in 1852, and later, by an inky phenomenon. Harriet Beecher Stowe, a wisp of a woman and the mother of a half-dozen chil-

 dren, published her heartrending novel Uncle Tom’s Cabin. Dismayed by the passage of the Fugitive Slave Law, she was determined to awaken the North to the wickedness of slavery by laying bare its terrible inhumanity, especially the cruel splitting of families. Her wildly popular book relied on powerful imagery and touching pathos. “God wrote it,” she explained in later years—a reminder that the deeper sources of her antislavery sentiments lay in the evangelical religious crusades of the Second Great Awakening. The success of the novel at home and abroad was sensational. Several hundred thousand copies were published in the ﬁ rst year, and the totals soon ran into the millions as the tale was translated into more than a score of languages. It was also put on the stage in “Tom shows” for lengthy runs. No other novel in American history—perhaps in all history—can be compared with it as a political force. To millions of people, it made slavery appear almost as evil as it really was. When Mrs. Stowe was introduced to President Lincoln in 1862, he reportedly remarked with twinkling

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 1854–1861


Harriet Beecher Stowe (1811–1896), Daguerreotype by
 Southworth and Hawes Stowe was a remarkable woman whose pen helped to change the course of history.

“The Book That Made This Great War”
 Lincoln’s celebrated remark to author Harriet Beecher Stowe reﬂected the enormous emotional impact of her impassioned novel.

 eyes, “So you’re the little woman who wrote the book that made this great war.” The truth is that Uncle Tom’s Cabin did help start the Civil War—and win it. The South condemned that “vile wretch in petticoats” when it learned that hundreds of thousands of fellow Americans were reading and believing her “unfair” indictment. Mrs. Stowe had never witnessed slavery at ﬁ rst hand in the Deep South, but she had seen it brieﬂy during a visit to Kentucky, and she had lived for many years in Ohio, a center of Underground Railroad activity. Uncle Tom, endearing and enduring, left a profound impression on the North. Uncounted thousands of readers swore that henceforth they would have nothing to do with the enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Law. The tale was devoured by millions of impressionable youths in the 1850s—some of whom later became the Boys in Blue who volunteered to ﬁght the Civil War through to its grim ﬁnale. The memory of a beaten and dying Uncle Tom helped sustain them in their determination to wipe out the plague of slavery.

 The novel was immensely popular abroad, especially in Britain and France. Countless readers wept over the kindly Tom and the angelic Eva, while deploring the brutal Simon Legree. When the guns in America In the closing scenes of Harriet Beecher Stowe’s novel, Uncle Tom’s brutal master, Simon Legree, orders the $1,200 slave savagely beaten (to death) by two fellow slaves. Through tears and blood, Tom exclaims,

“


 ‘No! no! no! my soul an’t yours, Mas’r! You haven’t bought it,—ye can’t buy it! It’s been bought and paid for, by one that is able to keep it,—no matter, no matter, you can’t harm me!’ ‘I can’t,’ said Legree, with a sneer; ‘we’ll see,—we’ll see! Here, Sambo, Quimbo, give this dog such a breakin’ in as he won’t get over, this month!’

”


Examining the Evidence




 Harriet Beecher Stowe, Uncle Tom’s Cabin s works of ﬁction, novels pose tricky problems to historians, whose principal objective is to get the factual record straight. Works of the imagination are notoriously unreliable as descriptions of reality, and only rarely is it known with any degree of certainty what a reader might have felt when confronting a particular ﬁctional passage or theme. Yet a novel like Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin had such an unarguably large impact on the American (and worldwide) debate over slavery that historians have inevitably looked to it for evidence of the mid-nineteenth-century ideas and attitudes to which Stowe appealed. The passage quoted here is especially rich in such evidence—and even offers an explanation for the logic of the novel’s title. Stowe cleverly aimed to mobilize not simply her readers’ sense of injustice but also their sentiments on behalf of the antislavery cause. Why is the cabin described here so central to Stowe’s novel? What sentimental values does the cabin represent? What is the nature of the threat to those values? What does it say about

A


 ﬁ nally began to boom, the common people of Eng land sensed that the triumph of the North would spell the end of the black curse. The governments in London and Paris seriously considered intervening in behalf of the South, but they were sobered by the realization that many of their own people, aroused by the “Tom-mania,” might not support them. Another trouble-brewing book appeared in 1857, ﬁve years after the debut of Uncle Tom. Titled The Impending Crisis of the South, it was written by Hinton R. Helper, a nonaristocratic white from North Carolina. Hating both slavery and blacks, he attempted to prove by an array of statistics that indirectly the nonslave-

 nineteenth-century American culture that Stowe’s appeal to sentiment succeeded so much more dramatically in exciting antislavery passions than did the factual and moral arguments of many other (mostly male) abolitionists?

 holding whites were the ones who suffered most from the millstone of slavery. Unable to secure a publisher in the South, he ﬁ nally managed to ﬁ nd one in the North. Helper’s inﬂuence was negligible among the poorer whites to whom he addressed his message. Yet the South’s planter elite certainly took note of Helper’s audacity, which fueled their fears that the nonslaveholding majority might abandon them. The Impending Crisis of the South, with its “dirty allusions,” was banned in the South and fed to the ﬂames at book-burning parties. In the North untold thousands of copies, many in condensed form, were distributed as campaign literature by the Republicans. Southerners were further



Chapter 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 1854–1861


100°W


UTAH TERR.



35°N




20 Mi.


Topeka


NEW MEXICO TERRITORY





R.


Pottawatomie Creek
May 24, 1856


800 Mi.


 TEXAS

INDIAN TERRITORY

 as ns

Kansas


R.
City 

Shawnee
Mission
Lawrence
May 21, 1856


Osage


800 Km.


 MISSOURI

Leavenworth uri R
.


Lecompton


KANSAS TERRITORY



0 10 20 Km.


 o

40°N


NEBRASKA TERRITORY

 s Mis

N


95°W


Ka


105°W


Oswatomie
Aug. 31, 1856


Marais des Cygnes
May 19, 1858


Attacks by
 free-state forces Attacks by proslavery forces Present-day Kansas

 Map 19.1 Bleeding Kansas, 1854–1860 “Enter every election district in Kansas . . . and vote at the point of a bowie knife or revolver,” one proslavery agitator exhorted a Missouri crowd. Proslavery Missouri senator David Atchison declared that “there are 1,100 men coming over from Platte County to vote, and if that ain’t enough we can send 5,000—enough to kill every Goddamned abolitionist in the Territory.”

 embittered when they learned that their northern brethren were spreading these wicked “lies.” Thus did southerners, reacting much as they did to Uncle Tom’s Cabin, become increasingly unwilling to sleep under the same federal roof with their hostile Yankee bedfellows.

The North-South
Contest for Kansas
 The rolling plains of Kansas had meanwhile been providing an example of the worst possible workings of popular sovereignty, although admittedly under abnormal conditions. Newcomers who ventured into Kansas were a motley lot. Most of the northerners were just ordinary westward-moving pioneers in search of richer lands beyond the sunset. But a small part of the inﬂow was ﬁ nanced by groups of northern abolitionists or freesoilers. The most famous of these antislavery orga ni zations was the New Eng land Emigrant Aid Company, which sent about two thousand people to the troubled area to forestall the South—and also to make a proﬁt. Shouting “Ho for Kansas,” many of them carried the deadly new breech-loading Sharps riﬂes, nicknamed “Beecher’s Bibles” after the Reverend Henry Ward Beecher (Harriet Beecher Stowe’s brother), who had helped raise money for their purchase. Many of the Kansas-bound pioneers sang John Greenleaf Whittier’s marching song (1854):

Interactive Map


 We cross the prairie as of old The pilgrims crossed the sea, To make the West, as they the East, The homestead of the free! Southern spokesmen, now more than ordinarily touchy, raised furious cries of betrayal. They had supported the Kansas-Nebraska scheme of Senator Douglas with the unspoken understanding that Kansas would become slave and Nebraska free. The northern “Nebrascals,” allegedly by foul means, were now apparently out to “abolitionize” both Kansas and Nebraska. A few southern hotheads, quick to respond in kind, attempted to “assist” small groups of well-armed slaveowners to Kansas. Some carried banners proclaiming, Let Yankees tremble, abolitionists fall, Our motto is, “Give Southern Rights to All.” But planting blacks on Kansas soil was a losing game. Slaves were valuable and volatile property, and foolish indeed were owners who would take them where bullets were ﬂying and where the soil might be voted free under popular sovereignty. The census of 1860 found only 2 slaves among 107,000 souls in all Kansas Territory and only 15 in Nebraska. There was much truth in the charge that the whole quarrel over slavery in the territories revolved around “an imaginary Negro in an impossible place.” Crisis conditions in Kansas rapidly worsened (see Map 19.1). When the day came in 1855 to elect members

The Contest for Kansas


 of the ﬁ rst territorial legislature, proslavery “border rufﬁans” poured in from Missouri to vote early and often. The slavery supporters triumphed and then set up their own puppet government at Shawnee Mission. The free-soilers, unable to stomach this fraudulent conspiracy, established an extralegal regime of their own in Topeka. The confused Kansans thus had their choice between two governments—one based on fraud, the other on illegality. Tension mounted as settlers also feuded over conﬂ icting land claims. The breaking point came in 1856 when a gang of proslavery raiders, alleging provocation, shot up and burned part of the free-soil town of Lawrence. This outrage was but the prelude to a bloodier tragedy.



 to themselves, the proslaveryites approved the constitution with slavery late in 1857. The scene next shifted to Washington. President Pierce had been succeeded by the no-less-pliable James Buchanan, who was also strongly under southern inﬂuence. Blind to sharp divisions within his own Democratic party, Buchanan threw the weight of his administration behind the notorious Lecompton Constitution. But Senator Douglas, who had championed

Kansas in Convulsion
 The fanatical ﬁgure of John Brown now stalked upon the Kansas battleﬁeld. Spare, gray-bearded, and ironwilled, he was obsessively dedicated to the abolitionist cause. The power of his glittering gray eyes was such, so he claimed, that his stare could force a dog or cat to slink out of a room. Becoming involved in dubious dealings, including horse stealing, he moved to Kansas from Ohio with part of his large family. Brooding over the recent attack on Lawrence, “Old Brown” of Osawatomie led a band of his followers to Pottawatomie Creek in May 1856. There they literally hacked to pieces ﬁve surprised men, presumed to be proslaveryites. This terrorist butchery besmirched the free-soil cause and brought vicious retaliation from the proslavery forces. Civil war in Kansas thus erupted in 1856 and continued intermittently until it merged with the largescale Civil War of 1861–1865. Altogether, the Kansas conﬂ ict destroyed millions of dollars’ worth of property, paralyzed agriculture in certain areas, and cost scores of lives. Yet by 1857 Kansas had enough people, chieﬂy freesoilers, to apply for statehood on a popular-sovereignty basis. The proslavery forces, then in the saddle, devised a tricky document known as the Lecompton Constitution. The people were not allowed to vote for or against the constitution as a whole, but for the constitution either “with slavery” or “with no slavery.” If they voted against slavery, one of the remaining provisions of the constitution would protect the owners of slaves already in Kansas. So whatever the outcome, there would still be black bondage in Kansas. Many freesoilers, infuriated by this ploy, boycotted the polls. Left

 John Brown (1800–1859) This daguerreotype of the militant abolitionist Brown tells a tale of two men, the sitter and the photographer. It was taken in 1847 when Brown was running a wool-brokerage house in Springﬁeld, Massachusetts, and working closely with other New England abolitionists, including Frederick Douglass. Brown made his way to the Hartford studio of free black photographer Augustus Washington, who was the son of an Asian woman and a former black slave and well known in abolitionist circles. Six years later, Washington would close his successful studio and take his family to Liberia, convinced that American blacks would do better in their own country in Africa than as free men in the United States (see pp. 383–384).



Chapter 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 1854–1861


 true popular sovereignty, would have none of this semipopular fraudulency. Deliberately tossing away his strong support in the South for the presidency, he fought courageously for fair play and democratic principles. The outcome was a compromise that, in effect, submitted the entire Lecompton Constitution to a popular vote. The free-soil voters thereupon thronged to the polls and snowed it under. Kansas remained a territory until 1861, when the southern secessionists left Congress. President Buchanan, by antagonizing the numerous Douglas Democrats in the North, hopelessly divided the once-powerful Democratic party. Until then, it had been the only remaining national party, for the Whigs were dead and the Republicans were sectional. With the disruption of the Democrats came the snapping of one of the last important strands in the rope that was barely binding the Union together.

“Bully” Brooks and
His Bludgeon
 Bleeding Kansas also spattered blood on the ﬂoor of the Senate in 1856. Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts, a tall and imposing ﬁgure, was a leading abolitionist—one of the few prominent in political life. Highly educated but cold, humorless, intolerant, and

Preston Brooks Caning
Charles Sumner, 1856
Cartoonist John Magee
 of Philadelphia depicted Brooks’s beating of Sumner in the Senate as a display of southern ruthlessness in defending slavery, ironically captioned “southern chivalry.”

 egotistical, he had made himself one of the most disliked men in the Senate. Brooding over the turbulent miscarriage of popular sovereignty, he delivered a blistering speech titled “The Crime Against Kansas.” Sparing few epithets, he condemned the proslavery men as “hirelings picked from the drunken spew and vomit of an uneasy civilization.” He also referred insultingly to South Carolina and to its white-haired senator Andrew Butler, one of the best-liked members of the Senate. Hot-tempered Congressman Preston S. Brooks of South Carolina now took vengeance into his own hands. Ordinarily gracious and gallant, he resented the insults to his state and to its senator, a distant cousin. His code of honor called for a duel, but in the South one fought only with one’s social equals. And had not the coarse language of the Yankee, who probably would reject a challenge, dropped him to a lower order? To Brooks, the only alternative was to chastise the senator as one would beat an unruly dog. On May 22, 1856, he approached Sumner, then sitting at his Senate desk, and pounded the orator with an eleven-ounce cane until it broke. The victim fell bleeding and unconscious to the ﬂoor, while several nearby senators refrained from interfering. Sumner had been provocatively insulting, but this counteroutrage put Brooks in the wrong. The House of Representatives could not muster enough votes to expel the South Carolinian, but he resigned and was

The Sumner-Brooks Clash and the Campaign of 1856


 triumphantly reelected. Southern admirers deluged Brooks with canes, some of them gold-headed, to replace the one that had been broken. The injuries to Sumner’s head and ner vous system were serious. He was forced to leave his seat for three and a half years and go to Europe for treatment that was both painful and costly. Meanwhile, Massachusetts deﬁantly reelected him, leaving his seat eloquently empty. Bleeding Sumner was thus joined with bleeding Kansas as a political issue. The free-soil North was mightily aroused against the “uncouth” and “cowardly” “Bully” Brooks. Copies of Sumner’s abusive speech, otherwise doomed to obscurity, were sold by the tens of thousands. Every blow that struck the senator doubtless made thousands of Republican votes. The South, although not unanimous in approving Brooks, was angered not only because Sumner had made such an intemperate speech but because it had been so extravagantly applauded in the North. The Sumner-Brooks clash and the ensuing reactions revealed how dangerously inﬂamed passions were becoming, North and South. It was ominous that the cultured Sumner should have used the language of a barroom bully and that the gentlemanly Brooks should have employed the tactics and tools of a thug. Emotion was displacing thought. The blows rained on Sumner’s head were, broadly speaking, among the ﬁ rst blows of the Civil War.

 Regarding the Brooks assault on Sumner, the Illinois State Journal, one of the more moderate antislavery journals, declared,

“


 Brooks and his Southern allies have deliberately adopted the monstrous creed that any man who dares to utter sentiments which they deem wrong or unjust, shall be brutally assailed.

”


 One of the milder southern responses came from the Petersburg (Virginia) Intelligencer:

“


 Although Mr. Brooks ought to have selected some other spot for the altercation than the Senate chamber, if he had broken every bone in Sumner’s carcass it would have been a just retribution upon this slanderer of the South and her individual citizens.

”




“Old Buck” Versus
 “The Pathﬁnder” With bullets whining in Kansas, the Democrats met in Cincinnati to nominate their presidential standardbearer of 1856. They shied away from both the weakkneed President Pierce and the dynamic Douglas. Each was too indelibly tainted by the Kansas-Nebraska Act. The delegates ﬁ nally chose James Buchanan (pronounced by many Buck-anan), who was muscular, white-haired, and tall (six feet), with a short neck and a protruding chin. Because of an eye defect, he carried his head cocked to one side. A well-to-do Pennsylvania lawyer, he had been serving as minister to London during the recent Kansas-Nebraska uproar. He was therefore “Kansas-less,” and hence relatively enemyless. But in a crisis that called for giants, “Old Buck” Buchanan was mediocre, irresolute, and confused. Delegates of the fast-growing Republican party met in Philadelphia with bubbling enthusiasm. “Higher Law” Seward was their most conspicuous leader, and he probably would have arranged to win the nomination had he been conﬁdent that this was a “Republican year.” The ﬁ nal choice was Captain John C. Frémont, the so-called Pathﬁ nder of the West—a dashing but erratic explorer-soldier-surveyor who was supposed to ﬁ nd the path to the White House. The black-bearded and ﬂashy young adventurer was virtually without political experience, but like Buchanan he was not tarred with the Kansas brush. The Republican platform came out vigorously against the extension of slavery into the territories, while the Democrats declared no less emphatically for popular sovereignty. An ugly dose of antiforeignism was injected into the campaign, even though slavery extension loomed largest. The recent inﬂux of immigrants from Ireland and Germany had alarmed “nativists,” as many oldstock Protestants were called. They orga nized the American party, also known as the Know-Nothing party because of its secretiveness, and in 1856 nominated the lackluster ex-president Millard Fillmore. Antiforeign and anti-Catholic, these superpatriots adopted the slogan “Americans Must Rule America.” Remnants of the dying Whig party likewise endorsed Fillmore, and they and the Know-Nothings threatened to cut into Republican strength. Republicans fell in behind Frémont with the zeal of crusaders. Shouting “We Follow the Pathﬁ nder” and “We Are Buck Hunting,” they orga nized glee clubs, which sang (to the tune of “The Marseillaise”),



Chapter 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 1854–1861


A
Know-Nothing Party Mob, Baltimore, ca. 1856–1860
 These armed rufﬁans were campaigning in Baltimore for their ultranationalistic, anti-immigrant, anti-Catholic candidate.

 Arise, arise ye brave! And let our war-cry be, Free speech, free press, free soil, free men, Fré-mont and victory! “And free love,” sneered the Buchanan supporters (“Buchaneers”). Mudslinging bespattered both candidates. “Old Fogy” Buchanan was assailed because he was a bachelor: the ﬁancée of his youth had died after a lovers’ quarrel. Frémont was reviled because of his illegitimate

 Spiritual overtones developed in the Frémont campaign, especially over slavery. The Independent, a prominent religious journal, saw in Frémont’s nomination “the good hand of God.” As election day neared, it declared,

“


Fellow-Christians! Remember it is for
 Christ, for the nation, and for the world that you vote at this election! Vote as you pray! Pray as you vote!

”


 birth, for his young mother had left her elderly husband, a Virginia planter, to run away with a French adventurer. In due season she gave birth to John in Savannah, Georgia—further to shame the South. More harmful to Frémont was the allegation, which alienated many bigoted Know-Nothings and other “nativists,” that he was a Roman Catholic.

The Electoral Fruits of 1856
 A bland Buchanan, although polling less than a majority of the popular vote, won handily (see Map 19.2). His tally in the Electoral College was 174 to 114 for Frémont, with Fillmore garnering 8. The popular vote was 1,832,955 for Buchanan to 1,339,932 for Frémont, and 871,731 for Fillmore. Why did the rousing Republicans go down to defeat? Frémont lost much ground because of grave doubts as to his honesty, capacity, and sound judgment. Perhaps more damaging were the violent threats of the southern “ﬁ re-eaters” that the election of a sectional “Black Republican” would be a declaration of war on them, forcing them to secede. Many northerners, anxious to save both the Union and their proﬁtable

The Dred Scott Decision




WASHINGTON TERRITORY OREGON TERRITORY

NEBRASKA TERRITORY

UTAH TERRITORY CA NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

ME VT 5 NH MA NY 5 13 RI PA NJ CT 4 7 6

MINNESOTA TERRITORY WI IA IL

KANSAS TERRITORY

MI IN

 MO

INDIAN TERR.

 VA

 KY

 NC

 TN

AR LA

 TX

 OH

 MS

 AL

 GA

DE MD

 SC

 FL

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Buchanan (Democrat)




59%


1,832,955


45.3%


 Frémont (Republican)



38%


1,339,932


33.1%




3%


871,731


21.6%


Fillmore (American)
Territories


 Map 19.2 Presidential Election of 1856 (electoral vote by state) The fateful split of 1860 was foreshadowed. The regional polarization in 1856, shown here, was to be even sharper four years later, as illustrated by Maps 19.3 and 19.4 later in this chapter. Interactive Map

 business connections with the South, were thus intimidated into voting for Buchanan. Innate conservatism triumphed, assisted by so-called southern bullyism. It was probably fortunate for the Union that secession and civil war did not come in 1856, following a Republican victory. Frémont, an ill-balanced and second-rate ﬁgure, was no Abraham Lincoln. And in 1856 the North was more willing to let the South depart in peace than in 1860. Dramatic events from 1856 to 1860 were to arouse hundreds of thousands of stillapathetic northerners to a ﬁghting pitch. Yet the Republicans in 1856 could rightfully claim a “victorious defeat.” The new party—a mere two-yearold toddler—had made an astonishing showing against the well-oiled Democratic machine. Whittier exulted: Then sound again the bugles, Call the muster-roll anew; If months have well-nigh won the ﬁeld, What may not four years do? The election of 1856 cast a long shadow forward, and politicians, North and South, peered anxiously toward 1860.

The Dred Scott Bombshell
 The Dred Scott v. Stanford decision, handed down by the Supreme Court on March 6, 1857, abruptly ended the two-day presidential honeymoon of the unlucky bachelor, James Buchanan. This pronouncement was one of the opening paper-gun blasts of the Civil War. Basically, the case was simple. Dred Scott, a black slave, had lived with his master for ﬁve years in Illinois and Wisconsin Territory. Backed by interested abolitionists, he sued for freedom on the basis of his long residence on free soil. The Supreme Court proceeded to twist a simple legal case into a complex political issue. It ruled, not surprisingly, that Dred Scott was a black slave and not a citizen, and hence could not sue in federal courts.* The tribunal could then have thrown out the case on these technical grounds alone. But a majority decided to go further, under the leadership of emaciated Chief Justice Roger B. Taney from the slave state of Maryland. A sweeping judgment on the larger issue of slavery in the territories seemed desirable, particularly to forestall arguments by two free-soil justices who were preparing dissenting opinions. The prosouthern majority evidently hoped in this way to lay the odious question to rest. Taney’s thunderclap rocked the free-soilers back on their heels. A majority of the Court decreed that because a slave was private property, he or she could be taken into any territory and legally held there in slavery. The reasoning was that the Fifth Amendment clearly forbade Congress to deprive people of their property without due process of law. The Court, to be consistent, went further. The Missouri Compromise, banning slavery north of 36° 30', had been repealed three years earlier by the Kansas-Nebraska Act. But its spirit was still venerated in the North. Now the Court ruled that the Compromise of 1820 had been unconstitutional all along: Congress had no power to ban slavery from the territories, regardless even of what the territorial legislatures themselves might want. Southerners were delighted with this unexpected victory. Champions of popular sovereignty were aghast, including Senator Douglas and a host of northern Democrats. Another lethal wedge was thus driven between

 *This part of the ruling, denying blacks their citizenship, seriously menaced the precarious position of the South’s quarter-million free blacks.



Chapter 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 1854–1861


 The decision of Chief Justice Roger B. Taney (1777– 1864) in the case of Dred Scott referred to the status of slaves when the Constitution was adopted:

“


 They had for more than a century before been regarded as beings of an inferior order; and altogether unﬁt to associate with the white race, either in social or political relations; and so far inferior that they had no rights which the white man was bound to respect. . . . This opinion was at that time ﬁxed and universal in the civilized portion of the white race.

”


 Taney’s statement accurately described historical attitudes, but it deeply offended antislaveryites when applied to conditions in 1857.

 Dred Scott with His Wife and Daughters, 1857 This slave’s long legal battle for his freedom, culminating in the Supreme Court’s Dred Scott decision in 1857, helped to ignite the Civil War. Widespread publicity about the fate of Scott and his family strengthened antislavery sentiment in the North. Articles like this one in Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Newspaper appealed to the same sentimental regard for the idealized family that Harriet Beecher Stowe so artfully mobilized in Uncle Tom’s Cabin (see “Examining the Evidence: Harriet Beecher Stowe, Uncle Tom’s Cabin,” p. 439).

 the northern and southern wings of the once-united Democratic party. Foes of slavery extension, especially the Republicans, were infuriated by the Dred Scott setback. Their chief rallying cry had been the banishing of bondage from the territories. They now insisted that the ruling of the Court was merely an opinion, not a decision, and no more binding than the views of a “southern debating society.” Republican deﬁance of the exalted tribunal was intensiﬁed by an awareness that a majority of

 its members were southerners and by the conviction that it had debased itself—“sullied the ermine”—by wallowing in the gutter of politics. Southerners in turn were inﬂamed by all this deﬁance. They began to wonder anew how much longer they could remain joined to a section that refused to honor the Supreme Court, to say nothing of the constitutional compact that had established it.

The Financial Crash
 of 1857 Bitterness caused by the Dred Scott decision was deepened by hard times, which dampened a period of feverish prosperity. Then the panic of 1857 burst about Buchanan’s harassed head. The storm was not so bad economically as the panic of 1837, but psychologically it was probably the worst of the nineteenth century. What caused the crash? Inpouring Cal i fornia gold played its part by helping to inﬂate the currency. The demands of the Crimean War in Russia (1853–1856) had overstimulated the growing of grain, while frenzied speculation in land and railroads had further ripped the economic fabric. When the collapse came, over ﬁve thousand businesses failed within a year. Unemployment, accompanied by hunger meetings in urban areas, was widespread. “Bread or Death” stated one desperate slogan. The North, including its grain growers, was hardest hit. The South, enjoying favorable cotton prices abroad,

The Panic of 1857




 South. In 1860, after years of debate, Congress ﬁ nally passed a homestead act—one that made public lands available at a nominal sum of twenty-ﬁve cents an acre. But the homestead act was stabbed to death by the veto pen of President Buchanan, near whose elbow sat leading southern sympathizers. The panic of 1857 also created a clamor for higher tariff rates. Several months before the crash, Congress, embarrassed by a large Treasury surplus, had enacted the Tariff of 1857. The new law, responding to pressures from the South, reduced duties to about 20 percent on dutiable goods—the lowest point since the War of 1812. Hardly had the revised rates been placed on the books when ﬁ nancial misery descended like a black pall. Northern manufacturers, many of them Republicans, noisily blamed their misfortunes on the low tariff. As the surplus melted away in the Treasury, industrialists in the North pointed to the need for higher duties. But what really concerned them was their desire for increased protection. Thus the panic of 1857 gave the Republicans two sureﬁ re economic issues for the election of 1860: protection for the unprotected and farms for the farmless. Panic on Wall Street, 1857 The panic of 1857 further burdened President Buchanan, already reeling from the armed clashes in Kansas and the controversy over the Dred Scott decision.

 rode out the storm with ﬂying colors. Panic conditions seemed further proof that cotton was king and that its economic kingdom was stronger than that of the North. This fatal delusion helped drive the overconﬁdent southerners closer to a shooting showdown. Financial distress in the North, especially in agriculture, gave a new vigor to the demand for free farms of 160 acres from the public domain. For several decades interested groups had been urging the federal government to abandon its ancient policy of selling the land for revenue. Instead, the argument ran, acreage should be given outright to the sturdy pioneers as a reward for risking health and life to develop it. A scheme to make outright gifts of homesteads encountered two-pronged opposition. Eastern industrialists had long been unfriendly to free land; some of them feared that their underpaid workers would be drained off to the West. The South was even more bitterly opposed, partly because gang-labor slavery could not ﬂourish on a mere 160 acres. Free farms would merely ﬁ ll up the territories more rapidly with freesoilers and further tip the political balance against the

An Illinois Rail-Splitter
Emerges
 The Illinois senatorial election of 1858 now claimed the national spotlight. Senator Stephen A. Douglas’s term was about to expire, and the Republicans decided to run against him a rustic Springﬁeld lawyer, one Abraham Lincoln. The Republican candidate—6 feet 4 inches in height and 180 pounds in weight—presented an awkward but arresting ﬁgure. Lincoln’s legs, arms, and neck were abnormally long; his head was crowned by coarse, black, and unruly hair; and his face was sad, sunken, and weather-beaten. Lincoln was no silver-spoon child of the elite. Born in 1809 in a Kentucky log cabin to impoverished parents, he attended a frontier school for not more than a year; being an avid reader, he was mainly self-educated. All his life he said, “git,” “thar,” and “heered.” Although narrow-chested and somewhat stoop-shouldered, he shone in his frontier community as a wrestler and weight lifter, and spent some time, among other pioneering pursuits, as a splitter of logs for fence rails. A superb teller of earthy and amusing stories, he would oddly enough plunge into protracted periods of melancholy. Lincoln’s private and professional lives were not especially noteworthy. He married “above himself”



Chapter 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 1854–1861


 In 1832, when Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865) became a candidate for the Illinois legislature, he delivered a speech at a political gathering:

“


 I presume you all know who I am. I am humble Abraham Lincoln. I have been solicited by many friends to become a candidate for the Legislature. My [Whiggish] politics are short and sweet, like the old woman’s dance. I am in favor of a national bank. I am in favor of the internalimprovement system, and a high protective tariff. These are my sentiments and political principles. If elected, I shall be thankful; if not, it will be all the same.

”


 He was elected two years later.

 mounting the Republican bandwagon, he emerged as one of the foremost politicians and orators of the Northwest. At the Philadelphia convention of 1856, where John C. Frémont was nominated, Lincoln actually received 110 votes for the vice-presidential nomination. Abraham Lincoln, a Most Uncommon Common Man This daguerreotype of Lincoln was done by Mathew B. Brady, a distinguished photographer of the era.

 socially, into the inﬂuential Todd family of Kentucky, and the temperamental outbursts of his high-strung wife, known by her enemies as the “she wolf,” helped to school him in patience and forbearance. After reading a little law, he gradually emerged as one of the dozen or so better-known trial lawyers in Illinois, although still accustomed to carrying important papers in his stovepipe hat. He was widely referred to as “Honest Abe,” partly because he would refuse cases that he had to suspend his conscience to defend. The rise of Lincoln as a political ﬁgure was less than rocketlike. After making his mark in the Illinois legislature as a Whig politician of the logrolling variety, he served one undistinguished term in Congress, 1847– 1849. Until 1854, when he was forty-ﬁve years of age, he had done nothing to establish a claim to statesmanship. But the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act in that year lighted within him unexpected ﬁ res. After

The Great Debate:
Lincoln Versus Douglas
 Lincoln, as Republican nominee for the Senate seat, boldly challenged Douglas to a series of joint debates. This was a rash act, because the stumpy senator was probably the nation’s most devastating debater. Douglas promptly accepted Lincoln’s challenge, and seven meetings—the famed Lincoln-Douglas debates—were arranged from August to October 1858. At ﬁ rst glance the two contestants seemed illmatched. The well-groomed and polished Douglas, with his bearlike ﬁgure and bullhorn voice, presented a striking contrast to the lanky Lincoln, with his baggy clothes and unshined shoes. Moreover, “Old Abe,” as he was called in both affection and derision, had a piercing, high-pitched voice and was often ill at ease when he began to speak. But as he threw himself into an argument, he seemed to grow in height, while his glowing eyes lighted up a rugged face. He relied on logic rather than on table-thumping. The most famous debate came at Freeport, Illinois, where Lincoln nearly impaled his opponent on the

The Lincoln-Douglas Debates




 Lincoln and Douglas Debate, 1858 Thousands attended each of the seven Lincoln-Douglas debates. Douglas is shown here sitting to Lincoln’s right in the debate at Charleston, Illinois, in September. On one occasion Lincoln quipped that Douglas’s logic would prove that a horse chestnut was a chestnut horse.

 horns of a dilemma. Suppose, he queried, the people of a territory should vote slavery down. The Supreme Court in the Dred Scott decision had decreed that they could not. Who would prevail, the Court or the people? Legend to the contrary, Douglas and some southerners had already publicly answered the Freeport question. The “Little Giant” therefore did not hesitate to meet the issue head-on, honestly and consistently. His reply to Lincoln became known as the Freeport Doctrine. No matter how the Supreme Court ruled, Douglas argued, slavery would stay down if the people voted it down. Laws to protect slavery would have to be passed by the territorial legislatures. These would not be forthcoming in the absence of popular approval, and black bondage would soon disappear. Douglas, in truth, had American history on his side. Where public opinion does not support the federal government, as in the case of Jefferson’s embargo (see pp. 240–242) the law is almost impossible to enforce. The upshot was that Douglas defeated Lincoln for the Senate seat. The “Little Giant’s” loyalty to popular sovereignty, which still had a powerful appeal in Illi-

 nois, probably was decisive. Senators were then chosen by state legislatures; and in the general election that followed the debates, more pro-Douglas members were elected than pro-Lincoln members. Yet thanks to inequitable apportionment, the districts carried by Douglas supporters represented a smaller population than those carried by Lincoln supporters. “Honest Abe” thus won a clear moral victory. Lincoln possibly was playing for larger stakes than just the senatorship. Although defeated, he had shambled into the national limelight in company with the most prominent northern politicians. Newspapers in the East published detailed accounts of the debates, and Lincoln began to emerge as a potential Republican nominee for president. But Douglas, in winning Illinois, hurt his own chances of winning the presidency, while further splitting his splintering party. After his opposition to the Lecompton Constitution for Kansas and his further deﬁance of the Supreme Court at Freeport, southern Democrats were determined to break up the party (and the Union) rather than accept him. The Lincoln-Douglas debate platform thus



Chapter 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 1854–1861


 Lincoln expressed his views on the relation of the black and white races in 1858, in his ﬁrst debate with Stephen A. Douglas:

“


 I, as well as Judge Douglas, am in favor of the race to which I belong, having the superior position. I have never said anything to the contrary, but I hold that notwithstanding all this, there is no reason in the world why the negro is not entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the Declaration of Independence, the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. I hold that he is as much entitled to those rights as the white man. I agree with Judge Douglas he is not my equal in many respects—certainly not in color, perhaps not in moral or intellectual endowment. But in the right to eat the bread, without leave of anybody else, which his own hand earns, he is my equal and the equal of Judge Douglas, and the equal of every living man.

”


 proved to be one of the preliminary battleﬁelds of the Civil War.

John Brown:
Murderer or Martyr?
 The gaunt, grim ﬁgure of John Brown of bleeding Kansas infamy now once again took the stage. After studying the tactics of the black rebels Toussaint L’Ouverture (see p. 234) and Nat Turner (see p. 384), he hatched a daring scheme to invade the South secretly with a handful of followers, call upon the slaves to rise, furnish them with arms, and establish a kind of black free state as a sanctuary. Brown secured several thousand dollars for ﬁ rearms from northern abolitionists and ﬁ nally arrived in hilly western Virginia with some twenty men, including several blacks. At scenic Harpers Ferry, he seized the federal arsenal in October 1859, incidentally kill ing seven innocent people, including a free black, and injuring ten or so more. But the slaves, largely ignorant of Brown’s strike, failed to rise, and the wounded Brown and the remnants of his tiny band were quickly captured by U.S. Marines under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Robert E. Lee.

 Upon hearing of John Brown’s execution, escaped slave and abolitionist Harriet Tubman (ca. 1820– 1913) paid him the highest tribute for his self-sacriﬁce:

“


 I’ve been studying, and studying upon it, and its clar to me, it wasn’t John Brown that died on that gallows. When I think how he gave up his life for our people, and how he never ﬂinched, but was so brave to the end; its clar to me it wasn’t mortal man, it was God in him.

”


 Not all opponents of slavery, however, shared Tubman’s reverence for Brown. Republican presidential candidate Abraham Lincoln dismissed Brown as deluded:

“


 [The Brown] affair, in its philosophy, corresponds with the many attempts, related in history, at the assassination of kings and emperors. An enthusiast broods over the oppression of a people till he fancies himself commissioned by Heaven to liberate them. He ventures the attempt, which ends in little else than his own execution.

”


 Ironically, within two years Lee would become the preeminent general in the Confederate army. “Old Brown” was convicted of murder and trea son after a hasty but legal trial. His presumed insan ity was supported by afﬁdavits from seventeen friends and relatives, who were trying to save his neck. Actually thirteen of his near relations were regarded as insane, including his mother and grandmother. Governor Wise of Virginia would have been wiser, so his critics say, if he had only clapped the culprit into a lunatic asylum. But Brown—“God’s angry man”—was given every opportunity to pose and to enjoy martyrdom. Though perhaps of unsound mind, he was clever enough to see that he was worth much more to the abolitionist cause dangling from a rope than in any other way. His demeanor during the trial was digniﬁed and courageous, his last words (“this is a beautiful country”) were to become legendary, and he marched up the scaffold steps without ﬂ inching. His conduct was so exemplary, his devotion to freedom so inﬂexible, that he took on an exalted character, however deplorable his previous record may have been. So the hangman’s trap was

 John Brown's Raid



Last Moments of John Brown, by Thomas Hovenden
 Sentenced to be hanged, John Brown wrote to his brother, “I am quite cheerful in view of my approaching end, being fully persuaded that I am worth inconceivably more to hang than for any other purpose. . . . I count it all joy. ‘I have fought the good ﬁght,’ and have, as I trust, ‘ﬁnished my course.’” This painting of Brown going to his execution may have been inspired by the journalist Horace Greeley, who was not present but wrote that “a black woman with a little child stood by the door. He stopped for a moment, and stooping, kissed the child.” That scene never took place, as Brown was escorted from the jail only by a detachment of soldiers. But this painting has become famous as a kind of allegorical expression of the pathos of Brown’s martyrdom for the abolitionist cause.

 sprung, and Brown plunged not into oblivion but into world fame. A memorable marching song of the impending Civil War ran, John Brown’s body lies a-mould’ring in the grave, His soul is marching on. The effects of Harpers Ferry were inﬂammatory. In the eyes of the South, already embittered, “Osawatomie Brown” was a wholesale murderer and an apostle of treason. Many southerners asked how they could possibly remain in the Union while a “murderous gang of abolitionists” was ﬁ nancing armed bands to “Brown” them. Moderate northerners, including Republican leaders, openly deplored this mad exploit. But the South naturally concluded that the violent abolitionist view was shared by the entire North, dominated by “Brown-loving” Republicans. Abolitionists and other ardent free-soilers were infuriated by Brown’s execution. Many of them were ignorant of his bloody past and his even more bloody purposes, and they were outraged because the Virginians had hanged so earnest a reformer who was working for so righteous a cause. On the day of his execution,

 free-soil centers in the North tolled bells, ﬁ red guns, lowered ﬂags, and held rallies. Some spoke of “Saint John” Brown, and the serene Ralph Waldo Emerson compared the new martyr-hero with Jesus. The gallows became a cross. E. C. Stedman wrote, And Old Brown, Osawatomie Brown, May trouble you more than ever, when you’ve nailed his cofﬁn down! The ghost of the martyred Brown would not be laid to rest.

The Disruption of
 the Democrats Beyond question the presidential election of 1860 was the most fateful in American history. On it hung the issue of peace or civil war. Deeply divided, the Democrats met in Charleston, South Carolina, with Douglas the leading candidate of the northern wing of the party. But the southern



Chapter 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 1854–1861


 “ﬁ re-eaters” regarded him as a traitor, as a result of his unpopular stand on the Lecompton Constitution and the Freeport Doctrine. After a bitter wrangle over the platform, the delegates from most of the cotton states walked out. When the remainder could not scrape together the necessary two-thirds vote for Douglas, the entire body dissolved. The ﬁ rst tragic secession was the secession of southerners from the Democratic National Convention. Departure became habit-forming. The Democrats tried again in Baltimore. This time the Douglas Democrats, chieﬂy from the North, were ﬁ rmly in the saddle. Many of the cotton-state delegates again took a walk, and the rest of the convention enthusiastically nominated their hero. The platform came out squarely for popular sovereignty and, as a sop to the South, against obstruction of the Fugitive Slave Law by the states. Angered southern Democrats promptly orga nized a rival convention in Baltimore, in which many of the northern states were unrepresented. They selected as their leader the stern-jawed vice president, John C. Breckinridge, a man of moderate views from the border state of Kentucky. The platform favored the extension of slavery into the territories and the annexation of slave-populated Cuba.

Lincoln Hits a Home Run in 1860
 Currier & Ives, the producer of popular, inexpensive colored prints, portrayed Lincoln’s victory over (from left to right) John Bell, Stephen Douglas, and John C. Breckinridge as a baseball game. Baseball developed in New York in the 1840s, and by 1860 the National Association of Baseball Players boasted ﬁfty clubs, several playing regular schedules and charging admission. This cartoon is thought to be the ﬁrst time baseball was used as a metaphor for politics. Note that Lincoln is beardless. By February 1861, when he left Springﬁeld, Illinois, by train for the White House, he was fully bearded, having followed the advice of an eleven-year-old girl from Westﬁeld, New York, who urged him to grow whiskers because “you would look a great deal better for your face is so thin.”

 A middle-of-the-road group, fearing for the Union, hastily orga nized the Constitutional Union party, sneered at as the “Do Nothing” or “Old Gentleman’s” party. It consisted mainly of former Whigs and KnowNothings, a veritable “gathering of graybeards.” Desperately anxious to elect a compromise candidate, they met in Baltimore and nominated for the presidency John Bell of Tennessee. They went into battle ringing hand bells for Bell and waving handbills for “The Union, the Constitution, and the Enforcement of the Laws.”

A
Rail-Splitter Splits the Union
 Elated Republicans, scenting victory in the breeze as their opponents split hopelessly, gathered in Chicago in a huge, boxlike wooden structure called the Wigwam. William H. Seward was by far the best known of the contenders. But his radical utterances, including his “irrepressible conﬂ ict” speech at Rochester in 1858, had ruined his prospects.* His numerous enemies *Seward had referred to an “irrepressible conﬂ ict” between slavery and freedom, though not necessarily a bloody one.

The Election of Lincoln




Table 19.1 Election of 1860
Popular Vote


Percentage of
Popular Vote


Lincoln


1,865,593


39.79%


Douglas
Breckinridge
Bell


1,382,713
848,356
592,906


29.40
18.20
12.61


Candidate


 coined the slogan “Success Rather Than Seward.” Lincoln, the favorite son of Illinois, was deﬁ nitely a “Mr. Second Best,” but he was a stronger candidate because he had made fewer enemies. Overtaking Seward on the third ballot, he was nominated amid scenes of the wildest excitement. The Republican platform had a seductive appeal for just about every important nonsouthern group: for the free-soilers, nonextension of slavery; for the northern manufacturers, a protective tariff; for the immigrants, no abridgment of rights; for the Northwest, a Paciﬁc railroad; for the West, internal improvements at federal expense; and for the farmers, free homesteads from the public domain. Alluring slogans included “Vote Yourselves a Farm” and “Land for the Landless.” Southern secessionists promptly served notice that the election of the “baboon” Lincoln—the “abolitionist” rail-splitter—would split the Union. In fact, “Honest Abe,” though hating slavery, was no outright abolitionist. As late as February 1865, he was inclined to favor cash compensation to the owners of freed slaves. But for the time being, he saw ﬁt, perhaps mistakenly, to issue no statements to quiet southern fears. He had already put himself on record, and fresh statements might stir up fresh antagonisms. As the election campaign ground noisily forward, Lincoln enthusiasts staged roaring rallies and parades, complete with pitch-dripping torches and oilskin capes. They extolled “High Old Abe,” the “Woodchopper of the West,” and the “Little Giant Killer,” while groaning dismally for “Poor Little Doug.” Enthusiastic “Little Giants” and “Little Dougs” retorted with “We want a statesman, not a rail-splitter, as President.” Douglas himself waged a vigorous speaking campaign, even in the South, and threatened to put the noose with his own hands around the neck of the ﬁrst secessionist. The returns, breathlessly awaited, proclaimed a sweeping victory for Lincoln (see Table 19.1).

Electoral Vote
 180 (every vote of the free states except for 3 of New Jersey’s 7 votes) 12 (only Missouri and 3 of New Jersey’s 7 votes) 72 (all the cotton states) 39 (Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee)

The Electoral Upheaval
 of 1860 Awkward “Abe” Lincoln had run a curious race. To a greater degree than any other holder of the nation’s highest ofﬁce (except John Quincy Adams), he was a minority president. Sixty percent of the voters preferred some other candidate. He was also a sectional president, for in ten southern states, where he was not allowed on the ballot, he polled no popular votes. The election of 1860 was virtually two elections: one in the North, the other in the South (see Map 19.3). South Carolinians rejoiced over Lincoln’s victory; they now had their excuse to secede. In winning the North, the “rail-splitter” had split off the South. Douglas, though scraping together only twelve electoral votes, made an impressive showing. Boldly breaking with tradition, he campaigned energetically for himself. (Presidential candidates customarily maintained a digniﬁed silence.) He drew important strength from all sections and ranked a fairly close second in the popular-vote column. In fact, the Douglas Democrats and the Breckinridge Democrats together amassed 365,476 more votes than did Lincoln. A myth persists that if the Democrats had only united behind Douglas, they would have triumphed. Yet the cold ﬁgures tell a different story. Even if the “Little Giant” had received all the electoral votes cast for all three of Lincoln’s opponents, the “rail-splitter” would have won, 169 to 134 instead of 180 to 123. Lincoln still would have carried the populous states of the North and the Northwest. On the other hand, if the Democrats had not broken up, they could have entered the campaign with higher enthusiasm and better orga ni zation and might have won. Signiﬁcantly, the verdict of the ballot box did not indicate a strong sentiment for secession (see Map



Chapter 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 1854–1861


 19.4). Breckinridge, while favoring the extension of slavery, was no disunionist. Although the candidate of the “ﬁ re-eaters,” he polled fewer votes in the slave states than the combined strength of his opponents, Douglas and Bell. He even failed to carry his own Kentucky.

 Yet the South, despite its electoral defeat, was not bad off. It still had a ﬁve-to-four majority on the Supreme Court. Although the Republicans had elected Lincoln, they controlled neither the Senate nor the House of Representatives. The federal government could not touch slavery in those states where it existed

 Map 19.3 Presidential Election of 1860: Electoral Vote by State (top) and Popular Vote by County (bottom) It is a surprising fact that Lincoln, often rated among the greatest presidents, ranks near the bottom in percentage of popular votes. In all the eleven states that seceded, he received only a scattering of one state’s votes—about 1.5 percent in Virginia. The vote by county for Lincoln was virtually all cast in the North. The northern Democrat, Douglas, was also nearly shut out in the South, which divided its votes between Breckinridge and Bell. (Note that only citizens of states could vote; inhabitants of territories could not.)

Interactive Map


WASHINGTON TERRITORY

UNORG. TERR.

 OR

NEBRASKA TERRITORY

MN WI IA

UTAH TERRITORY

KANSAS TERRITORY

 CA

INDIAN TERR.

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

 TX

 IL

MI OH

 IN

 MO

KY TN

AR LA

 MS

 AL

 GA

ME VT 5 NH MA NY 5 13 RI CT 4 PA NJ: R-4 / ND-3 DE VA MD NC SC

 FL

Candidate (Party)
Lincoln
(Republican)
Douglas
(Northern Democrat)
Breckinridge
(Southern Democrat)
Bell
(Constitutional Union)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote




59.4%


1,865,593


39.8%




3.9%


1,382,713


29.5%




23.8%


848,356


18.1%




12.9%


592,906


12.6%


N.H.
VT. R-5 R-5

ME. R-8

 Territories, no returns

WASHINGTON TERR. UNORG. TERR.

OREGON R-3 NEBRASKA TERR.

MINN. R-4 WISC. R-5

MICH. R-6 PA. R-27

IOWA R-4 ILL. R-11

UTAH TERR. CALIF. R-4

KANSAS TERR.

NEW MEXICO TERR.

INDIAN TERR.

MO. ND-9

IND. R-13

OHIO R-23 VA. CU-15

KY. CU-12

N.C.
 SD-10

TENN. CU-12

S.C.
 SD-8

ARK. SD-4 MISS. SD-7

TEXAS SD-4

N.Y.
R-35


ALA. SD-9

GA. SD-10

LA. SD-6 FLA. SD-3

MASS. R-13 R.I. R-4 CONN. N.J. R-6 R-4/ND-3 DEL. SD-3 MD. SD-8

Secession




 Against secession For secession Conventions divided No returns available

Map 19.4 Southern
Opposition to Secession,
 1860–1861 (showing vote by county) This county vote shows the opposition of the antiplanter, antislavery mountain whites in the Appalachian region. There was also considerable resistance to secession in Texas, where Governor Sam Houston, who led the Unionists, was deposed by secessionists.

 VIRGINIA

 TENNESSEE

SOUTH CAROLINA

 ARKANSAS

TE X AS

NORTH CAROLINA

MISS. ALABAMA

 LOUISIANA

 GEORGIA

 FLORIDA

Interactive Map


 except by a constitutional amendment, and such an amendment could be defeated by one-fourth of the states. The ﬁ fteen slave states numbered nearly onehalf of the total—a fact not fully appreciated by southern ﬁ rebrands.

The Secessionist Exodus
 But a tragic chain reaction of secession now began to erupt. South Carolina, which had threatened to go out if the “sectional” Lincoln came in, was as good as its word. Four days after the election of the “Illinois baboon” by “insulting” majorities, its legislature voted unanimously to call a special convention. Meeting at Charleston in December 1860, the convention unanimously voted to secede. During the next six weeks, six other states of the lower South, though somewhat less united, followed the leader over the precipice: Alabama, Mississippi, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas. Four more were to join them later, bringing the total to eleven. With the eyes of destiny upon them, the seven seceders, formally meeting at Montgomery, Alabama, in February 1861, created a government known as the Confederate States of America. As their president they chose Jefferson Davis, a digniﬁed and austere recent member of the U.S. Senate from Mississippi. He was a

 West Pointer and a former cabinet member with wide military and administrative experience; but he suffered from chronic ill health, as well as from a frustrated ambition to be a Napoleonic strategist. The crisis, already critical enough, was deepened by the “lame duck”* interlude. Lincoln, although elected president in November 1860, could not take ofﬁce until four months later, on March 4, 1861. During this period of protracted uncertainty, when he was still a private citizen in Illinois, seven of the eleven deserting states pulled out of the Union. President Buchanan, the aging incumbent, has been blamed for not holding the seceders in the Union by sheer force—for wringing his hands instead of secessionist necks. Never a vigorous man and habitually conser vative, he was now nearly seventy, and although devoted to the Union, he was surrounded by prosouthern advisers. As an able lawyer wedded to the Constitution, he did not believe that the southern states could legally secede. Yet he could ﬁ nd no authority in the Constitution for stopping them with guns. “Oh for one hour of Jackson!” cried the advocates of strong-arm tactics. But “Old Buck” Buchanan was not “Old Hickory,” and he was faced with a far more

 *The “lame duck” period was shortened to ten weeks in 1933 by the Twentieth Amendment (see the Appendix).



Chapter 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 1854–1861


 The state of South Carolina, leader of the secessionist movement, justiﬁed its retreat from the Union in its declaration of independence of December 1860:

“


 We afﬁrm that the ends for which this [Federal] government was instituted have been defeated, and the government itself has been made destructive of them by the action of the non-slaveholding states. . . . For twenty ﬁve years this agitation has been steadily increasing, until it has now secured to its aid the power of the common government. Observing the forms of the constitution, a sectional party has found within that article establishing the executive department the means of subverting the constitution itself.

”


 complex and serious problem. One important reason why he did not resort to force was that the tiny standing army of some ﬁ fteen thousand men, then widely scattered, was urgently needed to control the Indians in the West. Public opinion in the North, at that time, was far from willing to unsheathe the sword. Fighting would merely shatter all prospects of adjustment, and until the guns began to boom, there was still a ﬂicker-

 Three days after Lincoln’s election, Horace Greeley’s inﬂuential New York Tribune (November 9, 1860) declared,

“


 If the cotton States shall decide that they can do better out of the Union than in it, we insist on letting them go in peace. The right to secede may be a revolutionary one, but it exists nevertheless. . . . Whenever a considerable section of our Union shall deliberately resolve to go out, we shall resist all coercive measures designed to keep it in. We hope never to live in a republic, whereof one section is pinned to the residue by bayonets.

”


 After the secession movement got well under way, Greeley’s Tribune changed its tune.

Jefferson Davis (1808–1889), President of the
 Confederacy Faced with grave difﬁculties, he was probably as able a man for the position as the Confederacy could have chosen. Ironically, Davis and Lincoln had both sprung from the same Kentucky soil. The Davis family had moved south from Kentucky, the Lincoln family north.

 ing hope of reconciliation rather than a contested divorce. The weakness lay not so much in Buchanan as in the Constitution and in the Union itself. Ironically, when Lincoln became president in March, he essentially continued Buchanan’s wait-and-see policy.

The Collapse of Compromise
 Impending bloodshed spurred ﬁ nal and frantic attempts at compromise—in the American tradition. The most promising of these efforts was sponsored by Senator John Jordan Crittenden of Kentucky, on whose shoulders had fallen the mantle of a fellow Kentuckian, Henry Clay. The proposed Crittenden amendments to the Constitution were designed to appease the South. Slavery

The Failed Crittenden Compromise


 in the territories was to be prohibited north of 36° 30', but south of that line it was to be given federal protection in all territories existing or “hereafter to be acquired” (such as Cuba). Future states, north or south of 36° 30', could come into the Union with or without slavery, as they should choose. In short, the slavery supporters were to be guaranteed full rights in the southern territories, as long as they were territories, regardless of the wishes of the majority under popular sovereignty. Federal protection in a territory south of 36° 30' might conceivably, though improbably, turn the entire area permanently to slavery. Lincoln ﬂatly rejected the Crittenden scheme, which offered some slight prospect of success, and all hope of compromise evaporated. For this refusal he must bear a heavy responsibility. Yet he had been elected on a platform that opposed the extension of



 One reason why the Crittenden Compromise failed in December 1860 was the prevalence of an attitude reﬂected in a private letter of Senator James Henry Hammond (1807–1864) of South Carolina on April 19:

“


 I ﬁrmly believe that the slave-holding South is now the controlling power of the world—that no other power would face us in hostility. Cotton, rice, tobacco, and naval stores command the world; and we have sense to know it, and are sufﬁciently Teutonic to carry it out successfully. The North without us would be a motherless calf, bleating about, and die of mange and starvation.

 The Eagle’s Nest, 1861 The American eagle jealously guards her nest of states and bids deﬁance to the rebels.

”




Chapter 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 1854–1861


 slavery, and he felt that as a matter of principle, he could not afford to yield, even though gains for slavery in the territories might be only temporary. Larger gains might come later in Cuba and Mexico. Crittenden’s proposal, said Lincoln, “would amount to a perpetual covenant of war against every people, tribe, and state owning a foot of land between here and Tierra del Fuego.” As for the supposedly spineless “Old Fogy” Buchanan, how could he have prevented the Civil War by starting a civil war? No one has yet come up with a satisfactory answer. If he had used force on South Carolina in December 1860, the ﬁghting almost certainly would have erupted three months sooner than it did, and under less favorable circumstances for the Union. The North would have appeared as the heavy-handed aggressor. And the crucial Border States, so vital to the Union, probably would have been driven into the arms of their “wayward sisters.”

Farewell to Union
 Secessionists who parted company with their sister states left for a number of avowed reasons, mostly relating in some way to slavery. They were alarmed by the inexorable tipping of the political balance against them—“the despotic majority of numbers.” The “crime” of the North, observed James Russell Lowell, was the census returns. Southerners were also dismayed by the triumph of the new sectional Republican party, which

 James Russell Lowell (1819–1891), the northern poet and essayist, wrote in the Atlantic Monthly shortly after the secessionist movement began,

“


 The fault of the free States in the eyes of the South is not one that can be atoned for by any yielding of special points here and there. Their offense is that they are free, and that their habits and prepossessions are those of freedom. Their crime is the census of 1860. Their increase in numbers, wealth, and power is a standing aggression. It would not be enough to please the Southern States that we should stop asking them to abolish slavery: what they demand of us is nothing less than that we should abolish the spirit of the age. Our very thoughts are a menace.

”


 seemed to threaten their rights as a slaveholding minority. They were weary of free-soil criticism, abolitionist nagging, and northern interference, ranging from the Underground Railroad to John Brown’s raid. “All we ask is to be let alone,” declared Confederate president Jefferson Davis in an early message to his congress. Many southerners supported secession because they felt sure that their departure would be unopposed, despite “Yankee yawp” to the contrary. They were conﬁdent that the clodhopping and codﬁshing Yankee would not or could not ﬁght. They believed that northern manufacturers and bankers, so heavily dependent on southern cotton and markets, would not dare to cut their own economic throats with their own unionist swords. But should war come, the immense debt owed to northern creditors by the South—happy thought— could be promptly repudiated, as it later was. Southern leaders regarded secession as a golden opportunity to cast aside their generations of “vassalage” to the North. An independent Dixieland could develop its own banking and shipping and trade directly with Europe. The low Tariff of 1857, passed largely by southern votes, was not in itself menacing. But who could tell when the “greedy” Republicans would win control of Congress and drive through their own oppressive protective tariff? For decades this fundamental friction had pitted the North, with its manufacturing plants, against the South, with its agricultural exports. Worldwide impulses of nationalism—then stirring in Italy, Germany, Poland, and elsewhere—were fermenting in the South. This huge area, with its distinctive culture, was not so much a section as a subnation. It could not view with complacency the possibility of being lorded over, then or later, by what it regarded as a hostile nation of northerners. The principles of self-determination—of the Declaration of Independence—seemed to many southern-

Regarding the Civil War, the London Times
 (November 7, 1861) editorialized,

“


 The contest is really for empire on the side of the North, and for independence on that of the South, and in this respect we recognize an exact analogy between the North and the Government of George III, and the South and the Thirteen Revolted Provinces.

”


Chronology


 ers to apply perfectly to them. Few, if any, of the seceders felt that they were doing anything wrong or immoral. The thirteen original states had voluntarily entered the Union, and now seven—ultimately eleven—southern states were voluntarily withdrawing from it. Historical parallels ran even deeper. In 1776 thirteen American colonies, led by the rebel George Washington, had seceded from the British Empire by



 throwing off the yoke of King George III. In 1860–1861, eleven American states, led by the rebel Jefferson Davis, were seceding from the Union by throwing off the yoke of “King” Abraham Lincoln. With that burden gone, the South was conﬁdent that it could work out its own peculiar destiny more quietly, happily, and prosperously.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Harriet Beecher Stowe publishes Uncle Tom’s Cabin

1853–


Crimean War in Russia




Kansas-Nebraska Act
 Republican party forms



 Buchanan defeats Frémont and Fillmore for presidency Sumner beaten by Brooks in Senate chamber Brown’s Pottawatomie Massacre

1856–


 Civil war in “bleeding Kansas”



 Dred Scott decision Lecompton Constitution rejected

KEY TERMS
Uncle Tom’s Cabin (437) The Impending Crisis of the South (439) New Eng land Emigrant Aid Company (440) Lecompton Constitution (441) Bleeding Kansas (442) Dred Scott v. Stanford (445) panic of 1857 (446) Tariff of 1857 (447) 


Panic of 1857
Tariff of 1857
 Hinton R. Helper publishes The Impending Crisis of the South



 Lincoln-Douglas debates



 Brown raids Harpers Ferry



 Lincoln wins four-way race for presidency South Carolina secedes from Union Crittenden Compromise fails



 Seven seceding states form Confederate States of America

PEOPLE TO KNOW
Lincoln-Douglas debates (448) Freeport question (449) Freeport Doctrine (449) Harpers Ferry (450) Constitutional Union party (452) Confederate States of America (455) Crittenden amendments (456) 
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Henry Ward Beecher
James Buchanan
Charles Sumner
Preston S. Brooks
Dred Scott


Roger B. Taney
Stephen A. Douglas
Abraham Lincoln
John Brown
John C. Breckinridge
John Jordan Crittenden




Chapter 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 1854–1861


The Civil War: Repressible or Irrepressible?


F


 ew topics have generated as much controversy among American historians as the causes of the Civil War. Looming over the entire debate is the stark fact the United States was the only slaveowning society that had to ﬁght a war to rid itself of slavery. The very names employed to describe the conﬂ ict— notably “Civil War” or “War Between the States” or even “War for Southern Independence”—reveal much about the various authors’ points of view. Interpretations of the great conﬂ ict have naturally differed according to section and have been charged with both emotional and moral fervor. Yet despite long and keen interest in the origins of the conﬂ ict, the causes of the Civil War remain as passionately debated today as they were a century ago. The so-called Nationalist School of the late nineteenth century, typiﬁed in the work of historian James Ford Rhodes, claimed that slavery caused the Civil War. Defending the necessity and inevitability of the war, these northern-oriented historians credited the conﬂ ict with ending slavery and preserving the Union. But in the early twentieth century, progressive historians, led by Charles and Mary Beard, presented a more skeptical interpretation. The Beards argued that the war was not fought over slavery per se, but rather was a deeply rooted economic struggle between an industrial North and an agricultural South. Anointing the Civil War the “Second American Revolution,” the Beards claimed that the war precipitated vast changes in American class relations and shifted the political balance of power by magnifying the inﬂuence of business magnates and industrialists while destroying the plantation aristocracy of the South. Shaken by the disappointing results of World War I, a new wave of historians argued that the Civil War, too, had actually been a big mistake. Rejecting the nationalist interpretation that the clash was inevitable, James G. Randall and Avery Craven asserted that the war had been a “repressible conﬂ ict.” Neither slavery nor the economic differences between North and South were sufﬁcient causes for war. Instead Craven and others attributed the bloody confrontation to the breakdown of political institutions, the passion of

 overzealous reformers, and the ineptitude of a blundering generation of political leaders. Following the Second World War, however, a neonationalist view regained authority, echoing the earlier views of Rhodes in depicting the Civil War as an unavoidable conﬂ ict between two societies, one slave and one free. For Allan Nevins and David M. Potter, irreconcilable differences in morality, politics, culture, social values, and economies increasingly eroded the ties between the sections and inexorably set the United States on the road to Civil War. Eric Foner and Eugene Genovese emphasized each section’s nearly paranoid fear that the survival of its distinctive way of life was threatened by the expansion of the other section. In Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men (1970), Foner emphasized that most northerners detested slavery not because it enslaved blacks, but because its existence—and particularly its rapid extension—threatened the position of free white laborers. This “free labor ideology” increasingly became the foundation stone upon which the North claimed its superiority over the South. Eugene Genovese has argued that the South felt similarly endangered. Convinced that the southern labor system was more humane than the northern factory system, southerners saw northern designs to destroy their way of life lurking at every turn—and every territorial battle. Some historians have placed party politics at the center of their explanations for the war. For them, no event was more consequential than the breakdown of the Jacksonian party system. When the slavery issue tore apart both the Democratic and the Whig parties, the last ligaments binding the nation together were snapped, and the war inevitably came. More recently, historians of the “Ethnocultural School,” especially Michael Holt, have acknowledged the signiﬁcance of the collapse of the established parties, but have offered a different analysis of how that breakdown led to war. They have noted that the two great national parties before the 1850s focused attention on issues such as the tariff, banking, and internal improvements, thereby muting sectional differences

To Learn More


 over slavery. According to this argument, the erosion of the traditional party system was due not to growing differences over slavery, but to a temporary consensus between the two parties in the 1850s on almost all national issues other than slavery. In this peculiar political at mosphere, the slavery issue rose to the fore, encouraging the emergence of Republicans in the



 North and secessionists in the South. In the absence of regular, national, two-party conﬂ ict over economic issues, purely regional parties (like the Republicans) coalesced. They identiﬁed their opponents not simply as competitors for power but as threats to their way of life, even to the life of the Republic itself.

To Learn More
Frederick J. Blue, Charles Sumner and the Conscience of the
North (1994)
Nicole Etcheson, Bleeding Kansas: Contested Liberty in the
Civil War Era (2004)
 Paul Finkelman, ed., And His Soul Goes Marching On: Responses to John Brown and the Harpers Ferry Raid (1995) Joan Hedrick, Harriet Beecher Stowe: A Life (1994) Ward M. McAfee, ed., The Slaveholding Republic (2001) Stephen B. Oates, To Purge This Land with Blood (1970)

Kenneth M. Stampp, America in 1857: A Nation on the
Brink (1990)
 Harriet Beecher Stowe, Uncle Tom’s Cabin (1852)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Girding for War:
The North and
 the South




1861–1865
 I consider the central idea pervading this struggle is the necessity that is upon us, of proving that popular government is not an absurdity. We must settle this question now, whether in a free government the minority have the right to break up the government whenever they choose. If we fail it will go far to prove the incapability of the people to govern themselves.

A


 braham Lincoln solemnly took the presidential oath of ofﬁce on March 4, 1861, after having slipped into Washington at night, partially disguised to thwart assassins. He thus became president not of the United States of America, but of the dis-United States of America. Seven had already departed; eight more teetered on the edge. The girders of the unﬁ nished Capitol dome loomed nakedly in the background, as if to symbolize the imperfect state of the Union. Before the nation was restored—and the slaves freed at last—the American people would endure four years of anguish and bloodshed, and Lincoln would face tortuous trials of leadership such as have been visited upon few presidents.

The Menace of Secession
 Lincoln’s inaugural address was ﬁ rm yet conciliatory: there would be no conﬂict unless the South provoked it. Secession, the president declared, was wholly impractical, because “physically speaking, we cannot separate.” Here Lincoln put his ﬁ nger on a profound geographical truth. The North and South were Siamese twins, bound inseparably together. If they had been divided by the Pyrenees or the Danube River, a sectional divorce might have been more feasible. But the Appalachian Mountains and the mighty Mississippi River both ran the wrong way.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Attack on Fort Sumter


Secretary of State William H. Seward (1801–1872)
 entertained the dangerous idea that if the North picked a ﬁght with one or more European nations, the South would once more rally around the ﬂag. On April Fools’ Day, 1861, he submitted to Lincoln a memorandum:

“


 I would demand explanations from Spain and France, categorically, at once. I would seek explanations from Great Britain and Russia. . . . And, if satisfactory explanations are not received from Spain and France . . . would convene Congress and declare war against them.

”


 Lincoln quietly but ﬁrmly quashed Seward’s scheme.

 Uncontested secession would create new controversies. What share of the national debt should the South be forced to take with it? What portion of the jointly held federal territories, if any, should the Confederate states be allotted—areas so largely won with Southern blood? How would the fugitive-slave issue be resolved? The Underground Railroad would certainly redouble its activity, and it would have to transport its passengers only across the Ohio River, not all the way to Canada. Was it conceivable that all such problems could have been solved without ugly armed clashes? A united United States had hitherto been the paramount republic in the Western Hemisphere. If this powerful democracy should break into two hostile parts, the European nations would be delighted. They could gleefully transplant to America their ancient concept of the balance of power. Playing the no-lessancient game of divide and conquer, they could incite one snarling fragment of the dis-United States against the other. The colonies of the European powers in the New World, notably those of Britain, would thus be made safer against the rapacious Yankees. And European imperialists, with no uniﬁed republic to stand across their path, could more easily defy the Monroe Doctrine and seize territory in the Americas.

South Carolina Assails
Fort Sumter
 The issue of the divided Union came to a head over the matter of federal forts in the South. As the seceding states left, they seized the United States’ arsenals,



 mints, and other public property within their borders. When Lincoln took ofﬁce, only two signiﬁcant forts in the South still ﬂew the Stars and Stripes. The more important of the pair was square-walled Fort Sumter, in Charleston harbor, with fewer than a hundred men. Ominously, the choices presented to Lincoln by Fort Sumter were all bad. This stronghold had provisions that would last only a few weeks—until the middle of April 1861. If no supplies were forthcoming, its commander would have to surrender without ﬁ ring a shot. Lincoln, quite understandably, did not feel that such a weak-kneed course squared with his obligation to protect federal property. But if he sent reinforcements, the South Carolinians would undoubtedly ﬁght back; they could not tolerate a federal fort blocking the mouth of their most important Atlantic seaport. After agonizing indecision, Lincoln adopted a middle-of-the-road solution. He notiﬁed the South Carolin ians that an expedition would be sent to provision the garrison, though not to reinforce it. He promised “no effort to throw in men, arms, and ammunition.” But to Southern eyes “provision” still spelled “reinforcement.” A Union naval force was next started on its way to Fort Sumter—a move that the South regarded as an act of aggression. On April 12, 1861, the cannon of the Carolinians opened ﬁ re on the fort, while crowds in Charleston applauded and waved handkerchiefs. After a thirty-four-hour bombardment, which took no lives, the dazed garrison surrendered. The shelling of the fort electriﬁed the North, which at once responded with cries of “Remember Fort Sumter” and “Save the Union.” Hitherto countless Northerners had been saying that if the Southern states wanted to go, they should not be pinned to the rest of the nation with bayonets. “Wayward sisters, depart in peace” was a common sentiment, expressed even by the commander of the army, war hero General Winﬁeld Scott, now so feeble at seventy-ﬁve that he had to be boosted onto his horse. But the assault on Fort Sumter provoked the North to a ﬁghting pitch: the fort was lost, but the Union was saved. Lincoln had turned a tactical defeat into a calculated victory. Southerners had wantonly ﬁ red upon the glorious Stars and Stripes, and honor demanded an armed response. Lincoln promptly (April 15) issued a call to the states for seventy-ﬁve thousand militiamen, and volunteers sprang to the colors in such enthusiastic numbers that many were turned away—a mistake that was not often repeated. On April 19 and 27, the president proclaimed a leaky blockade of Southern seaports.



Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


Fort Sumter, South
Carolina, April 1861
 The interior of Fort Sumter, in Charleston harbor, shortly after the Union’s beleaguered force surrendered and ﬂed. Confederate soldiers pose in front of the fort’s bombarded walls while their ﬂag ﬂies victoriously above them.

 The call for troops, in turn, aroused the South much as the attack on Fort Sumter had aroused the North. Lincoln was now waging war—from the Southern view an aggressive war—on the Confederacy. Virginia, Arkansas, and Tennessee, all of which had earlier voted down secession, reluctantly joined their embattled sister states, as did North Carolina (see Map 20.1). Thus the seven states became eleven as the “submissionists” and “Union shriekers” were overcome. Richmond, Virginia, replaced Montgomery, Alabama, as the Confederate capital—too near Washington for strategic comfort on either side.

 and increase by nearly half its supply of horses and mules. The strategic prize of the Ohio River ﬂowed along the northern border of Kentucky and West Virginia. Two of its navigable tributaries, the Cumberland and Tennessee Rivers, penetrated deep into the heart of Dixie, where much of the Confederacy’s grain, gunpowder, and iron was produced. Small wonder that Lincoln reportedly said he hoped to have God on his side, but he had to have Kentucky. In dealing with the Border States, President Lincoln did not rely solely on moral suasion but successfully used methods of dubious legality. In Maryland he de-

Brothers’ Blood and
Border Blood
 The only slave states left were the crucial Border States. This group consisted of Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, Delaware, and later West Virginia—the “mountain white” area that somewhat illegally tore itself from the side of Virginia in mid-1861. If the North had ﬁ red the ﬁ rst shot, some or all of these doubtful states probably would have seceded, and the South might well have succeeded. The border group actually contained a white population more than half that of the entire Confederacy. Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri would almost double the manufacturing capacity of the South

 Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865), Kentucky-born like Jefferson Davis, was aware of Kentucky’s crucial importance. In September 1861 he remarked,

“


 I think to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game. Kentucky gone, we cannot hold Missouri, nor, I think, Maryland. These all against us, and the job on our hands is too large for us. We would as well consent to separation at once, including the surrender of this capital [Washington].

”




The Crucial Border States


90°W


 MINN.

L.


 Seceded after fall of Fort Sumter an L. Michig

IOWA ILLINOIS

N


OHIO MD. W.VA.

N.J.


R.I.
 CONN.

 DEL.

 (1863) VIRGINIA

 MISS.



 LA.



Jan. 9,


SOUTH CAROLINA

 ALABAMA



Jan. 11,


Jan. 26,


Washington, D.C.


 NORTH 10 CAROLINA May 20,1861

June 8,1861




Feb. 1,1861


Apr. 17,1861


 TENNESSEE 11



May 6,




 KENTUCKY

 ARKANSAS

TEX A S 30°N

 e

 IC

INDIAN TERRITORY

 MASS.

N.Y.


 PA.

(1861)


 MISSOURI

(1861)


 IND.

 KANSAS

(1861)


N. MEX. TERR.

 ri L. E

N.H.


 o



GEORGIA
Dec. 20,1860 
 NT

COLORADO TERRITORY

 nt ar i L. O

 MICH.

 LA

40°N


 ro n

Map 20.1 Seceding States
 (with dates and order of secession) Note the long interval—nearly six months— between the secession of South Carolina, the ﬁrst state to go, and that of Tennessee, the last state to leave the Union. These six months were a time of terrible trial for moderate Southerners. When a Georgia statesman pleaded for restraint and negotiations with Washington, he was rebuffed with the cry, “Throw the bloody spear into this den of incendiaries!”

 WIS.

 Order and date of secession

Hu


 Free state or territory

ME. VT.

L.


 Slave state loyal to the Union

70°W


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA ( C A N A DA )

 AN

 Seceded before fall of Fort Sumter

80°W
Superior


 OCE

100°W


 AT

110°W




Jan. 19,


 FLA.



Gulf of Mexico


M EXICO





400 Km.


Jan. 10,
400 Mi.


Interactive Map


 clared martial law where needed and sent in troops, because this state threatened to cut off Washington from the North. Lincoln also deployed Union soldiers in western Virginia and notably in Missouri, where they fought beside Unionists in a local civil war within the larger Civil War. Any ofﬁcial statement of the North’s war aims was profoundly inﬂuenced by the teetering Border States. At the very outset, Lincoln was obliged to declare publicly that he was not ﬁghting to free the blacks. An antislavery declaration would no doubt have driven the Border States into the welcoming arms of the South. An antislavery war was also extremely unpopular in the so-called Butternut region of southern Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. That area had been settled largely by Southerners who had carried their racial prejudices with them when they had crossed the Ohio River (see “Makers of America: Settlers of the Old Northwest,” pp. 260– 261). It was to be a hotbed of pro-Southern sentiment throughout the war. Sensitive to this delicate political calculus, Lincoln insisted repeatedly—even though undercutting his moral high ground—that his paramount purpose was to save the Union at all costs. Thus the war began not as one between slave soil and free

 soil, but one for the Union—with slaveholders on both sides and many proslavery sympathizers in the North. Slavery also colored the character of the war in the West. In Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma), most of the Five Civilized Tribes—the Cherokees, Creeks, Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Seminoles—sided with the Confederacy. Some of these Indians, notably the Cherokees, owned slaves and thus felt themselves to be making common cause with the slaveowning South. To secure their loyalty, the Confederate government

 Lincoln wrote to the antislavery editor Horace Greeley in August 1862, even as he was about to announce the Emancipation Proclamation,

“


 If I could save the Union without freeing any slave, I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves, I would do it; and if I could do it by freeing some and leaving others alone, I would also do that.

”




Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


 north to ﬁght with the Blue, another south to ﬁght with the Gray. Senator Crittenden of Kentucky, who had fathered the abortive Crittenden Compromise, also had fathered two sons: one became a general in the Union army, the other a general in the Confederate army. Lincoln’s own Kentucky-born wife had four brothers who fought for the Confederacy.

The Balance of Forces


 Friendly Enemies The man on the right is George Armstrong Custer. The youngest general in the Union army, this brilliant young ofﬁcer survived the Civil War only to lose his life and that of every soldier under his command to Sioux warriors at the Battle of the Little Bighorn in 1876—“Custer’s Last Stand.” The man on the left is a Southern soldier and prisoner of war. He and Custer had been classmates at West Point.

 agreed to take over federal payments to the tribes and invited the Native Americans to send delegates to the Confederate congress. In return the tribes supplied troops to the Confederate army. Meanwhile, a rival faction of Cherokees and most of the Plains Indians sided with the Union, only to be rewarded after the war with a relentless military campaign to herd them onto reservations or into oblivion. Unhappily, the conﬂ ict between “Billy Yank” and “Johnny Reb” was a brothers’ war (see “Makers of America: Billy Yank and Johnny Reb,” pp. 468–469). There were many Northern volunteers from the Southern states and many Southern volunteers from the Northern states. The “mountain whites” of the South sent north some 50,000 men, and the loyal slave states contributed some 300,000 soldiers to the Union. In many a family of the Border States, one brother rode

 When war broke out, the South seemed to have great advantages. The Confederacy could ﬁght defensively behind interior lines. The North had to invade the vast territory of the Confederacy, conquer it, and drag it bodily back into the Union. In fact, the South did not have to win the war in order to win its independence. If it merely fought the invaders to a draw and stood ﬁ rm, Confederate independence would be won. Fighting on their own soil for self-determination and preservation of their way of life, Southerners at ﬁ rst enjoyed an advantage in morale as well. Militarily, the South from the opening volleys of the war had the most talented ofﬁcers. Most conspicuous among a dozen or so ﬁ rst-rate commanders was gray-haired General Robert E. Lee, whose knightly bearing and chivalric sense of honor embodied the Southern ideal. Lincoln had unofﬁcially offered him command of the Northern armies, but when Virginia seceded, Lee felt honor-bound to go with his native state. Lee’s chief lieutenant for much of the war was black-bearded Thomas J. (“Stonewall”) Jackson, a gifted tactical theorist and a master of speed and deception. Besides their brilliant leaders, ordinary Southerners were also bred to ﬁght. Accustomed to managing horses and bearing arms from boyhood, they made excellent cavalrymen and foot soldiers. Their highpitched “rebel yell” (“yeeeahhh”) was designed to strike terror into the hearts of fuzz-chinned Yankee recruits. “There is nothing like it on this side of the infernal region,” one Northern soldier declared. “The peculiar corkscrew sensation that it sends down your backbone can never be told. You have to feel it.” As one immense farm, the South seemed to be handicapped by the scarcity of factories. Yet by seizing federal weapons, running Union blockades, and developing their own ironworks, Southerners managed to obtain sufﬁcient weaponry. “Yankee ingenuity” was not conﬁ ned to Yankees. Nevertheless, as the war dragged on, grave shortages of shoes, uniforms, and blankets disabled the

The Confederate Balance Sheet




 The Technology of War One of the new machines of destruction that made the Civil War the ﬁrst mechanized war, this eight-and-a-half ton federal mortar sat on a railroad ﬂatcar in Petersburg, Virginia, ready to hurl two-hundred-pound missiles as far as two and a half miles. This powerful artillery piece rode on the tracks of a captured Southern railroad—itself another artifact of modern technology that ﬁgured heavily in the war. Of the 31,256 miles of railroad track in the United States in 1861, less than 30 percent, or 9,283 miles, were in the Confederate states, soon reduced by Union capture and destruction to 6,000 miles. The Confederate government’s failure to understand the military importance of railroads contributed substantially to its defeat.

 South. Even with immense stores of food on Southern farms, civilians and soldiers often went hungry because of supply problems. “Forward, men! They have cheese in their haversacks,” cried one Southern ofﬁcer as he attacked the Yankees. Much of the hunger was caused by a breakdown of the South’s rickety transportation system, especially where the railroad tracks were cut or destroyed by the Yankee invaders. The economy was the greatest Southern weakness; it was the North’s greatest strength. The North was not only a huge farm but a sprawling factory as well (see

 Table 20.1). Yankees boasted about three-fourths of the nation’s wealth, including three-fourths of the thirty thousand miles of railroads. The North also controlled the sea. With its vastly superior navy, it established a blockade that, though a sieve at ﬁ rst, soon choked off Southern supplies and eventually shattered Southern morale. Its sea power also enabled the North to exchange huge quantities of grain for munitions and supplies from Europe, thus adding the output from the factories of Europe to its own.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
Yank TheBilly Great Africanand Johnny Reb American Migration 
T


 he Prussian general Helmuth von Moltke (1800– 1891) allegedly remarked that the American Civil War was merely a contest waged by “armed mobs.” Whether he meant it or not, the Prussian’s famous insult actually contains an important insight. Unlike the professional standing armies of nineteenth-century Europe, the Civil War armies were overwhelmingly amateur and volunteer. Taken from all walks of life, citizen-soldiers gave the Civil War drama its uniquely plebeian cast. With 2 million men in Union blue and 1 million men in Confederate gray, Civil War soldiers represented a vast cross section of American society. (At nearly 10 percent of the 1860 population, the same rate of mobilization would amount to more than 27 million troops today.) Most soldiers had been farmers or farm laborers. Poor unskilled workers, despite vehement antidraft rhetoric to the contrary, were actually underrepresented. Most troops were native-born, but immigrants did serve in rough proportion to their presence in the general population. Black ﬁghting men accounted for about 10 percent of Union enlistments by war’s end (see “Blacks Battle Bondage,” pp. 490–492). Perhaps onethird of the soldiers were married. Nearly 40 percent were under twenty-two years of age at the time of enlistment.

A
Union Private 



 Inheritors of the values of Jacksonian mass democracy and Victorian sentiments, Civil War citizen-soldiers brought strong ideological commitments to the struggle. Neither army regulars nor reluctant conscripts, these men fought in the name of country, duty, honor, manhood, and righteousness. Though enemies, Union and Confederate soldiers shared a common commitment to the patriotic “spirit of ’76” and the cause of liberty, independence, and republican government. A man’s moral obligation to defend his country and preserve his personal reputation provided added motivation. Many interpreted the war as a religious crusade. In short, convictions, not coercion, created Civil War armies. Despite their similarities, “Billy Yank” (the ordinary Union soldier) and “Johnny Reb” (the typical Confederate) were not necessarily cut from the same cloth. Both armies reﬂected the societies from which they came. Billy Yank tended to be more literate, intellectual, practical, and efﬁcient, while Johnny Reb was often more jocular, emotional, religious, and personally concerned about the war. Defense of home and hearth meant more to Confederate troops, for the simple reason that most of the ﬁghting occurred on Southern soil. Above all else, the men in gray maintained a distinctive rural individualism and homegrown disrespect for authority. Their counterparts in blue, often familiar with the strict regimen of Northern cities and factories, adapted more quickly to army discipline. One aspect of soldiering Johnny Reb and Billy Yank shared was the dull routine of camp life. For all its promises of adventure, the life of a Civil War soldier could be downright boring and unpleasant. Men spent ﬁ fty days in camp for every one in battle. Reveille, roll call, and drill were daily chores. A soldier’s ﬁ rst concern was usually his stomach, even when pork (“sowbelly”), beef (“salt horse”), coffee, and bread (or its unwelcome substitute, “hardtack”) were in abundance. Food shortages plagued both armies, especially the Confederates as the war progressed. Uniforms deteriorated from “ﬁ nery” to “tatters,” as did moral standards. Gambling, drinking, stealing, swearing, and Sabbath-breaking proliferated; even widespread religious revivals could not keep up. The gravest hardship of all, however, was disease. Germs—especially camp and campaign maladies like dysentery, diarrhea, typhoid, and malaria—took twice

A
Confederate Soldier 

 as many lives as bullets. By modern standards the mortality rates of wounded soldiers were appallingly high. (World War II marked the ﬁ rst time in American warfare that more soldiers died from combat wounds than from sickness and disease.) Without proper medical understanding of sterilization or sanitation, the risk of sepsis (bacterial infection) accompanied every wound. Head, chest, and stomach wounds were usually considered fatal; arm and leg injuries often resulted in amputation. Only the presence of nurses made life in ﬁeld hospitals tolerable. Overcoming the vocal hostility of male army doctors and the ﬁ lth, stench, and agony of these hospitals, some twenty thousand women volunteered as nurses during the war. Working with the maimed and the dying was never pleasant, but female

 nurses earned the respect of countless wounded soldiers for their dedicated ser vice. Yet for all its brutality, not even the ﬁeld hospital could match the traumatic experience of combat. Tension mounted in the ﬁ nal moments before battle, as ofﬁcers strove to maintain close-order ranks in the face of harrowing enemy gunﬁ re. Artillery shells blanketed the battleﬁeld with a smoky haze. Bullets zinged through the air like a driv ing rain. Once soldiers joined the action, a rush of adrenaline could transform frightened civilians into frenzied and ferocious ﬁghters. First-timers likened the experience to “seeing the elephant” (an antebellum expression of awe). One sight of mangled limbs or one whiff of decaying ﬂesh was often enough to push men over the edge. “Even when I sleep,” a Massachusetts soldier moaned, “I hear the whistling of the shells and the shouts and groans, and to sum it up in two [sic] words it is horrible.” Given the extraordinary stress of battle, many men avoided combat as much as they could. Shell-shocked and weary, most soldiers returned home from the war utterly transformed. For nearly a decade and a half, silence reigned, as veterans and civilians entered into a tacit agreement to put the ordeal behind them. By 1880 interest revived in the war, and a new battle over its proper meaning commenced. Ignoring the conﬂ ict’s original signiﬁcance as a moral victory for slave emancipation, many Americans embraced a new reconciliationist and white supremacist script. In the interest of sectional harmony and national prosperity, Northerners abandoned earlier commitments to black rights. A reunion of sections spelled a division of races. Casting aside their original ideological convictions, many Americans came to regard the conﬂ ict as a tragic brothers’ war meaningful only for its show of martial valor. Principles that had compelled 3 million men to enlist and caused 620,000 to die were largely forgotten. Instead a sentimental, sanitized, and whitened version of the Civil War became commonplace by the late nineteenth century. Von Moltke’s “armed mobs” came to be remembered as the noblest of knights.

 Leg Amputation on the Battleﬁelds of Virginia A surgeon wearing a hat and a sword amputates the leg of a wounded soldier, while an anesthetist (facing the camera) holds a sponge dipped in chloroform over the patient’s nose. A surgical assistant ties a tourniquet to stem the ﬂow of blood. Other soldiers, dressed in Zouave uniforms modeled on North African designs, which were popular among some Northern and Southern regiments, watch closely, likely aware of the dangers accompanying such crude surgery. An estimated 30 percent of amputees died from postoperative complications, most often infections.



Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


Table 20.1 Manufacturing by Sections, 1860
Section
 New Eng land Middle states Western states Southern states Paciﬁc states Territories total

Number of
Establishments


Capital Invested


Average Number
 of Laborers

Annual Value
 of Products

20,671
53,387
36,785
20,631
8,777
140,533


$ 257,477,783
435,061,964
194,212,543
95,975,185
23,380,334
3,747,906
$1,009,855,715


391,836
546,243
209,909
110,721
50,204
2,333
1,311,246


$ 468,599,287
802,338,392
384,606,530
155,531,281
71,229,989
3,556,197
$1,885,861,676


Recruiting Immigrants for the Union Army
 This poster in several languages appeals to immigrants to enlist. Immigrant manpower provided the Union with both industrial and military muscle.

Percentage of
Total Value
24.8%
42.5
20.4
8.3
3.8
0.2


 The Union also enjoyed a much larger reserve of manpower. The loyal states had a population of some 22 million; the seceding states had 9 million people, including about 3.5 million slaves. Adding to the North’s overwhelming supply of soldiery were ever-more immigrants from Europe, who continued to pour into the North even during the war (see Table 20.2). Over 800,000 newcomers arrived between 1861 and 1865, most of them British, Irish, and German. Large numbers of them were induced to enlist in the Union army. Altogether about one-ﬁ fth of the Union forces were foreignborn, and in some units military commands were given in four different languages. Whether immigrant or native, ordinary Northern boys were much less prepared than their Southern counterparts for military life. Yet the Northern “clodhoppers” and “shopkeepers” eventually adjusted themselves to soldiering and became known for their discipline and determination. The North was much less fortunate in its higher commanders. Lincoln was forced to use a costly trialand-error method to sort out effective leaders from the many incompetent political ofﬁcers, until he ﬁ nally uncovered a general, Ulysses Simpson Grant, who was determined to slog his way to victory at whatever cost in life and limb. In the long run, as the Northern strengths were brought to bear, they outweighed those of the South. But when the war began, the chances for Southern independence were unusually favorable—certainly better than the prospects for success of the thirteen colonies in 1776. The turn of a few events could easily have produced a different outcome. The might-have-beens are fascinating. If the Border States had seceded, if the uncertain states of the upper Mississippi Valley had turned against the Union,

The Threat of European Intervention




Table 20.2 Immigration to United States, 1860–1866
Year


Total


Britain


Ireland


Germany


All Others


1865*


153,640
91,918
91,985
176,282
193,418
248,120
318,568


29,737
19,675
24,639
66,882
53,428
82,465
94,924


48,637
23,797
23,351
55,916
63,523
29,772
36,690


54,491
31,661
27,529
33,162
57,276
83,424
115,892


20,775
16,785
16,466
20,322
19,191
52,459
71,062


 *Only the ﬁ rst three months of 1865 were war months.

 if a wave of Northern defeatism had demanded an armistice, and if Britain and/or France had broken the Union’s naval blockade of Southern ports, the South might well have won. All of these possibilities almost became realities, but none of them actually occurred, and lacking their impetus, the South could not hope to win.

Dethroning King Cotton
 Successful revolutions, including the American Revolution of 1776, have generally succeeded because of foreign intervention. The South counted on it, did not get it, and lost. Of all the Confederacy’s potential assets, none counted more weightily than the prospect of foreign intervention. Europe’s ruling classes were openly sympathetic to the Confederate cause. They had long abhorred the incendiary example of the American democratic experiment, and they cherished a kind of fellow-feeling for the South’s semifeudal, aristocratic social order. In contrast, the masses of working people in Britain, and to some extent in France, were pulling and praying for the North. Many of them had read Uncle Tom’s Cabin, and they sensed that the war—though at the outset ofﬁcially fought only over the question of union—might extinguish slavery if the North emerged victorious. The common folk of Britain could not yet cast the ballot, but they could cast the brick. Their certain hostility to any ofﬁcial intervention on behalf of the South evidently had a sobering effect on the British government. Thus the dead hands of Uncle Tom helped Uncle Sam by restraining the British and French ironclads from piercing the Union blockade. Yet the fact re-

 mained that British textile mills depended on the American South for 75 percent of their cotton supplies. Wouldn’t silent looms force London to speak? Humanitarian sympathies aside, Southerners counted on hard economic need to bring Britain to their aid. Why did King Cotton fail them? He failed in part because he had been so lavishly productive in the immediate prewar years of 1857– 1860. Enormous exports of cotton in those years had piled up surpluses in British warehouses. When the shooting started in 1861, British manufacturers had on hand a hefty oversupply of ﬁber. The real pinch did not come until about a year and a half later, when thousands of hungry operatives were thrown out of work. But by this time Lincoln had announced his slaveemancipation policy, and the “wage slaves” of Britain were not going to demand a war to defend the slaveowners of the South.

 The American minister to Britain wrote,

“


 The great body of the aristocracy and the commercial classes are anxious to see the United States go to pieces [but] the middle and lower class sympathise with us [because they] see in the convulsion in America an era in the history of the world, out of which must come in the end a general recognition of the right of mankind to the produce of their labor and the pursuit of happiness.

”




Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


 The direst effects of the “cotton famine” in Britain were relieved in several ways. Hunger among unemployed workers was partially eased when certain kindhearted Americans sent over several cargoes of foodstuffs. As Union armies penetrated the South, they captured or bought considerable supplies of cotton and shipped them to Britain; the Confederates also ran a limited quantity through the blockade. In addition, the cotton growers of Egypt and India, responding to high prices, increased their output and captured a share of the world cotton market that they held on to well after the war’s conclusion. Finally, booming war industries in Eng land, which supplied both the North and the South, relieved unemployment. King Wheat and King Corn—the monarchs of Northern agriculture—proved to be more potent potentates than King Cotton. During these war years, the

 As the Civil War neared the end of its third year, the London Times (January 7, 1864) could boast,

“


 We are as busy, as rich, and as fortunate in our trade as if the American war had never broken out, and our trade with the States had never been disturbed. Cotton was no King, notwithstanding the prerogatives which had been loudly claimed for him.

”


 North, blessed with ideal weather, produced bountiful crops of grain and harvested them with McCormick’s mechanical reaper. In the same period, the British suffered a series of bad harvests. They were forced to import huge quantities of grain from America, which happened to have the cheapest and most abundant supply. If the British had broken the blockade to gain cotton, they would have provoked the North to war and would have lost this precious granary. Unemployment for some seemed better than hunger for all. Hence one Yankee journal could exult, Wave the stars and stripes high o’er us, Let every freeman sing . . . Old King Cotton’s dead and buried; brave young Corn is King.

The Decisiveness
 of Diplomacy

 The Pending Conﬂict, 1863 Great Britain and France look on while the Americans struggle. Despite repeated pleas from Confederate diplomats for recognition and aid, both France and Britain refrained from intervening in the American conﬂict—not least because of the Union’s demonstrated strength on the battleﬁeld and its economic importance to European importers.

 America’s diplomatic front has seldom been so critical as during the Civil War. The South never wholly abandoned its dream of foreign intervention, and Europe’s rulers schemed to take advantage of America’s distress. The ﬁ rst major crisis with Britain came over the Trent affair, late in 1861. A Union warship cruising on the high seas north of Cuba stopped a British mail steamer, the Trent, and forcibly removed two Confederate diplomats bound for Europe. Britons were outraged: upstart Yankees could not so boldly offend the Mistress of the Seas. War preparations buzzed, and red-coated troops embarked for Canada, with bands blaring “I Wish I Was in Dixie.” The London Foreign Ofﬁce prepared an ultimatum demanding surrender of the prisoners and an apology. But luckily, slow communications gave passions on both sides a chance to cool. Lincoln came to see the

Diplomatic Crises




 while an angered North had to divert naval strength from its blockade for wild-goose chases. The barnacled Alabama ﬁ nally accepted a challenge from a stronger Union cruiser off the coast of France in 1864 and was quickly destroyed. The Alabama was beneath the waves, but the issue of British-built Confederate raiders stayed aﬂoat. Under prodding by the American minister, Charles Francis Adams, the British gradually perceived that allowing such ships to be built was a dangerous precedent that might someday be used against them. In 1863 London openly violated its own leaky laws and seized another raider being built for the South. But despite greater ofﬁcial efforts by Britain to remain truly neutral, Confederate commerce-destroyers, chieﬂy British-built, captured more than 250 Yankee ships, severely crippling the American merchant marine, which never fully recovered. Glowering Northerners looked farther north and talked openly of securing revenge by grabbing Canada when the war was over.

Battle of the USS Kearsarge and the CSS Alabama
 off the Normandy Coast, 1864, by Edouard Manet The Alabama sank sixty-four Union ships before it was destroyed off the coast of Cherbourg, France, in 1864. The Kearsarge rescued most of the Alabama’s crew from their sinking vessel, but Confederate captain Raphael Semmes managed to escape aboard an English yacht that had been observing the sea battle.

 Trent prisoners as “white elephants” and reluctantly released them. “One war at a time,” he reportedly said. Another major crisis in Anglo-American relations arose over the unneutral building in Britain of Confederate commerce-raiders, notably the Alabama. These vessels were not warships within the meaning of loopholed British law because they left their shipyards unarmed and picked up their guns elsewhere. The Alabama escaped in 1862 to the Portuguese Azores, and there took on weapons and a crew from two British ships that followed it. Although ﬂying the Confederate ﬂag and ofﬁcered by Confederates, it was manned by Britons and never entered a Confederate port. Britain was thus the chief naval base of the Confederacy. The Alabama lighted the skies from Europe to the Far East with the burning hulks of Yankee merchantmen. All told, this “British pirate” captured over sixty vessels. Competing British shippers were delighted,

 Foreign Flare-ups A ﬁ nal Anglo-American crisis was touched off in 1863 by the Laird rams—two Confederate warships being constructed in the shipyard of John Laird and Sons in Great Britain. Designed to destroy the wooden ships of the Union navy with their iron rams and large-caliber guns, they were far more dangerous than the swift but lightly armed Alabama. If delivered to the South, they probably would have sunk the blockading squadrons and then brought Northern cities under their ﬁ re. In retaliation the North doubtless would have invaded Canada, and a full-dress war with Britain would have erupted. But Minister Adams took a hard line, warning that “this is war” if the rams were released. At the last minute, the London government relented and bought the two ships for the Royal Navy. Everyone seemed satisﬁed—except the disappointed Confederates. Britain also eventually repented its sorry role in the Alabama business. It agreed in 1871 to submit the Alabama dispute to arbitration, and in 1872 paid American claimants $15.5 million for damages caused by wartime commerce-raiders. American rancor was also directed at Canada, where despite the vigilance of British authorities, Southern agents plotted to burn Northern cities. One Confederate raid into Vermont left three banks plundered and one American citizen dead. Hatred of Eng land burned especially ﬁercely among Irish Americans, and they



Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


 unleashed their fury on Canada. They raised several tiny “armies” of a few hundred green-shirted men and launched invasions of Canada, notably in 1866 and 1870. The Canadians condemned the Washington government for permitting such violations of neutrality, but the administration was hampered by the presence of so many Irish American voters. As fate would have it, two great nations emerged from the ﬁery furnace of the American Civil War. One was a reunited United States, and the other was a united Canada. The British Parliament established the Dominion of Canada in 1867. It was partly designed to bolster the Canadians, both politically and spiritually, against the possible vengeance of the United States. Emperor Napoleon III of France, taking advantage of America’s preoccupation with its own internal problems, dispatched a French army to occupy Mexico City in 1863. The following year he installed on the ruins of the crushed republic his puppet, Austrian archduke Maximilian, as emperor of Mexico. Both sending the army and enthroning Maximilian were ﬂagrant violations of the Monroe Doctrine. Napoleon was gambling that the Union would collapse and thus America would be too weak to enforce its “hands-off” policy in the Western Hemisphere. The North, as long as it was convulsed by war, pursued a walk-on-eggs policy toward France. The Washington government gave aid to the resistance movement headed by Mexico’s beloved national hero (and the ﬁ rst full-blooded Indian president of Mexico) Benito Juárez. But when the shooting stopped in 1865, Secretary of State Seward, speaking with the authority of nearly a million war-tempered bayonets, prepared to march south. Napoleon realized that his costly gamble was doomed. He reluctantly took “French leave” of his illstarred puppet in 1867, and Maximilian soon crumpled ingloriously before a Mexican ﬁring squad.

President Davis Versus
President Lincoln
 The Confederate government, like King Cotton, harbored fatal weaknesses. Its constitution, borrowing liberally from that of the Union, contained one deadly defect. Created by secession, it could not logically deny future secession to its constituent states. President Davis, while making his bow to states’ rights, had in view a well-knit central government. But determined states’ rights supporters fought him bitterly to the end. The Richmond regime encountered difﬁculty even in per-

 Lincoln at Antietam (also known as Sharpsburg), October 1862 Deeply committed to his responsibilities as commander in chief, President Lincoln visited Union forces on the battleﬁeld several times during the war. With him here at Antietam are the detective Allan Pinkerton (on the left), who provided intelligence to the Union army, and General John McClernand, who often accompanied the president on his travels (see pp. 487–488).

 suading certain state troops to serve outside their own borders. The governor of Georgia, a belligerent states’ righter, at times seemed ready to secede from the secession and ﬁght both sides. States’ rights were no less damaging to the Confederacy than Yankee ﬁ repower. Sharp-featured Jefferson Davis—tense, humorless, legalistic, and stubborn—was repeatedly in hot water. Although an eloquent orator and an able administrator, he at no time enjoyed real personal popularity and was often at loggerheads with his congress. At times there was serious talk of impeachment. Unlike Lincoln, Davis was somewhat imperious and inclined to defy rather than lead public opinion. Suffering acutely from neuralgia and other ner vous disorders (including a tic), he overworked himself with the details of both civil government and military operations. No one could

 Lincoln's Wartime Powers

 doubt his courage, sincerity, integrity, and devotion to the South, but the task proved beyond his powers. It was probably beyond the powers of any mere mortal. Lincoln also had his troubles, but on the whole they were less prostrating. The North enjoyed the prestige of a long-established government, ﬁ nancially stable and fully recognized both at home and abroad. Lincoln, the inexperienced prairie politician, proved superior to the more experienced but less ﬂexible Davis. Able to relax with droll stories at critical times, “Old Abe” grew as the war dragged on. Tactful, quiet, patient, yet ﬁ rm, he developed a genius for interpreting and leading a ﬁckle public opinion. Holding aloft the banner of Union with inspiring utterances, he demonstrated charitableness toward the South and forbearance toward backbiting colleagues. “Did [Secretary of War Edwin] Stanton say I was a damned fool?” he reportedly replied to a talebearer. “Then I dare say I must be one, for Stanton is generally right and he always says what he means.”

Limitations on Wartime
Liberties
 “Honest Abe” Lincoln, when inaugurated, laid his hand on the Bible and swore a solemn oath to uphold the Constitution. Then, feeling driven by necessity, he proceeded to tear a few holes in that hallowed document. He understandably concluded that if he did not do so, and patch the parchment later, there might not be a Constitution of a united United States to mend. The “rail-splitter” was no hairsplitter. But such infractions were not, in general, sweeping. Congress, as is often true in times of crisis, generally accepted or conﬁ rmed the president’s questionable acts. Lincoln, though accused of being a “Simple Susan Tyrant,” did not believe that his ironhanded authority would continue once the Union was preserved. As he pointedly remarked in 1863, a man suffering from “temporary illness” would not persist in feeding on bitter medicines for “the remainder of his healthful life.” Congress was not in session when war erupted, so Lincoln gathered the reins into his own hands. Brushing aside legal objections, he boldly proclaimed a blockade. (His action was later upheld by the Supreme Court.) He arbitrarily increased the size of the Federal army— something that only Congress can do under the Constitution (see Art. I, Sec. VIII, para. 12). (Congress later approved.) He directed the secretary of the Treasury to advance $2 million without appropriation or security to three private citizens for military purposes—a grave



 irregularity contrary to the Constitution (see Art. I, Sec. IX, para. 7). He suspended the precious privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, so that anti-Unionists might be summarily arrested. In taking this step, he deﬁed a dubious ruling by the chief justice that the safeguards of habeas corpus could be set aside only by the authorization of Congress (see Art. I, Sec. IX, para. 2). Lincoln’s regime was guilty of many other highhanded acts. For example, it arranged for “supervised” voting in the Border States. There the intimidated citizen, holding a colored ballot indicating his party preference, had to march between two lines of armed troops. The federal ofﬁcials also ordered the suspension of certain newspapers and the arrest of their editors on grounds of obstructing the war. Jefferson Davis was less able than Lincoln to exercise arbitrary power, mainly because of conﬁ rmed states’ righters who fanned an intense spirit of localism. To the very end of the conﬂ ict, the owners of horsedrawn vans in Petersburg, Virginia, prevented the sensible joining of the incoming and outgoing tracks of a militarily vital railroad. The South seemed willing to lose the war before it would surrender local rights—and it did.

Volunteers and Draftees:
North and South
 Ravenous, the gods of war demanded men—lots of men. Northern armies were at ﬁ rst manned solely by volunteers, with each state assigned a quota based on population. But in 1863, after volunteering had slackened, Congress passed a federal conscription law for the ﬁ rst time on a nationwide scale in the United States. The provisions were grossly unfair to the poor. Rich boys, including young John D. Rockefeller, could hire substitutes to go in their places or purchase exemption outright by paying $300. “Three-hundred-dollar men” was the scornful epithet applied to these slackers. Draftees who did not have the necessary cash complained that their banditlike government demanded “three hundred dollars or your life.” The draft was especially damned in the Democratic strongholds of the North, notably in New York City. A frightful riot broke out in 1863, touched off largely by underprivileged and antiblack Irish Americans, who shouted, “Down with Lincoln!” and “Down with the draft!” For several days the New York draft riots put the city at the mercy of a rampaging, pillaging mob. Scores of lives were lost, and the victims included many



Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


Table 20.3 Number of Men in Uniform at
Date Given


The New York City Anti-Draft Rioters, 1863
 Mostly Irish American mobs convulsed the city for days and were in the end put down only by a merciless application of Federal ﬁrepower.

 lynched blacks. Elsewhere in the North, conscription met with resentment and an occasional minor riot. More than 90 percent of the Union troops were volunteers, since social and patriotic pressures to enlist were strong. As able-bodied men became scarcer, generous bounties for enlistment were offered by federal, state, and local authorities. An enterprising and moneywise volunteer might legitimately pocket more than $1,000. With money ﬂowing so freely, an unsavory crew of “bounty brokers” and “substitute brokers” sprang up, at home and abroad. They combed the poorhouses of the British Isles and western Europe, and many an Irishman or German was befuddled with whiskey and induced to enlist. A number of the slippery “bounty boys” deserted, volunteered elsewhere, and netted another handsome haul. The records reveal that one “bounty jumper” repeated his proﬁtable operation thirty-two times. But desertion was by no means conﬁ ned to “bounty jumpers.” The rolls of the Union army recorded about 200,000 deserters of all classes, and the Confederate authorities were plagued with a runaway problem of similar dimensions.

Date


Union


Confederate


July 1861
January 1862
March 1862
January 1863
January 1864
January 1865


186,751
575,917
637,126
918,121
860,737
959,460


112,040
351,418
401,395
446,622
481,180
445,203


 Like the North, the South at ﬁ rst relied mainly on volunteers. But since the Confederacy was much less populous, it scraped the bottom of its manpower barrel much more quickly (see Table 20.3). Quipsters observed that any man who could see lightning and hear thunder was judged ﬁt for ser vice. The Richmond regime, robbing both “cradle and grave” (ages seventeen to ﬁ fty), was forced to resort to conscription as early as April 1862, nearly a year earlier than the Union. Confederate draft regulations also worked serious injustices. As in the North, a rich man could hire a substitute or purchase exemption. Slaveowners or overseers with twenty slaves might also claim exemption. These special privileges, later modiﬁed, made for bad feelings among the less prosperous, many of whom complained that this was “a rich man’s war but a poor man’s ﬁght.” Why sacriﬁce one’s life to save an afﬂuent neighbor’s slaves? No large-scale draft riots broke out in the South, as in New York City. But the Confederate conscription agents often found it prudent to avoid those areas inhabited by sharpshooting mountain whites, who were branded “Tories,” “traitors,” and “Yankee-lovers.”

The Economic Stresses of War
 Blessed with a lion’s share of the wealth, the North rode through the ﬁ nancial breakers much more smoothly than the South. Excise taxes on tobacco and alcohol were substantially increased by Congress. An income tax was levied for the ﬁ rst time in the nation’s experience, and although the rates were painlessly low by later standards, they netted millions of dollars. Customs receipts likewise proved to be important revenue-raisers. Early in 1861, after enough antiprotection Southern members had seceded, Congress passed the Morrill Tariff Act, superseding the low Tariff of

Rival Economies


 1857. It increased the existing duties some 5 to 10 percent, boosting them to about the moderate level of the Walker Tariff of 1846. But these modest rates were soon pushed sharply upward by the necessities of war. The increases were designed partly to raise additional revenue and partly to provide more protection for the prosperous manufacturers who were being plucked by the new internal taxes. A protective tariff thus became identiﬁed with the Republican party, as American industrialists, mostly Republicans, waxed fat on these welcome beneﬁts. The Washington Treasury also issued greenbacked paper money, totaling nearly $450 million, at face value. This printing-press currency was inadequately supported by gold, and hence its value was determined by the nation’s credit. Greenbacks thus ﬂuctuated with the fortunes of Union arms and at one low point were worth only 39 cents on the gold dollar. The holders of the notes, victims of creeping inﬂation, were indirectly taxed as the value of the currency slowly withered in their hands. Yet borrowing far outstripped both greenbacks and taxes as a money-raiser. The federal Treasury netted $2,621,916,786 through the sale of bonds, which bore interest and which were payable at a later date. The modern technique of selling these issues to the people directly through “drives” and payroll deductions had not yet been devised. Accordingly, the Treasury was forced to market its bonds through the private banking house of Jay Cooke and Company, which received a commission of three-eighths of 1 percent on all sales. With both proﬁts and patriotism at stake, the bankers succeeded in making effective appeals to citizen purchasers. A ﬁnancial landmark of the war was the National Banking System, authorized by Congress in 1863. Launched partly as a stimulant to the sale of government bonds, it was also designed to establish a standard bank-note currency. (The country was then ﬂooded with depreciated “rag money” issued by unreliable bankers.) Banks that joined the National Banking System could buy government bonds and issue sound paper money backed by them. The war-born National Banking Act thus turned out to be the ﬁ rst signiﬁcant step taken toward a uniﬁed banking network since 1836, when the “monster” Bank of the United States was killed by Andrew Jackson. Spawned by the war, this new system continued to function for ﬁ fty years, until replaced by the Federal Reserve System in 1913. An impoverished South was beset by different ﬁnancial woes. Customs duties were choked off as the coils



 A contemporary (October 22, 1863) Richmond diary portrays the ruinous effects of inﬂation:

“


 A poor woman yesterday applied to a merchant in Carey Street to purchase a barrel of ﬂour. The price he demanded was $70. ‘My God!’ exclaimed she, ‘how can I pay such prices? I have seven children; what shall I do?’ ‘I don’t know, madam,’ said he coolly, ‘unless you eat your children.’

”


 of the Union blockade tightened. Large issues of Confederate bonds were sold at home and abroad, amounting to nearly $400 million. The Richmond regime also increased taxes sharply and imposed a 10 percent levy on farm produce. But in general the states’ rights Southerners were immovably opposed to heavy direct taxation by the central authority: only about 1 percent of the total income was raised in this way. As revenue began to dry up, the Confederate government was forced to print blue-backed paper money with complete abandon. “Runaway inﬂation” occurred as Southern presses continued to grind out the poorly backed treasury notes, totaling in all more than $1 billion. The Confederate paper dollar ﬁ nally sank to the point where it was worth only 1.6 cents when Lee surrendered. Overall, the war inﬂ icted a 9,000 percent inﬂation rate on the Confederacy, contrasted with 80 percent for the Union.

 The North’s Economic Boom Wartime prosperity in the North was little short of miraculous. The marvel is that a divided nation could ﬁght a costly conﬂ ict for four long years and then emerge seemingly more prosperous than ever before. New factories, sheltered by the friendly umbrella of the new protective tariffs, mushroomed forth. Soaring prices, resulting from inﬂation, unfortunately pinched the day laborer and the white-collar worker to some extent. But the manufacturers and businesspeople raked in “the fortunes of war.” The Civil War bred a millionaire class for the ﬁ rst time in American history, though a few individuals of extreme wealth could have been found earlier. Many of these newly rich were noisy, gaudy, brassy, and given to extravagant living. Their emergence merely illustrates



Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


Booth at the Sanitary Fair in Chicago,
1863 The Chicago Sanitary Fair was the
 ﬁrst of many such fairs throughout the nation to raise funds for soldier relief efforts. Mainly organized by women, the fair sold captured Confederate ﬂags, battle relics, handicrafts like these potholders (right), and donated items, including President Lincoln’s original draft of the Emancipation Proclamation (which garnered $3,000 in auction). When the fair closed, the Chicago headquarters of the U.S. Sanitary Commission had raised $100,000, and its female managers had gained organizational experience that many would put to work in the postwar movement for women’s rights.

 the truth that some gluttony and greed always mar the devotion and self-sacriﬁce called forth by war. The story of speculators and peculators was roughly the same in both camps. But graft was more ﬂagrant in the North than in the South, partly because there was more to steal. Yankee “sharpness” appeared at its worst. Dishonest agents, putting proﬁts above patriotism, palmed off aged and blind horses on government purchasers. Unscrupulous Northern manufacturers supplied shoes with cardboard soles and fast-disintegrating uniforms of reprocessed or “shoddy” wool rather than virgin wool. Hence the reproachful term “shoddy millionaires” was doubly fair. One proﬁteer reluctantly admitted that his proﬁts were “painfully large.” Newly invented laborsaving machinery enabled the North to expand economically, even though the cream of its manpower was being drained off to the

 ﬁghting front. The sewing machine wrought wonders in fabricating uniforms and military footwear. The marriage of military need and innovative machinery largely ended the production of customtailored clothing. Graduated standard mea surements were introduced, creating “sizes” that were widely used in the civilian garment industry forever after. Clattering mechanical reapers, which numbered about 250,000 by 1865, proved hardly less potent than thundering guns. They not only released tens of thousands of farm boys for the army but fed them their ﬁeld rations. They produced vast surpluses of grain that, when sent abroad, helped dethrone King Cotton. They provided proﬁts with which the North was able to buy munitions and supplies from abroad. They contributed to the feverish prosperity of the North—a prosperity that enabled the Union to weather the war with ﬂying colors.

Wartime Transformations


 Other industries were humming. The discovery of petroleum gushers in 1859 had led to a rush of “FiftyNiners” to Pennsylvania. The result was the birth of a new industry, with its “petroleum plutocracy” and “coal oil Johnnies.” Pioneers continued to push westward during the war, altogether an estimated 300,000 people. Major magnets were free gold nuggets and free land under the Homestead Act of 1862. Strong propellants were the federal draft agents. The only major Northern industry to suffer a crippling setback was the ocean-carrying trade, which fell prey to the Alabama and other raiders. The Civil War was a women’s war, too. The protracted conﬂ ict opened new opportunities for women. When men departed in uniform, women often took their jobs. In Washington, D.C., ﬁve hundred women clerks (“government girls”) became government workers, with over one hundred in the Treasury Department alone. The booming military demand for shoes and clothing, combined with technological marvels like the sewing machine, likewise drew countless women into industrial employment. Before the war one industrial worker in four had been female; during the war the ratio rose to one in three. Other women, on both sides, stepped up to the ﬁghting front—or close behind it. More than four hundred women accompanied husbands and sweethearts into battle by posing as male soldiers. Other women took on dangerous spy missions. One woman was executed for smuggling gold to the Confederacy. Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell, America’s ﬁ rst female physician, helped organize the U.S. Sanitary Commission to assist the Union armies in the ﬁeld. The commission trained nurses, collected medical supplies, and equipped hospitals. Commission work helped many women to acquire the orga ni zational skills and the self-conﬁdence that would propel the women’s movement forward after the war. Heroically energetic Clara Barton and dedicated Dorothea Dix, superintendent of nurses for the Union army, helped transform nursing from a lowly service into a respected profession—and in the process opened up another major sphere of employment for women in the postwar era. Equally renowned in the South was Sally Tompkins, who ran a Richmond inﬁ rmary for wounded Confederate soldiers and was awarded the rank of captain by Confederate president Jefferson Davis. Still other women, North as well as South, orga nized bazaars and fairs that raised millions of dollars for the relief of widows, orphans, and disabled soldiers.



A
Crushed Cotton Kingdom  The South fought to the point of exhaustion. The suffocation caused by the blockade, together with the destruction wrought by invaders, took a terrible toll. Possessing 30 percent of the national wealth in 1860, the South claimed only 12 percent in 1870. Before the war the average per capita income of Southerners (including slaves) was about two-thirds that of Northerners. The Civil War squeezed the average Southern income to two-ﬁ fths of the Northern level, where it remained for the rest of the century. The South’s bid for independence exacted a cruel and devastating cost. Transportation collapsed. The South was even driven to the economic cannibalism of pulling up rails from the less-used lines to repair the main ones. Window weights were melted down into bullets; gourds replaced dishes; pins became so scarce that they were loaned with reluctance. To the brutal end, the South mustered remarkable resourcefulness and spirit. Women buoyed up their menfolk, many of whom had seen enough of war at ﬁrst hand to be heartily sick of it. A proposal was made by a number of women that they cut off their long hair and sell it abroad. But the project was not adopted, partly because of the blockade. The self-sacriﬁcing women took pride in denying themselves the silks and satins of their Northern sisters. The chorus of a song, “The Southern Girl,” touched a cheerful note: So hurrah! hurrah! For Southern Rights, hurrah! Hurrah! for the homespun dress the Southern ladies wear. At war’s end the Northern Captains of Industry had conquered the Southern Lords of the Manor. A crippled South left the capitalistic North free to work its own way, with high tariffs and other beneﬁts. The manufacturing moguls of the North, ushering in the full-ﬂedged Industrial Revolution, were headed for increased dominance over American economic and political life. Hitherto the agrarian “slavocracy” of the South had partially checked the ambitions of the rising plutocracy of the North. Now cotton capitalism had lost out to industrial capitalism. The South of 1865 was to be rich in little but amputees, war heroes, ruins, and memories.



Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


 CHRONOLOGY

 Confederate government formed Lincoln takes ofﬁce (March 4) Fort Sumter ﬁ red on (April 12) Four upper South states secede (April–June) Morrill Tariff Act passed Trent affair Lincoln suspends writ of habeas corpus



 Confederacy enacts conscription Homestead Act

1862–


 Alabama raids Northern shipping

KEY TERMS
Fort Sumter (463) Border States (464) West Virginia (464) Trent affair (472) Alabama (473) Laird rams (473) Dominion of Canada (474) writ of habeas corpus (475) 


 Union enacts conscription New York City draft riots National Banking System established

1863–


 Napoleon III installs Archduke Maximilian as emperor of Mexico



 Alabama sunk by Union warship

PEOPLE TO KNOW
New York draft riots (475) Morrill Tariff Act (476) greenbacks (477) National Banking System (477) Homestead Act (479) U.S. Sanitary Commission (479) 
Charles Francis Adams
Napoleon III
Maximilian
Jefferson Davis


Elizabeth Blackwell
Clara Barton
Sally Tompkins


To Learn More
Daniel Aaron, The Unwritten War: American Writers and
 the Civil War (1973) David W. Blight, Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory (2001) Richard J. Carwardine, Lincoln (2003) LaWanda Cox, Lincoln and Black Freedom (1981) David H. Donald, Lincoln (1995) ———, ed., Why the North Won the Civil War (1960) Drew Gilpin Faust, The Creation of Confederate Nationalism (1988) ———, Mothers of Invention: Women of the Slaveholding South in the American Civil War (1996) William Freehling, The South vs. The South: How AntiConfederate Southerners Shaped the Course of the Civil War (2001)

Doris Kearns Goodwin, Team of Rivals: The Political Genius
 of Abraham Lincoln (2005) Elizabeth D. Leonard, Yankee Women: Gender Battles in the Civil War (1994) Randall M. Miller et al., Religion and the American Civil War (1998)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Furnace
 of Civil War




1861–1865
 My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union, and is not either to save or to destroy slavery.

W


 hen President Lincoln issued his call to the states for seventy-ﬁve thousand militiamen on April 15, 1861, he envisioned them serving for only ninety days. Reafﬁ rming his limited war aims, he declared that he had “no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with slavery in the States where it exists.” With a swift ﬂourish of federal force, he hoped to show the folly of secession and rapidly return the rebellious states to the Union. But the war was to be neither brief nor limited. When the guns fell silent four years later, hundreds of thousands of soldiers on both sides lay dead, slavery was ended forever, and the nation faced the challenge of reintegrating the defeated but still recalcitrant South into the Union.

Bull Run Ends the
“Ninety-Day War”
 Northern newspapers, at ﬁ rst sharing Lincoln’s expectation of a quick victory, raised the cry “On to Rich-

 mond!” In this yeasty at mosphere, a Union army of some thirty thousand men drilled near Washington in the summer of 1861. It was ill-prepared for battle, but the press and the public clamored for action. Lincoln eventually concluded that an attack on a smaller Confederate force at Bull Run (Manassas Junction), some thirty miles southwest of Washington, might be worth a try. If successful, it would demonstrate the superiority of Union arms. It might even lead to the capture of the Confederate capital at Richmond, one hundred miles to the south. If Richmond fell, secession would be thoroughly discredited, and the Union could be restored without damage to the economic and social system of the South. Raw Yankee recruits swaggered out of Washington toward Bull Run on July 21, 1861, as if they were headed for a sporting event. Congressmen and spectators trailed along with their lunch baskets to witness the fun. At ﬁ rst the battle went well for the Yankees. But Thomas J. (“Stonewall”) Jackson’s gray-clad warriors stood like a stone wall (here he won his nickname), and

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


The Army of the Potomac
Marching up Pennsylvania
Avenue, Washington, D.C.,
 1861 In this painting Union troops parade before the Battle of Bull Run. Colorfully uniformed, they are a regiment of Zouaves, who adopted the name and style of military dress from a legendarily dashing French infantry unit recruited from Berber tribesmen in North Africa. But bright uniforms were not enough to win battles, and these troops were soon to be routed by the Confederates.

 An observer behind the Union lines described the Federal troops’ pell-mell retreat from the battleﬁeld at Bull Run:

“


 We called to them, tried to tell them there was no danger, called them to stop, implored them to stand. We called them cowards, denounced them in the most offensive terms, put out our heavy revolvers, and threatened to shoot them, but all in vain; a cruel, crazy, mad, hopeless panic possessed them, and communicated to everybody about in front and rear. The heat was awful, although now about six; the men were exhausted—their mouths gaped, their lips cracked and blackened with powder of the cartridges they had bitten off in battle, their eyes staring in frenzy; no mortal ever saw such a mass of ghastly wretches.

”


 Confederate reinforcements arrived unexpectedly. Panic seized the green Union troops, many of whom ﬂed in shameful confusion. The Confederates, themselves too exhausted or disorga nized to pursue, feasted on captured lunches. The “military picnic” at Bull Run, though not decisive militarily, bore signiﬁcant psychological and political consequences, many of them paradoxical. Victory was worse than defeat for the South, because it inﬂated an already dangerous overconﬁdence. Many of the Southern soldiers promptly deserted, some boastfully to display their trophies, others feeling that the war was now surely over. Southern enlistments fell off sharply, and preparations for a protracted conﬂ ict slackened. Defeat was better than victory for the Union, because it dispelled all illusions of a one-punch war and caused the Northerners to buckle down to the staggering task at hand. It also set the stage for a war that would be waged not merely for the cause of Union but also, eventually, for the abolitionist ideal of emancipation.

The Runners of Bull Run


 Preparing for Battle These troops of the 69th New York State Militia, a largely Irish regiment, were photographed attending Sunday morning Mass in May 1861, just weeks before the Battle of Bull Run. Because the regiment was camped near Washington, D.C., women were able to visit.



 the Army of the Potomac. Hating to sacriﬁce his troops, he was idolized by his men, who affectionately called him “Little Mac.” But he was a perfectionist who seems not to have realized that an army is never ready to the last button and that wars cannot be won without running some risks. He consistently but erroneously believed that the enemy outnumbered him, partly because his intelligence reports from the head of Pinkerton’s Detective Agency were unreliable. He was overcautious—Lincoln once accused him of having “the slows”—and he addressed the president in an arrogant tone that a less forgiving person would never have tolerated. Privately the general referred to his chief as a “baboon.” As McClellan doggedly continued to drill his army without moving it toward Richmond, the derisive Northern watchword became “All Quiet Along the Potomac.” The song of the hour was “Tardy George” (McClellan). After threatening to “borrow” the army if it was not going to be used, Lincoln ﬁnally issued ﬁ rm orders to advance. A reluctant McClellan at last decided upon a waterborne approach to Richmond, which lies at the western base of a narrow peninsula formed by the James and York Rivers—hence the name given to this historic encounter: the Peninsula Campaign (see Map 21.1). McClellan warily inched toward the Confederate capital in the spring of 1862 with about 100,000 men. After taking a month to capture historic Yorktown, which bristled with imitation wooden cannon, he ﬁ nally came within sight of the spires of Richmond. At this crucial juncture, Lincoln diverted McClellan’s anticipated reinforcements to chase “Stonewall” Jackson, whose lightning feints in the Shenandoah Valley seemed to

 “Tardy George” McClellan and the Peninsula Campaign Northern hopes brightened later in 1861, when General George B. McClellan was given command of the Army of the Potomac, as the major Union force near Washington was now called. Red-haired and red-mustached, strong and stocky, McClellan was a brilliant, thirtyfour-year-old West Pointer. As a serious student of warfare who was dubbed “Young Napoleon,” he had seen plenty of ﬁghting, ﬁ rst in the Mexican War and then as an observer of the Crimean War in Russia. Cocky George McClellan embodied a curious mixture of virtues and defects. He was a superb organizer and drillmaster, and he injected splendid morale into

 Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865) treated the demands of George McClellan for reinforcements and his excuses for inaction with inﬁnite patience. One exception came when the general complained that his horses were tired. On October 24, 1862, Lincoln wrote,

“


 I have just read your dispatch about soretongued and fatigued horses. Will you pardon me for asking what the horses of your army have done since the battle of Antietam that fatigues anything?

”


Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


N .J .
Baltimore


MARYLAND
Pot o 
39°N
78°W


 ma c

D EL.


Washington, D.C.


Manassas
Junction
N
Cle


R


M


 cC

Union
Confederate
 Union advance Union retreat Confederate victory

 lel

N
 EA

C O
C


Y


Richmond


Williamsburg
Yorktown


 lan

 NTI

R.


37°N




50 Km.


Norfolk


 ATLA

 kR .

Seven Days’
June 25–July 1
 k or .

Appomattox


 n

 peake Bay

 n an

 oc

 es R. am

 lla

 esa

V I R GI N I A


38°N


Mc


Ra
 pp

Ch


Fredericksburg


 ah

 Civil War Scene (detail) A Federal brigade repulses a Confederate assault at Williamsburg, Virginia, in 1862, as the Peninsula Campaign presses toward Richmond. General Winﬁeld Scott Hancock commanded the troops. For his success in this action, Hancock earned the nickname “The Superb.”

76°W


77°W


 PENNSYLVANIA

R.


 put Washington, D.C., in jeopardy. Stalled in front of Richmond, McClellan was further frustrated when “Jeb” Stuart’s Confederate cavalry rode completely around his army on reconnaissance. Then General Robert E. Lee launched a devastating counterattack— the Seven Days’ Battles—June 26–July 2, 1862. The Confederates slowly drove McClellan back to the sea. The Union forces abandoned the Peninsula Campaign as a costly failure, and Lincoln temporarily abandoned McClellan as commander of the Army of the Potomac— though Lee’s army had suffered some twenty thousand casualties to McClellan’s ten thousand. Lee had achieved a brilliant, if bloody, triumph. Yet the ironies of his accomplishment are striking. If McClellan had succeeded in taking Richmond and ending the war in mid-1862, the Union would probably have been restored with minimal disruption to the “peculiar institution.” Slavery would have survived, at least for a time. By his successful defense of Richmond and defeat of McClellan, Lee had in effect ensured that the war would endure until slavery was uprooted and the Old South thoroughly destroyed. Lincoln himself, who had earlier professed his unwillingness to tamper with slavery where it already existed, now declared that the rebels “cannot experiment for ten years trying to destroy the government and if they fail still come back into the Union unhurt.” He began to draft an emancipation proclamation.

J




50 Mi.


NORTH CAROLINA

Map 21.1 Peninsula Campaign, 1862
Interactive Map




The Union Strategy


 dations of the Old South; third, cut the Confederacy in half by seizing control of the Mississippi River backbone; fourth, chop the Confederacy to pieces by sending troops through Georgia and the Carolinas; ﬁ fth, decapitate it by capturing its capital at Richmond; and sixth (this was Ulysses Grant’s idea especially), try every where to engage the enemy’s main strength and to grind it into submission.

A
Confederate soldier assigned to burial detail after the Seven Days’ Battles (1862) wrote, 
“


 The sights and smells that assailed us were simply indescribable . . . corpses swollen to twice their original size, some of them actually burst asunder with the pressure of foul gasses. . . . The odors were so nauseating and so deadly that in a short time we all sickened and were lying with our mouths close to the ground, most of us vomiting profusely.

The War at Sea


”


 The blockade started leakily: it was not clamped down all at once but was extended by degrees. A watertight patrol of some thirty-ﬁve hundred miles of coast was impossible for the hastily improvised Northern navy, which counted converted yachts and ferryboats in its ﬂeet. But blockading was simpliﬁed by concentrating on the principal ports and inlets where dock facilities were available for loading bulky bales of cotton.

 Union strategy now turned toward total war (see Map 21.2). As ﬁ nally developed, the Northern military plan had six components: ﬁ rst, slowly suffocate the South by blockading its coasts; second, liberate the slaves and hence undermine the very economic foun-

80°W


 PA.

N.J.


Gettysburg
Lee 1863


OHIO INDIANA WEST VIRGINIA

 KENTUCKY

 MISSOURI

18 6


Grant


Charleston
(Fort Sumter)


N






LOUISIANA
Savannah 
Port
Hudson
30°N


 rra gu

 t1

New Orleans


 FLORIDA



Interactive Map


 GEORGIA

86 5
 n1

Fa


Map 21.2 Main Thrusts, 1861–
 1865 Northern strategists at ﬁrst believed that the rebellion could be snuffed out quickly by a swift, crushing blow. But the stiffness of Southern resistance to the Union’s early probes, and the North’s inability to strike with sufﬁcient speed and severity, revealed that the conﬂict would be a war of attrition, long and bloody.

 an Sherm

Vicksburg


 ma

.


 iR

 pp

 ssi

 ssi

SOUTH CAROLINA
Atlanta 
 ALABAMA

 McClellan

Raleigh


Chattanooga


 MISSISSIPPI

 t Gran 5 1864–1

NORTH CAROLINA

 TENNESSEE

Mi


 ARKANSAS

DEL. MD.

Richmond


Appomattox
Court
VIRGINIA
House 
Sher


Cairo


90°W


.


Oh
 io

R


 ILL.

Antietam
Washington D.C.
Lee


40°N


–1




ATLANTIC OCEAN

Gulf of Mexico




300 Km.


300 Mi.


Boundary of Confederacy


 Union advance

Union


 Confederate advance

Confederate


 Union naval blockade



Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


 How was the blockade regarded by the naval powers of the world? Ordinarily, they probably would have deﬁed it, for it was never completely effective and was especially sievelike at the outset. But Britain, the greatest maritime nation, recognized it as binding and warned its shippers that they ignored it at their peril. Britain plainly did not want to tie its hands in a future war by insisting that Lincoln maintain impossibly high blockading standards. Blockade-running was risky but proﬁtable, as the growing scarcity of Southern goods drove prices skyward. The most successful blockade runners were swift, gray-painted steamers, scores of which were specially built in Scotland. A leading rendezvous was the West Indies port of Nassau, in the British Bahamas, where at one time thirty-ﬁve of the speedy ships rode at anchor. The low-lying craft would take on cargoes of arms brought in by tramp steamers from Britain, leave with fraudulent papers for “Halifax” (Canada), and then return a few days later with a cargo of cotton. The risks were great, but the proﬁts would mount to 700 percent and more for lucky gamblers. Two successful voyages might well pay for capture on a third. The lush days of blockade-running ﬁ nally passed as Union squadrons gradually pinched off the leading Southern ports, from New Orleans to Charleston.

Battle of the Merrimack and
 the Monitor, March 9, 1862

 The Northern navy enforced the blockade with high-handed practices. Yankee captains, for example, would seize British freighters on the high seas, if laden with war supplies for the tiny port of Nassau and other halfway stations. The justiﬁcation was that obviously these shipments were “ultimately” destined, by devious routes, for the Confederacy. London, although not happy, acquiesced in this disagreeable doctrine of “ultimate destination” or “continuous voyage.” British blockaders might need to take advantage of the same far-fetched interpretation in a future war—as in fact they did in the world war of 1914–1918. The most alarming Confederate threat to the blockade came in 1862. Resourceful Southerners raised and reconditioned a former wooden U.S. warship, the Merrimack, and plated its sides with old iron railroad rails. Renamed the Virginia, this clumsy but powerful monster easily destroyed two wooden ships of the Union navy in the Virginia waters of Chesapeake Bay; it also threatened catastrophe to the entire Yankee blockading ﬂeet. (Actually the homemade ironclad was not a seaworthy craft.) A tiny Union ironclad, the Monitor, built in about one hundred days, arrived on the scene in the nick of time. For four hours, on March 9, 1862, the little “Yan-

Antietam


 When news reached Washington that the Merrimack had sunk two wooden Yankee warships with ridiculous ease, President Lincoln, much “excited,” summoned his advisers. Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles (1802–1878) recorded,

“


 The most frightened man on that gloomy day . . . was the Secretary of War [Stanton]. He was at times almost frantic. . . . The Merrimack, he said, would destroy every vessel in the service, could lay every city on the coast under contribution, could take Fortress Monroe. . . . Likely the ﬁrst movement of the Merrimack would be to come up the Potomac and disperse Congress, destroy the Capitol and public buildings.

”


 kee cheesebox on a raft” fought the wheezy Merrimack to a standstill. Britain and France had already built several powerful ironclads, but the ﬁ rst battle-testing of these new craft heralded the doom of wooden warships. A few months after the historic battle, the Confederates destroyed the Merrimack to keep it from the grasp of advancing Union troops.

The Pivotal Point:
Antietam
 Robert E. Lee, having broken the back of McClellan’s assault on Richmond, next moved northward. At the Second Battle of Bull Run (August 29–30, 1862), he encountered a Federal force under General John Pope. A handsome, dashing, soldierly ﬁgure, Pope boasted that in the western theater of war, from which he had recently come, he had seen only the backs of the enemy. Lee quickly gave him a front view, furiously attacking Pope’s troops and inﬂicting a crushing defeat. Emboldened by this success, Lee daringly thrust into Maryland. He hoped to strike a blow that would not only encourage foreign intervention but also seduce the still-wavering Border State and its sisters from the Union. The Confederate troops sang lustily: Thou wilt not cower in the dust, Maryland! my Maryland!



 Thy gleaming sword shall never rust, Maryland! my Maryland! But the Marylanders did not respond to the siren song. The presence among the invaders of so many blanketless, hatless, and shoeless soldiers dampened the state’s ardor. Events ﬁ nally converged toward a critical battle at Antietam Creek, Maryland. Lincoln, yielding to popular pressure, hastily restored “Little Mac” to active command of the main Northern army. His soldiers tossed their caps skyward and hugged his horse as they hailed his return. Fortune shone upon McClellan when two Union soldiers found a copy of Lee’s battle plans wrapped around a packet of three cigars dropped by a careless Confederate ofﬁcer. With this crucial piece of intelligence in hand, McClellan succeeded in halting Lee at Antietam on September 17, 1862, in one of the bitterest and bloodiest days of the war. Antietam was more or less a draw militarily. But Lee, ﬁ nding his thrust parried, retired across the Potomac. McClellan, from whom much more had been hoped, was removed from his ﬁeld command for the second and ﬁ nal time. His numerous critics, condemning him for not having boldly pursued the ever-dangerous Lee, ﬁ nally got his scalp. The landmark Battle of Antietam was one of the decisive engagements of world history—probably the most decisive of the Civil War. Jefferson Davis was perhaps never again so near victory as on that fateful summer day. The British and French governments were on the verge of diplomatic mediation, a form of interference sure to be angrily resented by the North. An almost certain rebuff by Washington might well have spurred Paris and London into armed collusion with Richmond. But both capitals cooled off when the Union displayed unexpected power at Antietam, and their chill deepened with the passing months. Bloody Antietam was also the long-awaited “victory” that Lincoln needed for launching his Emancipation Proclamation. The abolitionists had long been clamoring for action: Wendell Phillips was denouncing the president as a “ﬁ rst-rate second-rate man.” By midsummer of 1862, with the Border States safely in the fold, Lincoln was ready to move. But he believed that to issue such an edict on the heels of a series of military disasters would be folly. It would seem like a confession that the North, unable to conquer the South, was forced to call upon the slaves to murder their masters. Lincoln therefore decided to wait for the outcome of Lee’s invasion.



Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


The Killing Fields of Antietam
 These Confederate corpses testify to the awful slaughter of the battle. The twelve-hour ﬁght at Antietam Creek ranks as the bloodiest single day of the war, with more than ten thousand Confederate casualties and even more on the Union side. “At last the battle ended,” one historian wrote, “smoke heavy in the air, the twilight quivering with the anguished cries of thousands of wounded men.”

 Antietam served as the needed emancipation springboard. The halting of Lee’s offensive was just enough of a victory to justify Lincoln’s issuing, on September 23, 1862, the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation. This hope-giving document announced that on January 1, 1863, the president would issue a ﬁ nal proclamation. On the scheduled date, he fully redeemed his promise, and the Civil War became more of a moral crusade as the fate of slavery and the South it had sustained was sealed. The war now became more of what Lincoln called a “remorseless revolutionary struggle.” After January 1, 1863, Lincoln said, “the character of the war will be changed. It will be one of subjugation. . . . The [old] South is to be destroyed and replaced by new propositions and ideas.”

A
Proclamation Without Emancipation
 Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 declared “forever free” the slaves in those Confederate areas still in rebellion. Bondsmen in the loyal Border States were not affected, nor were those in speciﬁc conquered areas in the South—all told, about 800,000. The tone of the document was dull and legalistic (one historian has said that it had all the moral grandeur of a bill of lad-

 ing). But if Lincoln stopped short of a clarion call for a holy war to achieve freedom, he pointedly concluded his historic document by declaring that the proclamation was “an act of justice” and calling for “the considerate judgment of mankind and the gracious favor of Almighty God.” The presidential pen did not formally strike the shackles from a single slave. Where Lincoln could presumably free the slaves—that is, in the loyal Border States—he refused to do so, lest he spur disunion. Where he could not—that is, in the Confederate states— he tried to. In short, where he could he would not, and where he would he could not. Thus the Emancipation Proclamation was stronger on proclamation than emancipation. Yet much unofﬁcial do-it-yourself liberation did take place. Thousands of jubilant slaves, learning of the proclamation, ﬂocked to the invading Union armies, stripping already run-down plantations of their work force. In this sense the Emancipation Proclamation was heralded by the drumbeat of running feet. But many fugitives would have come anyhow, as they had from the war’s outset. One in seven Southern slaves ran away to Union camps. Their presence in the camps and their perseverance against all odds convinced many Northern soldiers of slavery’s evils and helped put emancipation atop Lincoln’s agenda. By issuing the proclamation, Lincoln addressed the refugees’ plight

The Emancipation Proclamation


 and strengthened the moral cause of the Union at home and abroad. At the same time, Lincoln’s proclamation clearly foreshadowed the ultimate doom of slavery (see Map 21.3). This was legally achieved by action of the individual states and by their ratiﬁcation of the Thirteenth Amendment (see the Appendix) in 1865, eight months after the Civil War had ended. The Emancipation Proclamation also fundamentally changed the nature of the war because it effectively removed any chance of a negotiated settlement. Both sides now knew that the war would be a ﬁght to the ﬁ nish. Public reactions to the long-awaited proclamation of 1863 were varied. “God bless Abraham Lincoln,” exulted the antislavery editor Horace Greeley in his New York Tribune. But many ardent abolitionists complained that Lincoln had not gone far enough. On the other hand, formidable numbers of Northerners, especially in the “Butternut” regions of the Old Northwest and the Border States, felt that he had gone too far. A cynical Democratic rhymester quipped,

 Abraham Lincoln defended his policies toward blacks in an open letter to Democrats on August 26, 1863:

“


 You say you will not ﬁght to free negroes. Some of them seem willing to ﬁght for you; but, no matter. Fight you, then, exclusively to save the Union. I issued the proclamation on purpose to aid you in saving the Union.

”


 Opposition mounted in the North against supporting an “abolition war”; ex-president Pierce and others felt that emancipation should not be “inﬂicted” on the slaves. Many Boys in Blue, especially from the Border States, had volunteered to ﬁght for the Union, not against slavery. Desertions increased sharply. The crucial congressional elections in the autumn of 1862 went heavily against the administration, particularly in New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio. Democrats even carried Lincoln’s Illinois, although they did not secure control of Congress. The Emancipation Proclamation caused an outcry to rise from the South that “Lincoln the ﬁend” was trying to stir up the “hellish passions” of a slave

 Honest old Abe, when the war ﬁrst began, Denied abolition was part of his plan; Honest old Abe has since made a decree, The war must go on till the slaves are all free. As both can’t be honest, will some one tell how, If honest Abe then, he is honest Abe now?

W. VA.
 MISSOURI

 TENNESSEE

MD. DEL.

 VIRGINIA

 KENTUCKY

 ARKANSAS



NORTH CAROLINA

SOUTH CAROLINA GEORGIA MISS. ALABAMA

TEXAS LOUISIANA FLORIDA
By Thirteenth Amendment, 1865 By state action, 1863–1865 By Emancipation Proclamation (in theory), 1863; legalized by Thirteenth Amendment 
Map 21.3 Emancipation in
 the South President Lincoln believed that emancipation of the slaves, accompanied by compensation to their owners, would be fairest to the South. He formally proposed such an amendment to the Constitution in December 1862. What ﬁnally emerged was the Thirteenth Amendment of 1865, which freed all slaves without compensation. Interactive Map



Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


 Not everyone in the North welcomed Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation, as this condemnation from the Cincinnati Enquirer reveals:

“


 The hundreds of thousands, if not millions of slaves [the act] will emancipate will come North and West and will either be competitors with our white mechanics and laborers, degrading them by competition, or they will have to be supported as paupers and criminals at the public expense.

”


 insurrection. Aristocrats of Europe, noting that the proclamation applied only to rebel slaveholders, were inclined to sympathize with Southern protests. But the Old World working classes, especially in Britain, reacted otherwise. They sensed that the proclamation spelled the ultimate doom of slavery, and many laborers were more determined than ever to oppose intervention. Gradually the diplomatic position of the Union improved.

 The Fabled 54th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment This bas-relief by famed sculptor Augustus SaintGaudens stands today in front of the Massachusetts Statehouse in Boston. It commemorates the all-black volunteer regiment, led by the white Boston patrician Robert Gould Shaw, that suffered heavy casualties during the Union siege of Fort Wagner, South Carolina, in 1863.

 The North now had much the stronger moral cause. In addition to preserving the Union, it had committed itself to freeing the slaves. The moral position of the South was correspondingly diminished.

Blacks Battle Bondage
 As Lincoln moved to emancipate the slaves, he also took steps to enlist blacks in the armed forces. Although some African Americans had served in the Revolution and the War of 1812, the regular army contained no blacks at the war’s outset, and the War Department refused to accept those free Northern blacks who tried to volunteer. (The Union navy, however, enrolled many blacks, mainly as cooks, stewards, and ﬁ remen.) But as manpower ran low and emancipation was proclaimed, black enlistees were accepted, sometimes over ferocious protests from Northern as well as Southern whites. By war’s end some 180,000 blacks served in the Union army, most of them from the slave states, but many from the free-soil North. Blacks accounted for about 10 percent of the total enlistments in the Union forces on land and sea and included two Massa-

Black Freedom Fighters




A
Bit of War History: Contraband, Recruit, Veteran, by Thomas Waterman Wood, 1865–1866 This painting dramatically commemorates the contributions and sacriﬁces of the 180,000 African Americans who served in the Union army during the Civil War. 
 chusetts regiments raised largely through the efforts of the ex-slave Frederick Douglass. Black ﬁghting men unquestionably had their hearts in the war against slavery that the Civil War had be-

 In August 1863 Lincoln wrote to Grant that enlisting black soldiers

“


 works doubly, weakening the enemy and strengthening us.”

 In December 1863 he announced,

 “It is difﬁcult to say they are not as good soldiers as any.” In August 1864 he said,

 “Abandon all the posts now garrisoned by black men, take 150,000 [black] men from our side and put them in the battleﬁeld or cornﬁeld against us, and we would be compelled to abandon the war in three weeks.

”


 come after Lincoln proclaimed emancipation. Service also offered them a chance to prove their manhood and to strengthen their claim to full citizenship at war’s end. Participating in about ﬁve hundred engagements, they received a total of twenty-two Congressional Medals of Honor—the highest military award. Their casualties were extremely heavy; more than thirty-eight thousand died, whether from battle, sickness, or reprisals from vengeful masters. Many, when captured, were put to death as slaves in revolt, for not until 1864 did the South recognize them as prisoners of war. In one notorious case, several black soldiers were massacred after they had formally surrendered at Fort Pillow, Tennessee. Thereafter vengeful black units cried “Remember Fort Pillow” as they swung into battle and vowed to take no prisoners. For reasons of pride, prejudice, and principle, the Confederacy could not bring itself to enlist slaves until a month before the war ended, and then it was too late. Meanwhile, tens of thousands were forced into labor battalions, the building of fortiﬁcations, the supplying of armies, and other war-connected activities. Slaves, moreover, were “the stomach of the Confederacy,” for they kept the farms going while the white men fought.



Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


 An afﬁdavit by a Union sergeant described the fate of one group of black Union troops captured by the Confederates:

“


 All the negroes found in blue uniform or with any outward marks of a Union soldier upon him was killed—I saw some taken into the woods and hung—Others I saw stripped of all their clothing and they stood upon the bank of the river with their faces riverwards and then they were shot—Still others were killed by having their brains beaten out by the butt end of the muskets in the hands of the Rebels.

”


 Involuntary labor did not imply slave support for the Confederacy. In many ways the actions of Southern slaves hamstrung the Confederate war effort and subverted the institution of slavery. Fear of slave insurrection necessitated Confederate “home guards,” keeping many eligible young white men from the front. Everyday forms of slave resistance, such as slowdowns, strikes, and open deﬁance, diminished productivity and undermined discipline. When Union troops neared, slave assertiveness increased. As “intelligent contraband,” slaves served as Union spies, guides, and scouts or provided shelter to escaped Northern prisoners of war. By war’s end nearly half a million slaves took the ultimate risk of revolting “with their feet,” abandoning their plantations. Many who remained, especially in the urban South, negotiated new working conditions in factories and on farms. Although they stopped short of violent uprising, slaves contributed powerfully to the collapse of slavery and the disintegration of the antebellum Southern way of life.

 Lee’s Last Lunge at Gettysburg After Antietam, Lincoln replaced McClellan as commander of the Army of the Potomac with General A. E. Burnside, whose ornate side-whiskers came to be known as “burnsides” or “sideburns.” Protesting his unﬁtness for this responsibility, Burnside proved it

 when he launched a rash frontal attack on Lee’s strong position at Fredericksburg, Virginia, on December 13, 1862. A chicken could not have lived in the line of ﬁ re, remarked one Confederate ofﬁcer. More than ten thousand Northern soldiers were killed or wounded in “Burnside’s Slaughter Pen.” A new slaughter pen was prepared when General Burnside yielded his command to Joseph (“Fighting Joe”) Hooker, an aggressive ofﬁcer but a headstrong subordinate. At Chancellorsville, Virginia, on May 2–4, 1863, Lee daringly divided his numerically inferior force and sent “Stonewall” Jackson to attack the Union ﬂank. The strategy worked. Hooker, temporarily dazed by a near-hit from a cannonball, was badly beaten but not crushed. This victory was probably Lee’s most brilliant, but it was dearly bought. Jackson was mistakenly shot by his own men in the gathering dusk and died a few days later. “I have lost my right arm,” lamented Lee. Southern folklore relates how Jackson outﬂanked the angels while galloping into heaven. Lee now prepared to follow up his stunning victory by invading the North again, this time through Pennsylvania. A decisive blow would add strength to the noisy peace prodders in the North and would also encourage foreign intervention—still a Southern hope. Three days before the battle was joined, Union general George G. Meade—scholarly, unspectacular, and abrupt—was aroused from his sleep at 2 a.m. with the unwelcome news that he would replace Hooker. Quite by accident, Meade took his stand atop a low ridge ﬂanking a shallow valley near quiet little Gettysburg, Pennsylvania (see Map 21.4). There his 92,000 men in blue locked in furious combat with Lee’s 76,000 gray-clad warriors. The battle seesawed across the rolling green slopes for three agonizing days, July 1–3, 1863, and the outcome was in doubt until the very end. The failure of General George Pickett’s magniﬁcent but futile charge ﬁ nally broke the back of the Confederate attack—and broke the heart of the Confederate cause. Pickett’s charge has been called the “high tide of the Confederacy.” It deﬁ ned both the northernmost point reached by any signiﬁcant Southern force and the last real chance for the Confederates to win the war. As the Battle of Gettysburg raged, a Confederate peace delegation was moving under a ﬂag of truce toward the Union lines near Norfolk, Virginia. Jefferson Davis hoped his negotiators would arrive in Washington from the south just as Lee’s triumphant army marched on it from Gettysburg to the north. But the victory at Gettys-

 Abraham Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address olitical speeches are unfortunately all too often composed of claptrap, platitudes, and just plain bunk—and they are frequently written by someone other than the person delivering them. But Abraham Lincoln’s address at the dedication of the cemetery at the Gettysburg battleﬁeld on November 19, 1863, has long been recognized as a masterpiece of political oratory and as a foundational document of the American political system, as weighty a statement of the national purpose as the Declaration of Independence (which it deliberately echoes in its statement that all men are created equal) or even the Constitution itself. In just 272 simple but eloquent words that Lin-

P


 coln himself indisputably wrote, he summarized the case for American nationhood. What were his principal arguments? What values did he invoke? What did he think was at stake in the Civil War? (Conspicuously, he made no direct mention of slavery in this address.) Another speech that Lincoln gave in 1861 offers some clues. He said, “I have often inquired of myself what great principle or idea it was that kept this [nation] together. It was not the mere separation of the colonies from the motherland, but that sentiment in the Declaration of Independence which gave liberty not alone to the people of this country, but hope to the world, for all future time.”



 rr

July 1


He


Frederick


M


 nd oa hR

.


Baltimore


 e

 r’s

Pi t


 ze

Cemetery
Hill


Peach
Orchard


 un

 yR

 ke

Wheat
Field


July 2


Falmouth


Big
Round Top


Bay


Fredericksburg
Dec. 13, 1862
Rap
 p ah an ck no

Union


R.


Confederate
 Union advance Confederate advance

M


Little
Round
Top


 Devil's Den

Run
Plum


R.
 an pid a R Chancellorsville May 2–4, 1863 38°N

N


 er

 n

 c k C r e ek Ro

Le


H


 k oo

Manassas
Junction


Chesapea


 VIRGINIA

Washington,
D.C.


Ru


Cr
 ee k

 a

 Culp's Hill

Willou
 ghb

Sh


 en

Poto
 ma cR

July 2


July 3


 Pickett’s Charge

 MARYLAND

.


39°N


Lo n g s t r e e


 t

Winchester


 c

 ge

 idg

 e

Rid


Westminster


Meade


Gettysburg


 y Rid

 ge

Le


 e

R.
 na an eh qu

Hagerstown


July 1


 us

York
Gettysburg
July 1–3, 1863


 PENNSYLVANIA

Harpers
Ferry


July 1


Wrightsville
S


Chambersburg


WEST VIRGINIA

Oak
Hill


 nR

Ew


THE BATTLE OF GETTYSBURG

 inar

40 Mi.


 l

 so



 el

76°W


Harrisburg


Sem




40°N


77°W


Carlisle


40 Km.


 er

78°W




Ph




 sh ar

 Union position

.5


 Confederate position

1 Km.
.5


1 Mi.


 Confederate advance

 Confederate retreat Union victory Confederate victory

 Map 21.4 The Battle of Gettysburg, 1863 With the failure of Pickett’s charge, the fate of the Confederacy was sealed—though the Civil War dragged on for almost two more bloody years.

 burg belonged to Lincoln, who refused to allow the Confederate peace mission to pass through Union lines. From now on, the Southern cause was doomed. Yet the men of Dixie fought on for nearly two years longer, through sweat, blood, and weariness of spirit. Later in that dreary autumn of 1863, with the graves still fresh, Lincoln journeyed to Gettysburg to dedicate the cemetery. He read a two-minute address, following a two-hour speech by the orator of the day, a former president of Harvard. Lincoln’s noble remarks were branded by the London Times as “ludicrous” and by Democratic editors as “dishwatery” and “silly.” The Gettysburg Address attracted relatively little attention at the time, but the president was speaking for the ages.

Interactive Map


The War in the West
 Events in the western theater of the war at last provided Lincoln with an able general who did not have to be shelved after every reverse. Ulysses S. Grant had been a mediocre student at West Point, distinguishing himself only in horsemanship, although he did fairly well in mathematics. After ﬁghting creditably in the Mexican War, he was stationed at isolated frontier posts, where boredom and loneliness drove him to drink. Resigning from the army to avoid a court-martial for drunkenness, he failed at various business ventures, and when war came, he was working in his father’s leather store in Illinois for $50 a month.

 Grant's Victories in the West



General Ulysses S. Grant and
General Robert E. Lee
 Trained at West Point, Grant (left) proved to be a better general than a president. Oddly, he hated the sight of blood and recoiled from rare beef. Lee (right), a gentlemanly general in an ungentlemanly business, remarked when the Union troops were bloodily repulsed at Fredericksburg, “It is well that war is so terrible, or we should get too fond of it.”

 Grant did not cut much of a ﬁgure. The shy and silent shopkeeper was short, stooped, awkward, stubblebearded, and sloppy in dress. He managed with some difﬁculty to secure a colonelcy in the volunteers. From then on, his military experience—combined with his boldness, resourcefulness, and tenacity—catapulted him on a meteoric rise. Grant’s ﬁ rst signal success came in the northern Tennessee theater (see Map 21.5). After heavy ﬁghting, he captured Fort Henry and Fort Donelson on the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers in February 1862. When the Confederate commander at Fort Donelson asked for terms, Grant bluntly demanded “an unconditional and immediate surrender.” Grant’s triumph in Tennessee was crucial. It not only riveted Kentucky more securely to the Union but also opened the gateway to the strategically important region of Tennessee, as well as to Georgia and the heart of Dixie. Grant next attempted to exploit his victory by capturing the junction of the main Confederate northsouth and east-west railroads in the Mississippi Valley at Corinth, Mississippi. But a Confederate force foiled

 his plans in a gory battle at Shiloh, just over the Tennessee border from Corinth, on April 6–7, 1862. Though Grant successfully counterattacked, the impressive Confederate showing at Shiloh conﬁ rmed that there would be no quick end to the war in the West. Lincoln resisted all demands for the removal of “Unconditional Surrender” Grant, insisting, “I can’t spare this man; he ﬁghts.” When talebearers later told Lincoln that Grant drank too much, the president allegedly replied, “Find me the brand, and I’ll send a barrel to each of my other generals.” There is no evidence that Grant’s drinking habits seriously impaired his military per for mance. Other Union thrusts in the West were in the making. In the spring of 1862, a ﬂotilla commanded by David G. Farragut joined with a Northern army to strike the South a blow by seizing New Orleans. With Union gunboats both ascending and descending the Mississippi, the eastern part of the Confederacy was left with a jeopardized back door. Through this narrowing entrance, between Vicksburg, Mississippi, and Port Hudson, Louisiana, ﬂowed herds of vitally needed cattle



Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


88°W


Corinth
Memphis


 i R. pp

 ss i

 er

R.
 land

 TENNESSEE

T en n es s e e


Chattanooga


R.
Nov. 25, 1863 





Mi


 ssi

N


 KENTUCKY

Fort Donelson
Feb. 16, 1862


 nt Gra 3

 ARKANSAS

Fort Henry
Feb. 6, 1862
Shiloh
April 6–7,


 o Ohi R.

Grant 1862


36°N


Cairo


 b

ILLINOIS MO.

86°W


Cu m


90°W


Gra


 nt

34°N


GA. MISSISSIPPI ALABAMA

Vicksburg
July 4, 1863


Montgomery


32°N


LOUISIANA
Port Hudson May 27, 1863 30°N 
Mobile




50 100 Km.


100 Mi.


F
 86 arrag 2– u t



New
Orleans


 FLORIDA

Mississippi R.


Gulf of Mexico


Union
Confederate
 Union advance Union victory

 In the southern tier of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, sympathy for the South combined with hostility to the Northeast to stimulate talk of a “Northwest Confederacy” that would itself secede from the Union and make a separate peace with the Confederacy. These sentiments were fueled by economic grievances stemming from the closure of the Mississippi River to trade, and they gained strength after Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation. Warned one Ohio congressman in January 1863,

“


 If you of the East, who have found this war against the South, and for the negro, gratifying to your hate or proﬁtable to your purse, will continue it . . . [be prepared for] eternal divorce between the West and the East.”

 Another Ohio congressman, giving great urgency to the Union effort to reopen the Mississippi River, declared,

 “The erection of the states watered by the Mississippi and its tributaries into an dependent Republic is the talk of every other western man.

”


Map 21.5 The Mississippi River and Tennessee,
1862–1863
Interactive Map


 and other provisions from Louisiana and Texas. The fortress of Vicksburg, located on a hairpin turn of the Mississippi, was the South’s sentinel protecting the lifeline to the western sources of supply. General Grant was now given command of the Union forces attacking Vicksburg and in the teeth of grave difﬁculties displayed rare skill and daring. The siege of Vicksburg was his best-fought campaign of the war. The beleaguered city at length surrendered, on July 4, 1863, with the garrison reduced to eating mules and rats. Five days later came the fall of Port Hudson, the last Southern bastion on the Mississippi. The spinal cord of the Confederacy was now severed, and, in Lincoln’s quaint phrase, the Father of Waters at last ﬂowed “unvexed to the sea.” The Union victory at Vicksburg came the day after the Confederate defeat at Gettysburg. The political sig-

 niﬁcance of these back-to-back military successes was monumental. Reopening the Mississippi helped to quell the Northern peace agitation in the “Butternut” area of the Ohio River valley. Confederate control of the Mississippi had cut off that region’s usual trade routes down the Ohio-Mississippi River system to New Orleans, thus adding economic pain to that border section’s already shaky support for the “abolition war.” The twin victories also conclusively tipped the diplomatic scales in favor of the North, as Britain stopped delivery of the Laird rams to the Confederates (see p. 473) and as France killed a deal for the sale of six naval vessels to the Richmond government. By the end of 1863, all Confederate hopes for foreign help were irretrievably lost.

Sherman Scorches Georgia
 General Grant, the victor of Vicksburg, was now transferred to the east Tennessee theater, where Confeder-



 Sherman's March to the Sea

 ates had driven Union forces from the battleﬁeld at Chickamauga into the city of Chattanooga, to which they then laid siege. Grant won a series of desperate engagements in November 1863 in the vicinity of besieged Chattanooga, including Missionary Ridge and Lookout Mountain (the “Battle Above the Clouds”). Chattanooga was liberated, the state was cleared of Confederates, and the way was thus opened for an invasion of Georgia. Grant was rewarded by being made general in chief. Georgia’s conquest was entrusted to General William Tecumseh Sherman. Red-haired and red-bearded, grim-faced and ruthless, he captured Atlanta in September 1864 and burned the city in November of that year. He then daringly left his supply base, lived off the country for some 250 miles, and weeks later emerged at Savannah on the sea. A rousing Northern song (“Marching Through Georgia”) said,

 “Sherman’s dashing Yankee boys will never reach the coast!” So the saucy rebels said—and ’t was a handsome boast. But Sherman’s hated “Blue Bellies,” sixty thousand strong, cut a sixty-mile swath of destruction through Georgia. They burned buildings, leaving only the blackened chimneys (“Sherman’s Sentinels”). They tore up railroad rails, heated them red-hot, and twisted them into “iron doughnuts” and “Sherman’s hairpins.” They bayoneted family portraits and ran off with valuable “souvenirs.” “War . . . is all hell,” admitted Sherman later, and he proved it by his efforts to “make Georgia howl.” One of the major purposes of Sherman’s march was to destroy supplies destined for the Confederate army and to weaken the morale of the men at the front by waging war on their homes (see Map 21.6).

Raleigh
 Johnston surrenders April 18, 1865

 TENNESSEE

Bentonville
Mar. 19, 1865


NORTH CAROLINA

35°N


Fayetteville


Chattanooga
Nov. 23, 1863
Dalton


Wilmington
Kennesaw Mt.
June 27, 1864


Columbia
Feb. 17, 1865


Atlanta
Occupied by Sherman
Sept. 2, 1864;
 burned Nov. 16, 1864

SOUTH CAROLINA

AT L A N T I C O C E A N

Milledgeville
Macon


Charleston


 GEORGIA

 Union advance



N




Savannah
Dec. 21, 1864


100 Km.


 Union victory



100 Mi.


80°W


 Map 21.6 Sherman’s March, 1864–1865 Interactive Map



Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


 Sherman was a pioneer practitioner of “total war.” His success in “Shermanizing” the South was attested by increasing numbers of Confederate desertions. Although his methods were brutal, he probably shortened the struggle and hence saved lives. But there can be no doubt that the discipline of his army at times broke down, as roving riffraff (Sherman’s “bummers”) engaged in an orgy of pillaging. “Sherman the Brute” was universally damned in the South. After seizing Savannah as a Christmas present for Lincoln, Sherman’s army veered north into South Carolina, where the destruction was even more vicious. Many Union soldiers believed that this state, the “hellhole of secession,” had wantonly provoked the war. The capital city, Columbia, burst into ﬂames, in all probability the handiwork of the Yankee invader. Crunching northward, Sherman’s conquering army had rolled deep into North Carolina by the time the war ended.

 A letter picked up on a dead Confederate in North Carolina and addressed to his “deer sister” concluded that

“


 it was “dam fulishness” trying to “lick shurmin.” He had been getting “nuthin but hell & lots uv it” ever since he saw the “dam yanks,” and he was “tirde uv it.” He would head for home now, but his old horse was “plaid out.” If the “dam yankees” had not got there yet, it would be a “dam wunder.” They were thicker than “lise on a hen and a dam site ornerier.

”


 Sherman’s March to the Sea, 1863–1864 Sherman’s army inﬂicted cruel destruction along its route, an early instance of a tactic that came to characterize modern warfare, in which civilians are considered legitimate targets.

Politics in Wartime


The Politics of War
 Presidential elections come by the calendar and not by the crisis. As fate would have it, the election of 1864 fell most inopportunely in the midst of war. Political inﬁghting in the North added greatly to Lincoln’s cup of woe. Factions within his own party, distrusting his ability or doubting his commitment to abolition, sought to tie his hands or even remove him from ofﬁce. Conspicuous among his critics was a group led by the overambitious secretary of the Treasury, Salmon Chase. Especially burdensome to Lincoln was the creation of the Congressional Committee on the Conduct of the War, formed in late 1861. It was dominated by “radical” Republicans who resented the expansion of presidential power in wartime and who pressed Lincoln zealously on emancipation. Most dangerous of all to the Union cause were the Northern Democrats. Deprived of the talent that had departed with the Southern wing of the party, those Democrats remaining in the North were left with the



 taint of association with the seceders. Tragedy befell the Democrats—and the Union—when their gifted leader, Stephen A. Douglas, died of typhoid fever seven weeks after the war began. Unshakably devoted to the Union, he probably could have kept much of his following on the path of loyalty. Lacking a leader, the Democrats divided. A large group of “War Democrats” patriotically supported the Lincoln administration, but tens of thousands of “Peace Democrats” did not. At the extreme were the so-called Copperheads, named for the poisonous snake that strikes without a warning rattle. Copperheads openly obstructed the war through attacks against the draft, against Lincoln, and especially, after 1863, against emancipation. They denounced the president as the “Illinois Ape” and condemned the “Nigger War.” They commanded considerable political strength in the southern parts of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. Notorious among the Copperheads was a sometime congressman from Ohio, Clement L. Vallandigham. This tempestuous character possessed brilliant oratorical gifts and unusual talents for stirring up

A
Study in Black and White Soldiers of the 7th
 Tennessee Cavalry pose with their slaves—whose bondage the Confederacy fought to perpetuate.



Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


 trouble. A Southern partisan, he publicly demanded an end to the “wicked and cruel” war. The civil courts in Ohio were open, and he should have been tried in them for sedition. But he was convicted by a military tribunal in 1863 for treasonable utterances and was then sentenced to prison. Lincoln decided that if Vallandigham liked the Confederates so much, he ought to be banished to their lines. This was done. Vallandigham was not so easily silenced. Working his way to Canada, he ran for the governorship of Ohio on foreign soil and polled a substantial but insufﬁcient vote. He returned to his own state before the war ended, and although he deﬁed “King Lincoln” and spat upon a military decree, he was not further prosecuted. The strange case of Vallandigham inspired Edward Everett Hale to write his moving but ﬁctional story of Philip Nolan, The Man Without a Country (1863), which was immensely popular in the North and which helped stimulate devotion to the Union. The ﬁctional Nolan was a young army ofﬁcer found guilty of participation in the Aaron Burr plot of 1806 (see p. 237). He had cried out in court, “Damn the United States! I wish I may never hear of the United States again!” For this outburst he was condemned to a life of eternal exile on American warships.

The Election of 1864
 As the election of 1864 approached, Lincoln’s precarious authority depended on his retaining Republican support while spiking the threat from the Peace Democrats and Copperheads. Fearing defeat, the Republican party executed a clever maneuver. Joining with the War Democrats, it proclaimed itself to be the Union party (see Figure 21.1). Thus the Republican party passed temporarily out of existence. Lincoln’s renomination at ﬁrst encountered surprisingly strong opposition. Hostile factions whipped

 up considerable agitation to shelve homely “Old Abe” in favor of his handsome nemesis, Secretary of the Treasury Chase. Lincoln was accused of lacking force, of being overready to compromise, of not having won the war, and of having shocked many sensitive souls by his ill-timed and earthy jokes. (“Prince of Jesters,” one journal called him.) But the “ditch Lincoln” move collapsed, and he was nominated by the Union party without serious dissent. Lincoln’s running mate was ex-tailor Andrew Johnson, a loyal War Democrat from Tennessee who had been a small slaveowner when the conﬂ ict began. He was placed on the Union party ticket to “sew up” the election by attracting War Democrats and the voters in the Border States, and, sadly, with no proper regard for the possibility that Lincoln might die in ofﬁce. Southerners and Copperheads alike condemned both candidates as birds of a feather: two ignorant, third-rate, boorish, backwoods politicians born in log cabins. Embattled Democrats—regular and Copperhead— nominated the deposed and overcautious war hero General McClellan. The Copperheads managed to force into the Democratic platform a plank denouncing the prosecution of the war as a failure. But McClellan, who could not otherwise have faced his old comrades-inarms, repudiated this defeatist declaration. The campaign was noisy and nasty. The Democrats cried, “Old Abe removed McClellan. We’ll now remove Old Abe.” They also sang, “Mac Will Win the Union Back.” Union party supporters shouted for “Uncle Abe and Andy” and urged, “Vote as you shot.” Their most effective slogan, growing out of a remark by Lincoln, was “Don’t swap horses in the middle of the river.” Lincoln’s reelection was at ﬁ rst gravely in doubt. The war was going badly, and Lincoln himself gave way to despondency, fearing that political defeat was imminent. The anti-Lincoln Republicans, taking heart, started a new movement to “dump” Lincoln in favor of someone else.

NORTHERN DEMOCRATS

 COPPERHEADS

Figure 21.1 Union Party, 1864
 The blue area represents the Union party.

PEACE DEMOCRATS

WAR DEMOCRATS

 REPUBLICANS

War Democrats and Peace Democrats




 McClellan as Mediator, 1865 This 1864 poster shows Presidents Lincoln and Davis trying to tear the country in half, while former general George McClellan, the candidate of the Democratic party, attempts to mediate.

 But the at mosphere of gloom was changed electrically, as balloting day neared, by a succession of Northern victories. Admiral Farragut captured Mobile, Alabama, after deﬁantly shouting the now-famous order, “Damn the torpedoes! Go ahead.” General Sherman seized Atlanta. General (“Little Phil”) Sheridan laid waste the verdant Shenandoah Valley of Virginia so thoroughly that in his words “a crow could not ﬂy over it without carrying his rations with him.” The president pulled through, but nothing more than necessary was left to chance. At election time many Northern soldiers were furloughed home to support Lincoln at the polls. One Pennsylvania veteran voted forty-nine times—once for himself and once for each absent member of his company. Other Northern soldiers were permitted to cast their ballots at the front.

 Lincoln, bolstered by the “bayonet vote,” vanquished McClellan by 212 electoral votes to 21, losing only Kentucky, Delaware, and New Jersey (see Map 21.7). But “Little Mac” ran a closer race than the electoral count indicates. He netted a healthy 45 percent of the popular vote, 1,803,787 to Lincoln’s 2,206,938, piling up much support in the Southerner-inﬁ ltrated states of the Old Northwest, in New York, and also in his native state of Pennsylvania. One of the most crushing losses suffered by the South was the defeat of the Northern Democrats in 1864. The removal of Lincoln was the last ghost of a hope for a Confederate victory, and the Southern soldiers would wishfully shout, “Hurrah for McClellan!” When Lincoln triumphed, desertions from the sinking Southern ship increased sharply.



Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


WASHINGTON TERR.

N.H.
VT. U-5

MONTANA TERR.

 OREGON

 ME.

U-5


U-7


 MINN.

U-3


 MASS.

U-4


IDAHO TERR.

DAKOTA TERR.

U-12


N.Y.


WISC. U-8

U-33


 MICH.

R.I.


U-4


U-8


NEV. U-2

CALIF. U-5

UTAH TERR.

U-8


 ILL.

U-16


COLORADO TERR.

KANSAS U-3

ARIZONA TERR.

 PA.

 IOWA

NEBRASKA TERR.

NEW MEXICO TERR.

D-11


 DEL.

U-21


U-13


D-3


 W.VA.

 MD.

 VA.

 KY.

U-11


U-7


D-7


N.C.


TENN. ARK.

S.C.
 MISS.

 TEXAS

 OHIO

 IND.

N.J. U-6


U-26


U-5


 MO.

INDIAN TERR.

 CONN.

 ALA.

 GA.

LA. FLA.

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Lincoln (Union)




91%


2,206,938


55.0%


Confederate States




9%


1,803,787


45.0%


 Territories, no returns, etc.

 McClellan (Democrat)

 Map 21.7 Presidential Election of 1864 (showing popular vote by county) Lincoln also carried California, Oregon, and Nevada, but there was a considerable McClellan vote in each. Note McClellan’s strength in the Border States and in the southern tier of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois—the so-called “Butternut” region. Interactive Map

Grant Outlasts Lee
 After Gettysburg, Grant was brought in from the West over Meade, who was blamed for failing to pursue the defeated but always dangerous Lee. Lincoln needed a general who, employing the superior resources of the North, would have the intestinal stamina to drive ever forward, regardless of casualties. A soldier of bulldog tenacity, Grant was the man for this meat-grinder type of warfare. His overall basic strategy was to assail the enemy’s armies simultaneously, so that they could not assist one another and hence could be destroyed piecemeal. His personal motto was “When in doubt, ﬁght.” A grimly determined Grant, with more than 100,000 men, struck toward Richmond. He engaged Lee in a series of furious battles in the Wilderness of Virginia, during

 May and June of 1864, notably in the leaden hurricane of the “Bloody Angle” and “Hell’s Half Acre.” In this Wilderness Campaign, Grant suffered about 50,000 casualties, or nearly as many men as Lee commanded at the start. But Lee lost about as heavily in proportion (see Map 21.8). In a ghastly gamble, on June 3, 1864, Grant ordered a frontal assault on the impregnable position of Cold Harbor. The Union soldiers advanced to almost certain death with papers pinned on their backs bearing their names and addresses. In a few minutes, about seven thousand men were killed or wounded. Public opinion in the North was appalled by this “blood and guts” type of ﬁghting. Critics cried that “Grant the Butcher” had gone insane. But Grant’s reputation was undeserved, while Lee’s was overrated. Lee’s rate of loss (at one casualty for every ﬁve soldiers) was

Pittsburgh


1864–1865
 ILLINOIS

40°N


Philadelphia


N.J.
MD.
Baltimore DEL. 
 PA.

 OHIO

 INDIANA

Wilderness
May 5–7, 1864
WEST
Richmond 
 io

 VIRGINIA

R.


 VIRGINIA

 KENTUCKY

 ARKANSAS

Nashville
Dec. 15–16, 1864
Averasboro
March 16, 1865
TENNESSEE
Memphis Atlanta 
 sape

R.


 ake

Bay




 FLORIDA

 nt

Mobile Bay
Aug. 2–23, 1864


 nn



79°W


Ma


.


90°W


38°N


 aR nn

New
Orleans


80°W


Olustee
Feb. 20, 1864


LOUISIANA 30°N

Che


Charleston


Mobile


 MARYLAND

Wilderness
May 5–7, 1864
R.
 n Chancellorsville a d pi Fredericksburg Ra Spotsylvania Courthouse Po toma c May 7–19, 1864 North VIRGINIA A nn R a aR . Charlottesville Sout hA North Anna 40 Km. oc May 23–26, 1864 k R. Gr a . 40 Mi. t ta po ni Pa James R. R mu nk R . ey Amelia Richmond Courthouse x R. Cold Harbor, atto Yo June 3, 1864 om

GEORGIA
Savannah 
77°W


 a ah pp

Montgomery


 No clear victor

 e

Pleasant Hill
April 9, 1864


Jackson


 Confederate victory

 Confederate retreat

Culpeper
Courthouse


 July 22, 1864 CAROLINA

 ALABAMA

 Union victory

 Confederate advance

Le


 MISSISSIPPI

Tupelo
July 14–15,


 Union advance

78°W


NORTH
March 21, 1865 CAROLINA 
 SOUTH

Mississippi R.


 Jenkin’s Ferry April 30, 1864

Washington,
D.C.
Cold Harbor
June 3, 1864


Bentonville


 MISSOURI

Oh


St.
Louis


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

Gul f of M ex i c o
Lynchburg






Ap
37°N


300 Km.


Le e


Gr


 an

Appomattox Courthouse,
 Lee surrenders, April 9, 1865.

R.


 Sayler’s Creek, April 6, 1865

 rk

 p

N


Jam
 e

 t

Five Forks,
April 1, 1865


 sR .

Siege of Petersburg
June 15, 1864–April 12, 1865


300 Mi.


 Map 21.8 Grant’s Virginia Campaign, 1864–1865 The Wilderness Campaign pitted soldier against desperate soldier in some of the most brutal and terrifying ﬁghting of the Civil War. “No one could see the ﬁght ﬁfty feet from him,” a Union private recalled of his month spent ﬁghting in Virginia. “The lines were very near each other, and from the dense underbrush and the tops of trees came puffs of smoke, the ‘ping’ of the bullets and the yell of the enemy. It was a blind and bloody hunt to the death, in bewildering thickets, rather than a battle.” Interactive Map

 the highest of any general in the war. By contrast, Grant lost one of ten. Grant had intended to ﬁght battles out in the open, a tactic he had perfected in the West. It was Lee, not Grant, who turned the eastern campaign into a war of attrition fought in the trenches. With fewer men, Lee could no longer seize the offensive, as he had at Chancellorsville or Gettysburg. Lee’s new defensive posture in turn forced Grant into some brutal arithmetic. Grant could trade two men for one and still beat the enemy to his knees. “I propose to ﬁght it out on this line,” he wrote, “if it takes all summer.” It did—and it also took all autumn, all winter, and a part of the spring. In February 1865 the Confederates, tasting the bitter dregs of defeat, tried desperately to negotiate for peace between the “two countries.” Lincoln himself met with Confederate representatives aboard a Union

 ship moored at Hampton Roads, Virginia, to discuss peace terms. But Lincoln could accept nothing short of Union and emancipation, and the Southerners could accept nothing short of independence. So the tribulation wore on—amid smoke and agony—to its terrible climax. The end came with dramatic suddenness. Rapidly advancing Northern troops captured Richmond and cornered Lee at Appomattox Courthouse in Virginia, in April 1865. Grant—stubble-bearded and informally dressed—met with Lee on the ninth, Palm Sunday, and granted generous terms of surrender. Among other concessions, the hungry Confederates were allowed to keep their horses for spring plowing. Tattered Southern veterans—“Lee’s Ragamufﬁns”— wept as they took leave of their beloved commander.



Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


 The Burning of Richmond, April 1865 The proud Confederate capital, after holding out against repeated Union assaults, was evacuated and burned in the ﬁnal days of the war.

 The elated Union soldiers cheered, but they were silenced by Grant’s stern admonition, “The war is over; the rebels are our countrymen again.” Lincoln traveled to conquered Richmond and sat in Jefferson Davis’s evacuated ofﬁce just forty hours after the Confederate president had left it. “Thank God I have lived to see this,” he said. With a small escort of sailors, he walked the blasted streets of the city. Freed slaves began to recognize him, and crowds gathered to see and touch “Father Abraham.” One black man fell to his knees before the Emancipator, who said to him, “Don’t kneel to me. This is not right. You must kneel to God only, and thank Him for the liberty you will enjoy hereafter.” Sadly, as many freed slaves were to discover, the hereafter of their full liberty was a long time coming.

The Martyrdom of Lincoln
 On the night of April 14, 1865 (Good Friday), only ﬁve days after Lee’s surrender, Ford’s Theater in Washington witnessed its most sensational drama. A halfcrazed, fanatically pro-Southern actor, John Wilkes Booth, slipped behind Lincoln as he sat in his box and shot him in the head. After lying unconscious all night, the Great Emancipator died the following morning. “Now he belongs to the ages,” remarked the oncecritical Secretary Stanton—probably the ﬁ nest words he ever spoke. Lincoln expired in the arms of victory, at the very pinnacle of his fame. From the standpoint of his reputation, his death could not have been better timed if he had hired the assassin. A large number of his countrymen had not suspected his greatness, and many

The Death of Lincoln




 New York Mourns Lincoln’s Death, April 25, 1865 Lincoln’s body traveled by train to lie in state in fourteen cities before arriving at his ﬁnal resting place of Springﬁeld, Illinois. In New York City, 160,000 mourners accompanied the hearse as the funeral procession slowly made its way down Broadway. Scalpers sold choice window seats for four dollars and up. Blacks were barred from participating, until the mayor changed his mind at the last minute— but only if they marched at the rear. This souvenir stereo view, bringing the scene to three-dimensional life when seen through the popular device of a hand-held stereopticon, allowed many more Americans to observe the funeral than could be there in person.

 others had even doubted his ability. But his dramatic death helped to erase the memory of his shortcomings and caused his nobler qualities to stand out in clearer relief. The full impact of Lincoln’s death was not at once apparent to the South. Hundreds of bedraggled exConfederate soldiers cheered, as did some Southern civilians and Northern Copperheads, when they learned of the assassination. This reaction was only natural, because Lincoln had kept the war grinding on to the bitter end. If he had only been willing to stop the shooting, the South would have won. As time wore on, increasing numbers of Southerners perceived that Lincoln’s death was a calamity for them. Belatedly they recognized that his kindliness and moderation would have been the most effective

 The New York Herald editorialized on April 16, 1865, that the South had the most to lose from Lincoln’s assassination:

“


 In the death of President Lincoln we feel the pressure of a heavy national calamity; but the great and irrevocable decree of the loyal States that Union must and shall be preserved will lose nothing of its force, but will be immensely if not terribly strengthened. In striking Abraham Lincoln and his kindly disposed Secretary of State the assassins struck at the best friends in the government to the prostrate rebels of the South.

”


THINKING GLOBALLY

The Era of Nationalism


T


 he American Civil War was rooted in America’s “peculiar institution” of slavery as well as uniquely American controversies about westward expansion. But it was also part of a wider phenomenon that transformed many parts of the world in the mid-nineteenth century: nationalism. To be sure, some ancient societies, such as the Greeks and the Hebrews, had a sense of themselves as distinct peoples who shared a common culture and history. But the creation of robust nation-states with strong central governments ruling over large populations that considered themselves part of an enduring community was of decidedly modern origin. Nationalism was anchored in the French and American Revolutions, with their emphasis on popular sovereignty and on a government that expressed the will of a population that saw itself not just as a random assembly of persons, but as a distinctive and coherent “people,” often bonded by religion and language. Nationalism also owed much to modern technologies like the steamship, railroad, and telegraph, which extended both the emotional range of fellow feeling and the geographical reach of centralized authority. The convergence of these several nineteenth-century developments, intellectual as well as material, made possible the creation of the “virtual communities” called nations.



Count Camillo di Cavour
(1810–1861)


 In the early nineteenth century, only Britain and France could claim to be nation-states in the modern sense. Central Europe remained a patchwork of major and minor principalities. Italy, in the words of the Austrian diplomat Klemens von Metternich, was merely “a geographic expression,” as several small duchies and overgrown city-states uneasily coexisted on the Italian peninsula. Canada, a scattering of disconnected provinces, was more a map-maker’s convention than a functioning political entity. Both Spain and Japan looked united on the map, but both notoriously lacked internal cohesion. And in the United States, sectional and state loyalties continued to compete with notions of a national identity. But within just a dozen years, between 1859 and 1871, Prince Otto von Bismarck created modern Germany; Count Camillo di Cavour united Italy (“We have made Italy; now we must make Italians,” quipped one Italian wit); a new Meiji emperor launched Japan on a dramatic program of rapid modernization; the British North America Act of 1867 forged a uniﬁed Canada; and the American Civil War, in Abraham Lincoln’s words, gave the United States “a new birth of freedom” as a uniﬁed country, as well as a signiﬁcantly invigorated federal government. Before the Civil War,

Prince Otto von Bismark
(1815–1898)


 it was said, the United States were; after the Civil War, the United States was. These several consolidations created the model for modern states that has prevailed ever since. The rise of nationalism fostered the growth of unprecedentedly powerful governments able to command deep loyalty from millions of people and consequently to marshal enormous economic and military resources—for good or ill. Nationalism was every where accompanied by some degree of political democratization and the expansion of public ser vices, as freshly created or reinvigorated central governments sought to secure the loyalty of peoples newly brought under their sway. Bismarck, for example, supported universal suffrage and social insurance for German workers (establishing precedents that would much later be adopted in the United States). The new Italy and Meiji Japan adopted fairly liberal voting laws and programs for universal education. Britain’s Reform Bill of 1867 enfranchised 1.5 million adult, male, urban householders, effectively doubling the British electorate. In the United States, Civil War–era constitutional amendments at least nominally guaranteed the right to vote to adult African American males, while the federal government adopted ambitious plans to facilitate the construction of transcontinental railroads, distribute public

 lands under the Homestead Act, and support higher education under the Morrill Land-Grant College Act. The Civil War deﬁned a historic pivot in the role of federal power. Of the twelve amendments to the Constitution passed before 1865, eleven were designed to limit the authority of the federal government. Of the ﬁfteen amendments passed since the Civil War, nine contain the phrase “Congress shall have the power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.” The words nation and native derive from the same Latin root, denoting birth or birthplace. Nationalism is at bottom a sentiment of common feeling or shared identity, generally among people born in the same place. It therefore implies boundaries, territorial as well as psychological. It deﬁnes who is included as well as who is excluded. (“No nation imagines itself coterminous with mankind,” writes one scholar of nationalism.) It can breed exclusionary and nativist pathologies, as well as chauvinism, jingoism, and imperialism. The United States was no exception to these patterns. Nativists mounted increasingly effective antiimmigrant campaigns in the post–Civil War era, beginning with the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 and culminating in the highly restrictionist National Origins Act of 1924. As Germany and Italy acquired colonies in Africa and Japan tightened its grip on Taiwan, Korea, and parts of Manchuria, the United States also joined the imperial scramble, annexing the Philippines, Puerto Rico, Guam, and Samoa before the century’s end.

Three Nation Builders: Count Camillo
 di Cavour (1810–1861), Prince Otto von Bismarck (1815–1898), and Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865) While the two European aristocrats Cavour and Bismarck were creating the new nations of Italy and Germany, respectively, the lowborn Lincoln was preserving American nationhood.

Abraham Lincoln
(1809–1865)






Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


 shields between them and vindictive treatment by the victors. The assassination unfortunately increased the bitterness in the North, partly because of the fantastic rumor that Jefferson Davis had plotted it. A few historians have argued that Andrew Johnson, now president-by-bullet, was cruciﬁed in Lincoln’s stead. The implication is that if the “rail-splitter” had lived, he would have suffered Johnson’s fate of being impeached by the embittered members of his own party, who demanded harshness, not forbearance, toward the South. The cruciﬁ xion thesis does not stand up under scrutiny. Lincoln no doubt would have clashed with Congress; in fact, he had already found himself in some hot water. The legislative branch normally struggles to win back the power that has been wrested from it by the executive in time of crisis. But the surefooted and experienced Lincoln could hardly have blundered into the same quicksands that engulfed Johnson. Lincoln was a victorious president, and there is no arguing with victory. In addition to his powers of leadership reﬁ ned in the war crucible, Lincoln possessed in full mea sure tact, sweet reasonableness, and an uncommon amount of common sense. Andrew Johnson, hot-tempered and impetuous, lacked all of these priceless qualities.

 Prisoners from the Front, by Winslow Homer, 1866 This celebrated painting reﬂects the artist’s ﬁrsthand observations of the war. Homer brilliantly captured the enduring depths of sectional animosity. The Union ofﬁcer somewhat disdainfully asserts his command of the situation; the beaten and disarmed Confederates exhibit an out-at-the-elbows pride and deﬁance.

 Ford’s Theater, with its tragic murder of Lincoln, set the stage for the wrenching ordeal of Reconstruction.

The Aftermath of
 the Nightmare The Civil War took a grisly toll in gore, about as much as all of America’s subsequent wars combined. Over 600,000 men died in action or of disease, and in all over a million were killed or seriously wounded. The number of dead, amounting to 2 percent of the entire nation’s population, greatly exceeded the number of Americans killed in World War II. The modern equivalent would be a loss of some 6 million American lives. To its lasting hurt, the nation lost the cream of its young manhood and potential leadership. In addition, tens of thousands of babies went unborn because potential fathers were at the front. Direct monetary costs of the conﬂ ict totaled about $15 billion. But this colossal ﬁgure does not include continuing expenses, such as pensions and interest on the national debt. The intangible costs—dislocations, disunities, wasted energies, lowered ethics, blasted lives, bitter memories, and burning hates—cannot be calculated.

The Legacy of War




Nora August: The Fruits of Emancipation An
 unidentiﬁed Union soldier carved this ivory bust of the freedwoman Nora August during the Civil War. Note the elaborately braided hair—a direct adaptation of a West African style. The anonymous sculptor etched the following legend into the base of the statue: “Carved from life. Retreat Plantation. Presented to the Nurses of Darien GA in the year of Our Lord 1865. Nora August (slave). Age 23 years. Purchased from the Market, St. Augustine, Florida, April 17th 1860. Now a Free Woman.”

 The greatest constitutional decision of the century, in a sense, was written in blood and handed down at Appomattox Courthouse, near which Lee surrendered. The extreme states’ righters were crushed. The national government, tested in the ﬁery furnace of war, emerged unbroken. Nulliﬁcation and secession, those twin nightmares of previous decades, were laid to rest. Beyond doubt the Civil War—the nightmare of the Republic—was the supreme test of American democracy. It ﬁ nally answered the question, in the words of Lincoln at Gettysburg, whether a nation dedicated to such principles “can long endure.” The preservation of democratic ideals, though not an ofﬁcially announced war aim, was subconsciously one of the major objectives of the North. Victory for Union arms also provided inspiration to the champions of democracy and liberalism the world over (see “Thinking Globally: The Era of Nationalism,” pp. 506–507). The great Eng lish Reform Bill of 1867, under which Britain became a true political democracy, was passed two years after the Civil War ended. American democracy had proved itself, and its success was an additional argument used by the disfranchised

 British masses in securing similar blessings for themselves. The “Lost Cause” of the South was lost, but few Americans today would argue that the result was not for the best. The shameful cancer of slavery was sliced away by the sword, and African Americans were at last in a position to claim their rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. The nation was again united politically, though for many generations still divided spiritually by the passions of the war. Grave dangers were averted by a Union victory, including the indeﬁ nite prolongation of the “peculiar institution,” the unleashing of the slave power on weak Caribbean neighbors, and the transformation of the area from Panama to Hudson Bay into an armed camp, with several heavily armed and hostile states constantly snarling and sniping at one another. America still had a long way to go to make the promises of freedom a reality for all its citizens, black and white. But emancipation laid the necessary groundwork, and a united and democratic United States was free to fulﬁ ll its destiny as the dominant republic of the hemisphere—and eventually of the world.



Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


 CHRONOLOGY

First Battle of Bull Run




 Grant takes Fort Henry and Fort Donelson Battle of Shiloh McClellan’s Peninsula Campaign Seven Days’ Battles Second Battle of Bull Run Naval battle of Merrimack (Virginia) and Monitor Battle of Antietam Preliminary Emancipation Proclamation Battle of Fredericksburg Northern army seizes New Orleans





 Sherman’s march through Georgia Grant’s Wilderness Campaign Battle of Cold Harbor Lincoln defeats McClellan for presidency



Hampton Roads Conference
 Lee surrenders to Grant at Appomattox Lincoln assassinated Thirteenth Amendment ratiﬁed



 Reform Bill expands British electorate

Final Emancipation Proclamation
Battle of Chancellorsville
Battle of Gettysburg
Fall of Vicksburg
Fall of Port Hudson


KEY TERMS
Bull Run (Manassas Junction), Battle of (481) Peninsula Campaign (483) Merrimack (486) Monitor (486) Bull Run, Second Battle of (487) Antietam, Battle of (487) Emancipation Proclamation (487) Thirteenth Amendment (489) Fredericksburg, Battle of (492) Gettysburg, Battle of (492) Gettysburg Address (494) Fort Henry and Fort Donelson, Battle of (495) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Shiloh, Battle of (495) Vicksburg, siege of (495) Sherman’s march (497) Congressional Committee on the Conduct of the War (499) Copperheads (499) The Man Without a Country (500) Union party (500) Wilderness Campaign (502) Appomattox Courthouse (503) Reform Bill of 1867 (509) 
Thomas J. (“Stonewall”)
Jackson
 George B. McClellan Robert E. Lee John Pope A. E. Burnside Joseph (“Fighting Joe”) Hooker George G. Meade

George Pickett
Ulysses S. Grant
William Tecumseh
Sherman
Salmon Chase
Clement L.
Vallandigham
John Wilkes Booth


Varying Viewpoints




What Were the Consequences of the Civil War?


W


 ith the end of the Civil War in 1865, the United States was permanently altered, despite the reuniﬁcation of the Union and the Confederacy. Slavery was ofﬁcially banned, secession was a dead issue, and industrial growth surged forward. For the ﬁ rst time, the United States could securely consider itself a singular nation rather than a union of states. Though sectional differences remained, there would be no return to the unstable days of precarious balancing between Northern and Southern interests. With the Union’s victory, power rested ﬁ rmly with the North, and it would orchestrate the future development of the country. According to historian Eric Foner, the war redrew the economic and political map of the country. The constitutional impact of the terms of the Union victory created some of the most far-reaching transformations. The ﬁ rst twelve amendments to the Constitution, ratiﬁed before the war, had all served to limit government power. In contrast, the Thirteenth Amendment, which abolished slavery, and the revolutionary Fourteenth Amendment, which conferred citizenship and guaranteed civil rights to all those born in the United States, marked unprecedented expansions of federal power. Historian James McPherson has noted still other ways in which the Civil War extended the authority of the central government. It expanded federal powers of taxation. It encouraged the government to develop the National Banking System, print currency, and conscript an army. It made the federal courts more inﬂuential. And through the Freedmen’s Bureau, which aided former slaves in the South, it insti-

 tuted the ﬁ rst federal social welfare agency. With each of these actions, the nation moved toward a more powerful federal government, invested with the authority to protect civil rights, aid its citizens, and enforce laws in an aggressive manner that superseded state powers. Yet some scholars have disputed whether the Civil War marked an absolute watershed in American history. They correctly note that racial inequality scandalously persisted after the Civil War, despite the abolition of slavery and the supposed protections extended by federal civil rights legislation. Others have argued that the industrial growth of the post– Civil War era had its real roots in the Jacksonian era, and thus cannot be ascribed solely to war. Thomas Cochran has even argued that the Civil War may have retarded overall industrialization rather than advancing it. Regional differences between North and South endured, moreover, even down to the present day. Even so, the argument that the Civil War launched a modern America remains convincing. The lives of Americans, white and black, North and South, were transformed by the war experience. Industry entered a period of unprecedented growth, having been stoked by the transportation and military needs of the Union army. The emergence of new, national legal and governmental institutions marked the birth of the modern American state. All considered, it is hard to deny that the end of the Civil War brought one chapter of the nation’s history to a close, while opening another.



Chapter 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 1861–1865


To Learn More
 William Blair, Virginia’s Private War: Feeding Body and Soul in the Confederacy, 1861–1865 (1998) David W. Blight, Frederick Douglass’ Civil War: Keeping Faith in Jubilee (1989) Bruce Catton, This Hallowed Ground (1956) Stephen Crane, The Red Badge of Courage (1895) Drew Gilpin Faust, This Republic of Suffering: Death and the American Civil War (2008) Joseph Glatthaar, Forged in Battle: The Civil War Alliance of Black Soldiers and White Ofﬁcers (1990) Leon Litwack, Been in the Storm So Long (1979) Robert R. Mackey, The Uncivil War: Irregular Warfare in the Upper South, 1861–1865 (2004)

Reid Mitchell, The Vacant Chair: The Northern Soldier
Leaves Home (1993)
Geoffrey C. Ward, The Civil War: An Illustrated History
(1990)
Bell I. Wiley, The Life of Billy Yank (1952)
———, The Life of Johnny Reb (1943)


 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Ordeal of
Reconstruction





1865–1877
 With malice toward none, with charity for all, with ﬁrmness in the right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to ﬁnish the work we are in, to bind up the nation’s wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and orphan, to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.

T


 he battle was done, the buglers silent. Bone-weary and bloodied, the American people, North and South, now faced the staggering challenges of peace. Four questions loomed large. How would the South, physically devastated by war and socially revolutionized by emancipation, be rebuilt? How would liberated blacks fare as free men and women? How would the Southern states be reintegrated into the Union? And who would direct the process of Reconstruction—the Southern states themselves, the president, or Congress?

The Problems of Peace
 Other questions also clamored for answers. What should be done with the captured Confederate ringleaders, all

 of whom were liable to charges of treason? During the war a popular Northern song had been “Hang Jeff Davis to a Sour Apple Tree,” and even innocent children had lisped it. Davis was temporarily clapped into irons during the early days of his two-year imprisonment. But he and his fellow “conspirators” were ﬁnally released, partly because the odds were that no Virginia jury would convict them. All rebel leaders were ﬁ nally pardoned by President Johnson as a sort of Christmas present in 1868. But Congress did not remove all remaining civil disabilities until thirty years later and only posthumously restored Davis’s citizenship more than a century later. Dismal indeed was the picture presented by the war-racked South when the rattle of musketry faded. Not only had an age perished, but a civilization had collapsed, in both its economic and its social structure.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


Charleston, South
Carolina, in Ruins,
 April 1865 Rebel troops evacuating Charleston blew up military supplies to deny them to General William Tecumseh Sherman’s forces. The explosions ignited ﬁres that all but destroyed the city.

 The moonlight-and-magnolia Old South, largely imaginary in any case, had forever gone with the wind. Handsome cities of yesteryear, such as Charleston and Richmond, were rubble-strewn and weed-choked. An Atlantan returned to his once-fair hometown and remarked, “Hell has laid her egg, and right here it hatched.” Economic life had creaked to a halt. Banks and businesses had locked their doors, ruined by runaway inﬂation. Factories were smokeless, silent, dismantled. The transportation system had broken down completely. Before the war ﬁve different railroad lines had converged on Columbia, South Carolina; now the nearest connected track was twenty-nine miles away. Efforts to untwist the rails corkscrewed by Sherman’s soldiers proved bumpily unsatisfactory. Agriculture—the economic lifeblood of the South— was almost hopelessly crippled. Once-white cotton ﬁelds now yielded a lush harvest of nothing but green weeds. The slave-labor system had collapsed, seed was scarce, and livestock had been driven off by plundering Yankees. Pathetic instances were reported of men hitching themselves to plows, while women and children gripped the handles. Not until 1870 did the se-

 ceded states produce as large a cotton crop as that of the fateful year 1860, and much of that yield came from new acreage in the Southwest. The princely planter aristocrats were humbled by the war—at least temporarily. Reduced to proud poverty, they faced charred and gutted mansions, lost investments, and almost worthless land. Their investments of more than $2 billion in slaves, their primary form of wealth, had evaporated with emancipation. Beaten but unbent, many high-spirited white Southerners remained dangerously deﬁant. They cursed the “damnyankees” and spoke of “your government” in Washington instead of “our government.” One Southern bishop refused to pray for President Andrew Johnson, though Johnson proved to be in sore need of divine guidance. Conscious of no crime, these former Confederates continued to believe that their view of secession was correct and that the “lost cause” was still a just war. One popular anti-Union song ran, I’m glad I fought agin her, I only wish we’d won, And I ain’t axed any pardon for anything I’ve done. Such attitudes boded ill for the prospects of painlessly binding up the Republic’s wounds.

From Slavery to Freedom


 Freedmen Deﬁne Freedom Confusion abounded in the still-smoldering South about the precise meaning of “freedom” for blacks. Emancipation took effect haltingly and unevenly in different parts of the conquered Confederacy. As Union armies marched in and out of various localities, many blacks found themselves emancipated and then reenslaved. A North Carolina slave estimated that he had celebrated freedom about twelve times. Blacks from one Texas county ﬂeeing to the free soil of the liberated county next door were attacked by slaveowners as they swam across the river that marked the county line. The next day trees along the riverbank were bent with swinging corpses—a grisly warning to others dreaming of liberty. Other planters resisted emancipation more legalistically, stubbornly protesting that slavery was lawful until state legislatures or the Supreme Court declared otherwise. For many slaves the shackles of bondage were not struck off in a single mighty blow; long-suffering blacks often had to wrench free of their chains link by link. The variety of responses to emancipation, by whites as well as blacks, illustrated the sometimes startling complexity of the master-slave relationship. Loyalty to



 the plantation master prompted some slaves to resist the liberating Union armies, while other slaves’ pentup bitterness burst forth violently on the day of liberation. Many newly emancipated slaves, for example, joined Union troops in pillaging their masters’ possessions. In one instance a group of Virginia slaves laid twenty lashes on the back of their former master—a painful dose of his own favorite medicine. Prodded by the bayonets of Yankee armies of occupation, all masters were eventually forced to recognize their slaves’ permanent freedom. The oncecommanding planter would assemble his former human chattels in front of the porch of the “big house” and announce their liberty. Though some blacks initially responded to news of their emancipation with suspicion and uncertainty, they soon celebrated their newfound freedom. Many took new names in place of the ones given by their masters and demanded that whites formally address them as “Mr.” or “Mrs.” Others abandoned the coarse cottons that had been their only clothing as slaves and sought silks, satins, and other ﬁ nery. Though many whites perceived such behavior as insubordinate, they were forced to recognize the realities of emancipation. “Never before had I a word of impudence from any of our black folk,” wrote one white Southerner, “but they are not ours any longer.”

The Day of Jubilo This French
 illustration of “Emancipated Negroes Celebrating the Emancipation Proclamation” may have been somewhat fanciful, but it captured well the exhilaration that came with freedom.



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


Educating Young Freedmen and Freedwomen,
 1870s Freed slaves in the South regarded schooling as the key to improving their children’s lives and the fulﬁllment of a long-sought right that had been denied blacks in slavery. These well-dressed schoolchildren are lined up outside their rural, one-room schoolhouse alongside their teachers, both black and white.

 Houston H. Holloway, age twenty at the time of his emancipation, recalled his feelings upon hearing of his freedom:

“


 I felt like a bird out of a cage. Amen. Amen. Amen. I could hardly ask to feel any better than I did that day. . . . The week passed off in a blaze of glory.

”


 The reunion of long-lost relatives also inspired joy; one Union ofﬁcer wrote home,

“


 Men are taking their wives and children, families which had been for a long time broken up are united and oh! such happiness. I am glad I am here.

”


 Tens of thousands of emancipated blacks took to the roads, some to test their freedom, others to search for long-lost spouses, parents, and children. Emancipation thus strengthened the black family, and many newly freed men and women formalized “slave marriages” for personal and pragmatic reasons, including the desire to make their children legal heirs. Other blacks left their former masters to work in towns and cities, where existing black communities provided protection and mutual assistance. Whole communities sometimes moved together in search of opportunity. From 1878 to 1880, some twenty-ﬁve thousand blacks from Louisiana, Texas, and Mississippi surged in a mass exodus to Kansas. The westward ﬂood of these “Exodusters” was stemmed only when steamboat captains refused to transport more black migrants across the Mississippi River. The church became the focus of black community life in the years following emancipation. As slaves, blacks had worshiped alongside whites, but now they formed their own churches pastored by their own ministers. Black churches grew robustly. The 150,000member black Baptist Church of 1850 reached 500,000 by 1870, while the African Methodist Episcopal Church

 Letter from a Freedman to His Old Master, 1865 hat was it like to experience the transition from slavery to freedom? Four million Southern blacks faced this exhilarating and formidable prospect with the end of the war. For historians, recovering the African American perspective on emancipation is challenging. Unlike their white masters, freed blacks left few written records. But one former slave captured in a letter to his “Old Master” (whose surname he bore) the heroic determination of many blacks to build new independent and digniﬁed lives for themselves and their families. During the war Jourdon Anderson escaped slavery in Tennessee with his wife and two daughters. After relocating to the relative safety of Ohio, he received a communication from his former owner asking him to return. In his bold reply, reportedly “dictated by the old servant” himself, Anderson expressed his family’s new expectations for life as free people and an uneasiness about his former master’s intentions. He made reference to his “comfortable home,” his daughters’ schooling, the church that he and his wife were free to attend regularly, and the peace of mind that came with knowing that “my girls [would not be] brought to shame by the violence and wickedness of their young masters.” To test the white man’s sincerity, Anderson and his wife asked for the astronomical ﬁgure of $11,680 in back wages from decades as slaves. He closed by reiterating that “the great desire of my life is to give my children an education and have them form virtuous habits.” This rare letter demonstrates that many black correspondents may have been illiterate, but they were hardly inarticulate. And they asserted themselves as parents, workers, and citizens not only from the distance of a former free state like Ohio but also deep within the former slave states of the South. Was the tone of Anderson’s letter (and postscript) serious or tonguein-cheek? What did “freedom” mean for Anderson and other blacks in the months following emancipation? How did the eventual accomplishments of Reconstruction correspond with the initial expectations of people like Anderson and his former owner?

W






Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 quadrupled in size from 100,000 to 400,000 in the ﬁ rst decade after emancipation. These churches formed the bedrock of black community life, and they soon gave rise to other benevolent, fraternal, and mutual aid societies. All these orga ni zations helped blacks protect their newly won freedom. Emancipation also meant education for many blacks. Learning to read and write had been a privilege generally denied to them under slavery. Freedmen wasted no time establishing societies for self-improvement, which undertook to raise funds to purchase land, build schoolhouses, and hire teachers. One member of a North Carolina education society asserted that “a schoolhouse would be the ﬁ rst proof of their independence.” Southern blacks soon found, however, that the demand outstripped the supply of qualiﬁed black teachers. They accepted the aid of Northern white women sent by the American Missionary Association, who volunteered their ser vices as teachers. They also turned to the federal government for help. The freed blacks were going to need all the friends—and power— they could muster in Washington.

 The Freedmen’s Bureau Abolitionists had long preached that slavery was a degrading institution. Now the emancipators were faced with the brutal reality that the freedmen were overwhelmingly unskilled, unlettered, without property or money, and with scant knowledge of how to survive as free people. To cope with this problem throughout the conquered South, Congress created the Freedmen’s Bureau on March 3, 1865. On paper at least, the bureau was intended to be a kind of primitive welfare agency. It was to provide food, clothing, medical care, and education both to freedmen and to white refugees. Heading the bureau was a

 Women from the North enthusiastically embraced the opportunity to go south and teach in Freedmen’s Bureau schools for emancipated blacks. One volunteer explained her motives:

“


 I thought I must do something, not having money at my command, what could I do but give myself to the work. . . . I would go to them, and give them my life if necessary.

”


 warmly sympathetic friend of blacks, Union general Oliver O. Howard, who later founded and served as president of Howard University in Washington, D.C. The bureau achieved its greatest successes in education. It taught an estimated 200,000 blacks how to read. Many former slaves had a passion for learning, partly because they wanted to close the gap between themselves and whites and partly because they longed to read the Word of God. In one elementary class in North Carolina sat four generations of the same family, ranging from a six-year-old child to a seventy-ﬁve-yearold grandmother. But in other areas, the bureau’s accomplishments were meager—or even mischievous. Although the bureau was authorized to settle former slaves on forty-acre tracts conﬁscated from the Confederates, little land actually made it into blacks’ hands. Instead local administrators often collaborated with planters in expelling blacks from towns and cajoling them into signing labor contracts to work for their former masters. Still, the white South resented the bureau as a meddlesome federal interloper that threatened to upset white racial dominance. President Andrew Johnson, who shared the white supremacist views of most white Southerners, repeatedly tried to kill it, and it expired in 1872.

Johnson: The Tailor President
 Few presidents have ever been faced with a more perplexing sea of troubles than that confronting Andrew Johnson. What manner of man was this medium-built, dark-eyed, black-haired Tennessean, now chief executive by virtue of the bullet that killed Lincoln? No citizen, not even Lincoln, has ever reached the White House from humbler beginnings. Born to impoverished parents in North Carolina and orphaned early, Johnson never attended school but was apprenticed to a tailor at age ten. Ambitious to get ahead, he taught himself to read, and later his wife taught him to write and do simple arithmetic. Like many another self-made man, he was inclined to overpraise his maker. Johnson early became active in politics in Tennessee, where he had moved when seventeen years old. He shone as an impassioned champion of poor whites against the planter aristocrats, although he himself ultimately owned a few slaves. He excelled as a two-ﬁsted stump speaker before angry and heckling crowds, who on occasion greeted his political oratory with cocked pistols, not just cocked ears. Elected to Congress, he attracted much favorable attention in the

 Johnson's Plans for the South



Crushed by the Constitution
 President Andrew Johnson revered the U.S. Constitution but eventually felt its awesome weight in his impeachment trial.

 North (but not the South) when he refused to secede with his own state. After Tennessee was partially “redeemed” by Union armies, he was appointed war governor and served courageously in an at mosphere of danger. Political exigency next thrust Johnson into the vice presidency. Lincoln’s Union party in 1864 needed to attract support from the War Democrats and other proSouthern elements, and Johnson, a Democrat, seemed to be the ideal man. Unfortunately, he appeared at the vice-presidential inaugural ceremonies the following March in a scandalous condition. He had recently been afﬂ icted with typhoid fever, and although not known as a heavy drinker, he was urged by his friends to take a stiff bracer of whiskey. This he did—with unfortunate results. “Old Andy” Johnson was no doubt a man of parts— unpolished parts. He was intelligent, able, forceful, and gifted with homespun honesty. Steadfastly devoted to duty and to the people, he was a dogmatic champion of states’ rights and the Constitution. He would often present a copy of the document to visitors, and he was buried with one as a pillow. Yet the man who had raised himself from the tailor’s bench to the president’s chair was a misﬁt. A Southerner who did not understand the North, a Tennessean who had earned the distrust of the South, a Democrat who had never been accepted by the Republicans, a president who had never been elected to the

 ofﬁce, he was not at home in a Republican White House. Hotheaded, contentious, and stubborn, he was the wrong man in the wrong place at the wrong time. A Reconstruction policy devised by angels might well have failed in his tactless hands.

Presidential Reconstruction
 Even before the shooting war had ended, the political war over Reconstruction had begun. Abraham Lincoln believed that the Southern states had never legally withdrawn from the Union. Their formal restoration to the Union would therefore be relatively simple. Accordingly, Lincoln in 1863 proclaimed his “10 percent” Reconstruction plan. It decreed that a state could be reintegrated into the Union when 10 percent of its voters in the presidential election of 1860 had taken an oath of allegiance to the United States and pledged to abide by emancipation. The next step would be formal erection of a state government. Lincoln would then recognize the puriﬁed regime. Lincoln’s proclamation provoked a sharp reaction in Congress, where Republicans feared the restoration of the planter aristocracy to power and the possible reenslavement of blacks. Republicans therefore rammed through Congress in 1864 the Wade-Davis Bill. The bill required that 50 percent of a state’s voters take the oath of allegiance and demanded stronger safeguards for



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 emancipation than Lincoln’s as the price of readmission to the Union. Lincoln “pocket-vetoed” this bill by refusing to sign it after Congress had adjourned. Republicans were outraged. They refused to seat delegates from Louisiana after that state had reorga nized its government in accordance with Lincoln’s 10 percent plan in 1864. The controversy surrounding the Wade-Davis Bill had revealed deep differences between the president and Congress. Unlike Lincoln, many in Congress insisted that the seceders had indeed left the Union—had “committed suicide” as republican states—and had therefore forfeited all their rights. They could be readmitted only as “conquered provinces” on such conditions as Congress should decree. This episode further revealed differences among Republicans. Two factions were emerging. The majority moderate group tended to agree with Lincoln that the seceded states should be restored to the Union as simply and swiftly as reasonable—though on Congress’s terms, not the president’s. The minority radical group believed that the South should atone more painfully for its sins. Before the South should be restored, the radicals wanted its social structure uprooted, the haughty planters punished, and the newly emancipated blacks protected by federal power. Some of the radicals were secretly pleased when the assassin’s bullet felled Lincoln, for the martyred president had shown tenderness toward the South. Spiteful “Andy” Johnson, who shared their hatred for the planter aristocrats, would presumably also share their desire to reconstruct the South with a rod of iron. Johnson soon disillusioned them. He agreed with Lincoln that the seceded states had never legally been outside the Union. Thus he quickly recognized several of Lincoln’s 10 percent governments, and on May 29, 1865, he issued his own Reconstruction proclamation (see Table 22.1). It disfranchised certain leading Con-

Before President Andrew Johnson (1808–1875)
 softened his Southern policy, his views were radical. Speaking on April 21, 1865, he declared,

“


 It is not promulgating anything that I have not heretofore said to say that traitors must be made odious, that treason must be made odious, that traitors must be punished and impoverished. They must not only be punished, but their social power must be destroyed. If not, they will still maintain an ascendancy, and may again become numerous and powerful; for, in the words of a former Senator of the United States, ‘When traitors become numerous enough, treason becomes respectable.’

”


 federates, including those with taxable property worth more than $20,000, though they might petition him for personal pardons. It called for special state conventions, which were required to repeal the ordinances of secession, repudiate all Confederate debts, and ratify the slave-freeing Thirteenth Amendment. States that complied with these conditions, Johnson declared, would be swiftly readmitted to the Union. Johnson, savoring his dominance over the hightoned aristocrats who now begged his favor, granted pardons in abundance. Bolstered by the political resurrection of the planter elite, the recently rebellious states moved rapidly in the second half of 1865 to organize governments. But as the pattern of the new governments became clear, Republicans of all stripes grew furious.

Table 22.1 Principal Reconstruction Proposals and Plans
Year


Proposal or Plan


1864–1865
1865–1866
1866–1867
1867–1877


 Lincoln’s 10 percent proposal Johnson’s version of Lincoln’s proposal Congressional plan: 10 percent plan with Fourteenth Amendment Congressional plan of military Reconstruction: Fourteenth Amendment plus black suffrage, later established nationwide by Fifteenth Amendment

The Black Codes


The Baleful Black Codes
 Among the ﬁ rst acts of the new Southern regimes sanctioned by Johnson was the passage of the iron-toothed Black Codes. These laws were designed to regulate the affairs of the emancipated blacks, much as the slave statutes had done in pre–Civil War days. Mississippi passed the ﬁ rst such law in November 1865, and other Southern states soon followed suit. The Black Codes varied in severity from state to state (Mississippi’s was the harshest and Georgia’s the most lenient), but they had much in common. The Black Codes aimed, ﬁ rst of all, to ensure a stable and subservient labor force. The crushed Cotton Kingdom could not rise from its weeds until the ﬁelds were once again put under hoe and plow—and many whites wanted to make sure that they retained the tight control they had exercised over black ﬁeld hands and plow drivers in the days of slavery. Dire penalties were therefore imposed by the codes on blacks who “jumped” their labor contracts, which usually committed them to work for the same employer for one year, and generally at pittance wages. Violators could be made to forfeit back wages or could be forcibly dragged back to work by a paid “Negro-catcher.” In Mississippi the captured freedmen could be ﬁ ned and then hired out to pay their ﬁ nes—an arrangement that closely resembled slavery itself.



 Early in 1866 one congressman quoted a Georgian:

“


 The blacks eat, sleep, move, live, only by the tolerance of the whites, who hate them. The blacks own absolutely nothing but their bodies; their former masters own everything, and will sell them nothing. If a black man draws even a bucket of water from a well, he must ﬁrst get the permission of a white man, his enemy. . . . If he asks for work to earn his living, he must ask it of a white man; and the whites are determined to give him no work, except on such terms as will make him a serf and impair his liberty.

”


 The codes also sought to restore as nearly as possible the pre-emancipation system of race relations. Freedom was legally recognized, as were some other privileges, such as the right to marry. But all the codes forbade a black to serve on a jury; some even barred blacks from renting or leasing land. A black could be punished for “idleness” by being sentenced to work on a chain gang. Nowhere were blacks allowed to vote. These oppressive laws mocked the ideal of freedom, so recently purchased by buckets of blood. The

Sharecroppers Picking Cotton
 Although many freed slaves found themselves picking cotton on their former masters’ plantations, they took comfort that they were at least paid wages and could work as a family unit. In time, however, they became ensnared in the web of debt that their planter bosses spun to keep a free labor force tightly bound to them.



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 Black Codes imposed terrible burdens on the unfettered blacks, struggling against mistreatment and poverty to make their way as free people. The worst features of the Black Codes would eventually be repealed, but their revocation could not by itself lift the liberated blacks into economic independence. Lacking capital, and with little to offer but their labor, thousands of impoverished former slaves slipped into the status of sharecropper farmers, as did many landless whites. Luckless sharecroppers gradually sank into a morass of virtual peonage and remained there for generations. Formerly slaves to masters, countless blacks as well as poorer whites in effect became slaves to the soil and to their creditors. Yet the dethroned planter aristocracy resented even this pitiful concession to freedom. Sharecropping was the “wrong policy,” said one planter. “It makes the laborer too independent; he becomes a partner, and has a right to be consulted.” The Black Codes made an ugly impression in the North. If the former slaves were being re-enslaved, people asked one another, had not the Boys in Blue spilled their blood in vain? Had the North really won the war?

Congressional Reconstruction
 These questions grew more insistent when the congressional delegations from the newly reconstituted Southern states presented themselves in the Capitol in December 1865. To the shock and disgust of the Republicans, many former Confederate leaders were on hand to claim their seats. The appearance of these ex-rebels was a natural but costly blunder. Voters of the South, seeking able representatives, had turned instinctively to their experienced statesmen. But most of the Southern leaders were tainted by active association with the “lost cause.” Among them were four former Confederate generals, ﬁve colonels, and various members of the Richmond cabinet and Congress. Worst of all, there was the shrimpy but brainy Alexander Stephens, ex–vice president of the Confederacy, still under indictment for treason. The presence of these “whitewashed rebels” infuriated the Republicans in Congress. The war had been fought to restore the Union, but not on these kinds of terms. The Republicans were in no hurry to embrace their former enemies—virtually all of them Democrats—in the chambers of the Capitol. While the South

 had been “out” from 1861 to 1865, the Republicans in Congress had enjoyed a relatively free hand. They had passed much legislation that favored the North, such as the Morrill Tariff, the Paciﬁc Railroad Act, and the Homestead Act. Now many Republicans balked at giving up this political advantage. On the ﬁ rst day of the congressional session, December 4, 1865, they banged shut the door in the face of the newly elected Southern delegations. Looking to the future, the Republicans were alarmed to realize that a restored South would be stronger than ever in national politics. Before the war a black slave had counted as three-ﬁ fths of a person in apportioning congressional representation. Now the slave was ﬁve-ﬁ fths of a person. Eleven Southern states had seceded and been subdued by force of arms. But now, owing to full counting of free blacks, the rebel states were entitled to twelve more votes in Congress, and twelve more presidential electoral votes, than they had previously enjoyed. Again, angry voices in the North raised the cry, Who won the war? Republicans had good reason to fear that ultimately they might be elbowed aside. Southerners might join hands with Democrats in the North and win control of Congress or maybe even the White House. If this happened, they could perpetuate the Black Codes, virtually re-enslaving blacks. They could dismantle the economic program of the Republican party by lowering tariffs, rerouting the transcontinental railroad, repealing the free-farm Homestead Act, and possibly even repudiating the national debt. President Johnson thus deeply disturbed the congressional Republicans when he announced on December 6, 1865, that the recently rebellious states had satisﬁed his conditions and that in his view the Union was now restored.

 Johnson Clashes with Congress A clash between president and Congress was now inevitable. It exploded into the open in February 1866, when the president vetoed a bill (later repassed) extending the life of the controversial Freedmen’s Bureau. Aroused, the Republicans swiftly struck back. In March 1866 they passed the Civil Rights Bill, which conferred on blacks the privilege of American citizenship and struck at the Black Codes. President Johnson resolutely vetoed this forward-looking mea sure on constitutional grounds, but in April congressmen steamrollered it over his veto—something they repeat-

Johnson Versus Congressional Republicans


 edly did henceforth. The hapless president, dubbed “Sir Veto” and “Andy Veto,” had his presidential wings clipped, as Congress increasingly assumed the dominant role in running the government. One critic called Johnson “the dead dog of the White House.” The Republicans now undertook to rivet the principles of the Civil Rights Bill into the Constitution as the Fourteenth Amendment. They feared that the Southerners might one day win control of Congress and repeal the hated law. The proposed amendment, approved by Congress and sent to the states in June 1866 and ratiﬁed in 1868, was sweeping. It (1) conferred civil rights, including citizenship but excluding the fran-



 chise, on the freedmen; (2) reduced proportionately the representation of a state in Congress and in the Electoral College if it denied blacks the ballot; (3) disqualiﬁed from federal and state ofﬁce former Confederates who as federal ofﬁceholders had once sworn “to support the Constitution of the United States”; and (4) guaranteed the federal debt, while repudiating all Confederate debts. (See the text of the Fourteenth Amendment in the Appendix.) The radical faction was disappointed that the Fourteenth Amendment did not grant the right to vote, but all Republicans were agreed that no state should be welcomed back into the Union fold without ﬁ rst ratifying the Fourteenth Amendment. Yet President Johnson advised the Southern states to reject it, and all of the “sinful eleven,” except Tennessee, deﬁantly spurned the amendment. Their spirit was reﬂected in a Southern song: And I don’t want no pardon for what I was or am, I won’t be reconstructed and I don’t give a damn.

Swinging ’Round the
 Circle with Johnson

 An Inﬂexible President, 1866 This Republican cartoon shows Johnson knocking blacks out of the Freedmen’s Bureau by his veto.

 As 1866 lengthened, the battle grew between the Congress and the president. The root of the controversy was Johnson’s “10 percent” governments that had passed the most stringent Black Codes. Congress had tried to temper the worst features of the codes by extending the life of the embattled Freedmen’s Bureau and passing the Civil Rights Bill. Both mea sures Johnson had vetoed. Now the issue was whether Reconstruction was to be carried on with or without the Fourteenth Amendment. The Republicans would settle for nothing less. The crucial congressional elections of 1866—more crucial than some presidential elections—were fast approaching. Johnson was naturally eager to escape from the clutch of Congress by securing a majority favorable to his soft-on-the-South policy. Invited to dedicate a Chicago monument to Stephen A. Douglas, he undertook to speak at various cities en route in support of his views. Johnson’s famous “swing ’round the circle,” beginning in the late summer of 1866, was a seriocomedy of errors. The president delivered a series of “give ’em hell” speeches, in which he accused the radicals in Congress of having planned large-scale antiblack riots and murder in the South. As he spoke, hecklers hurled insults at



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 him. Reverting to his stump-speaking days in Tennessee, he shouted back angry retorts, amid cries of “You be damned” and “Don’t get mad, Andy.” The dignity of his high ofﬁce sank to a new low, as the old charges of drunkenness were revived. As a vote-getter, Johnson was highly successful— for the opposition. His inept speechmaking heightened the cry “Stand by Congress” against the “Tailor of the Potomac.” When the ballots were counted, the Republicans had rolled up more than a two-thirds majority in both houses of Congress.

Republican Principles
 and Programs The Republicans now had a veto-proof Congress and virtually unlimited control of Reconstruction policy. But moderates and radicals still disagreed over the best course to pursue in the South.

Republicans Campaigning in
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, 1868
 The soldiers’ caps and regimental ﬂags demonstrate the continuing federal military presence in the Reconstruction South. Radical Republican congressman Thaddeus Stevens said that Reconstruction must “revolutionize Southern institutions, habits, and manners. . . . The foundation of their institutions . . . must be broken up and relaid, or all our blood and treasure have been spent in vain.”

 The radicals in the Senate were led by the courtly and principled idealist Charles Sumner, long since recovered from his prewar caning on the Senate ﬂoor, who tirelessly labored not only for black freedom but for racial equality. In the House the most powerful radical was Thaddeus Stevens, crusty and vindictive congressman from Pennsylvania. Seventy-four years old in 1866, he was a curious ﬁgure, with a protruding lower lip, a heavy black wig covering his bald head, and a deformed foot. An unswerving friend of blacks, he had defended runaway slaves in court without fee and, before dying, insisted on burial in a black cemetery. His affectionate devotion to blacks was matched by his vitriolic hatred of rebellious white Southerners. A masterly parliamentarian with a razor-sharp mind and withering wit, Stevens was a leading ﬁgure on the Joint (House-Senate) Committee on Reconstruction. Still opposed to rapid restoration of the Southern states, the radicals wanted to keep them out as long as possible and apply federal power to bring about a dras-

Military Reconstruction


 though the moderates, as the majority faction, had the upper hand. And one thing both groups had come to agree on by 1867 was the necessity to enfranchise black voters, even if it took federal troops to do it.

Representative Thaddeus Stevens (1792–1868), in
 a congressional speech on January 3, 1867, urged the ballot for blacks out of concern for them and out of bitterness against Southern whites:

“


 I am for Negro suffrage in every rebel state. If it be just, it should not be denied; if it be necessary, it should be adopted; if it be a punishment to traitors, they deserve it.

Reconstruction by the Sword


”


 tic social and economic transformation in the South. But moderate Republicans, more attuned to the timehonored principles of states’ rights and self-government, recoiled from the full implications of the radical program. They preferred policies that restrained the states from abridging citizens’ rights, rather than policies that directly involved the federal government in individual lives. The actual policies adopted by Congress showed the inﬂuence of both these schools of thought,

 Against a backdrop of vicious and bloody race riots that had erupted in several Southern cities, Congress passed the Reconstruction Act on March 2, 1867 (see Map 22.1). Supplemented by later mea sures, this drastic legislation divided the South into ﬁve military districts, each commanded by a Union general and policed by blue-clad soldiers, about twenty thousand all told. The act also temporarily disfranchised tens of thousands of former Confederates. Congress additionally laid down stringent conditions for the readmission of the seceded states. The wayward states were required to ratify the Fourteenth Amendment, giving the former slaves their rights as citizens. The bitterest pill of all to white Southerners

 Map 22.1 Military Reconstruction, 1867 (ﬁve districts and commanding generals) For many white Southerners, military Reconstruction amounted to turning the knife in the wound of defeat. An often-repeated story of later years had a Southerner remark, “I was sixteen years old before I discovered that damnyankee was two words.” Boundaries of the five Military Districts

 VA.

Interactive Map




MILITARY DISTRICT 1

 Tennessee escaped military regime.

 1870 Date refers to year of readmission to the Union

General Schofield


N.C.


 TENNESSEE

 ARKANSAS

MILITARY DISTRICT 4
General Ord 
 TEXAS

 MISS.

MILITARY DISTRICT 5
General Sheridan 


 ALABAMA

MILITARY DISTRICT 2

General Sickles


 GEORGIA



S.C.


MILITARY DISTRICT 3
General Pope 
 LOUISIANA

 FLORIDA



Years “Redeemer”
 governments established Established 1869 –1871 Established 1873 –1874 Established 1876 –1877

 Presidential electoral vote by party Independent Democratic Republican Democratic



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 was the stipulation that they guarantee in their state constitutions full suffrage for their former adult male slaves. Yet the act, reﬂecting moderate sentiment, stopped short of giving the freedmen land or education at federal expense. The overriding purpose of the moderates was to create an electorate in Southern states that would vote those states back into the Union on acceptable terms and thus free the federal government from direct responsibility for the protection of black rights. As later events would demonstrate, this approach proved woefully inadequate to the cause of justice for blacks. The radical Republicans were still worried. The danger loomed that once the unrepentant states were readmitted, they would amend their constitutions so as to withdraw the ballot from blacks. The only ironclad safeguard was to incorporate black suffrage in the federal Constitution. This goal was ﬁ nally achieved by the Fifteenth Amendment, passed by Congress in 1869 and ratiﬁed by the required number of states in 1870 (see the Appendix). Military Reconstruction of the South not only usurped certain functions of the president as commander in chief but set up a martial regime of dubious legality. The Supreme Court had already ruled, in the

 At a constitutional convention in Alabama, freed people afﬁrmed their rights in the following declaration:

“


 We claim exactly the same rights, privileges and immunities as are enjoyed by white men—we ask nothing more and will be content with nothing less. . . . The law no longer knows white nor black, but simply men, and consequently we are entitled to ride in public conveyances, hold ofﬁce, sit on juries and do everything else which we have in the past been prevented from doing solely on the ground of color.

”


 case Ex parte Milligan (1866), that military tribunals could not try civilians, even during wartime, in areas where the civil courts were open. Peacetime military rule seemed starkly contrary to the spirit of the Constitution. But the circumstances were extraordinary in the Republic’s history, and for the time being the Supreme Court avoided offending the Republican Congress.

Table 22.2 Southern Reconstruction by State


State


Readmitted to
Representation
 in Congress

Home Rule (Democratic
 or “Redeemer” Regime) Reestablished

Tennessee


July 24, 1866


Arkansas
North Carolina
Alabama
Florida


June 22, 1868
June 25, 1868
June 25, 1868
June 25, 1868




Louisiana
South Carolina
Virginia
Mississippi
Texas
Georgia


June 25, 1868
June 25, 1868
January 26, 1870
February 23, 1870
March 30, 1870
[June 25, 1868] July 15, 1870




Comments
 Ratiﬁed Fourteenth Amendment in 1866 and hence avoided military Reconstruction*

 Federal troops restationed in 1877, as result of Hayes-Tilden electoral bargain Same as Florida Same as Florida

 Readmitted June 25, 1868, but returned to military control after expulsion of blacks from legislature

 *For many years Tennessee was the only state of the secession to observe Lincoln’s birthday as a legal holiday. Many states in the South still observe the birthdays of Jefferson Davis and Robert E. Lee.

Amending the Constitution


 Prodded into line by federal bayonets, the Southern states got on with the task of constitution making. By 1870 all of them had reorga nized their governments and had been accorded full rights (see Table 22.2). The hated “bluebellies” remained until the new Republican regimes—usually called “radical” regimes—appeared to be ﬁ rmly entrenched. Yet when the federal troops ﬁnally left a state, its government swiftly passed back into the hands of white Redeemers, or “Home Rule” regimes, which were inevitably Democratic. Finally, in 1877, the last federal muskets were removed from state politics, and the “solid” Democratic South congealed.

No Women Voters
 The passage of the three Reconstruction-era Amendments—the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth— delighted former abolitionists but deeply disappointed advocates of women’s rights. Women had played a prominent part in the prewar abolitionist movement and had often pointed out that both women and blacks lacked basic civil rights, especially the crucial right to vote. The struggle for black freedom and the crusade for women’s rights, therefore, were one and the same in the eyes of many women. Yet during the war, feminist leaders such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony had temporarily suspended their own demands and worked wholeheartedly for the cause of black emancipation. The Woman’s Loyal League had gathered nearly 400,000 signatures on petitions asking Congress to pass a constitutional amendment prohibiting slavery. Now, with the war ended and the Thirteenth Amendment passed, feminist leaders believed that their time had come. They reeled with shock, however,

 The prominent suffragist and abolitionist Susan B. Anthony (1820–1906) was outraged over the proposed exclusion of women from the Fourteenth Amendment. In a conversation with her former male allies Wendell Phillips and Theodore Tilton, she reportedly held out her arm and declared,

“


 Look at this, all of you. And hear me swear that I will cut off this right arm of mine before I will ever work for or demand the ballot for the negro and not the woman.

”




 when the wording of the Fourteenth Amendment, which deﬁ ned equal national citizenship, for the ﬁ rst time inserted the word male into the Constitution in referring to a citizen’s right to vote. Both Stanton and Anthony campaigned actively against the Fourteenth Amendment despite the pleas of Frederick Douglass, who had long supported woman suffrage but believed that this was “the Negro’s hour.” When the Fifteenth Amendment proposed to prohibit denial of the vote on the basis of “race, color, or previous condition of servitude,” Stanton and Anthony wanted the word sex added to the list. They lost this battle, too. Fifty years would pass before the Constitution granted women the right to vote.

The Realities of Radical
Reconstruction in the South
 Blacks now had freedom, of a sort. Their friends in Congress had only haltingly and somewhat belatedly secured the franchise for them. Both Presidents Lincoln and Johnson had proposed to give the ballot gradually to selected blacks who qualiﬁed for it through education, property ownership, or military ser vice. Moderate Republicans and even many radicals at ﬁ rst hesitated to bestow suffrage on the freedmen. The Fourteenth Amendment, in many ways the heart of the Republican program for Reconstruction, had fallen short of guaranteeing the right to vote. (It envisioned for blacks the same status as that of women—citizenship without voting rights.) But by 1867 hesitation had given way to a hard determination to enfranchise the former slaves wholesale and immediately, while thousands of white Southerners were being denied the vote. By glaring contrast, most of the Northern states, before ratiﬁcation of the Fifteenth Amendment in 1870, withheld the ballot from their tiny black minorities. White Southerners naturally concluded that the Republicans were hypocritical in insisting that blacks in the South be allowed to vote. Having gained their right to suffrage, Southern black men seized the initiative and began to organize politically. Their primary vehicle became the Union League, originally a pro-Union orga ni zation based in the North. Assisted by Northern blacks, freedmen turned the League into a network of political clubs that educated members in their civic duties and campaigned for Republican candidates. The league’s mission soon expanded to include building black churches and schools, representing black grievances before local



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


Freedmen Voting, Richmond,
 Virginia, 1871 The exercise of democratic rights by former slaves constituted a political and social revolution in the South and was bitterly resented by whites.

 employers and government, and recruiting militias to protect black communities from white retaliation. Though African American women did not obtain the right to vote, they too assumed new political roles. Black women faithfully attended the parades and rallies common in black communities during the early years of Reconstruction and helped assemble mass meetings in the newly constructed black churches. They even showed up at the constitutional conventions held throughout the South in 1867, monitoring the proceedings and participating in informal votes outside the convention halls. But black men elected as delegates to the state constitutional conventions held the greater political authority. They formed the backbone of the black political community. At the conventions, they sat down with whites to hammer out new state constitutions, which most importantly provided for universal male suffrage. Though the subsequent elections produced no black governors or majorities in state senates, black political participation expanded exponentially during Reconstruction. Between 1868 and 1876, fourteen black congressmen and two black senators, Hiram Revels and Blanche K. Bruce, both of Mississippi, served in Washington, D.C. Blacks also served in state governments as

 lieutenant governors and representatives, and in local governments as mayors, magistrates, sheriffs, and justices of the peace. The sight of former slaves holding ofﬁce deeply offended their onetime masters, who lashed out with particular fury at the freedmen’s white allies, labeling them scalawags and carpetbaggers. The so-called scalawags were Southerners, often former Unionists and Whigs. The former Confederates accused them, often with wild exaggeration, of plundering the treasuries of the Southern states through their political inﬂuence in the radical governments. The carpetbaggers, on the other hand, were supposedly sleazy Northerners who had packed all their worldly goods into a carpetbag suitcase at war’s end and had come South to seek personal power and proﬁt. In fact, most were former Union soldiers and Northern businessmen and professionals who wanted to play a role in modernizing the “New South.” How well did the radical regimes rule? The radical legislatures passed much desirable legislation and introduced many badly needed reforms. For the ﬁ rst time in Southern history, steps were taken toward establishing adequate public schools. Tax systems were streamlined; public works were launched; and property rights

Radical Reconstruction




Black Reconstruction
 A composite portrait of the ﬁrst black senators and representatives in the Forty-ﬁrst and Forty-second Congresses. Senator Hiram Revels, on the left, was elected in 1870 to the seat that had been occupied by Jefferson Davis when the South seceded.

 were guaranteed to women. Many welcome reforms were retained by the all-white “Redeemer” governments that later returned to power. Despite these achievements, graft ran rampant in many “radical” governments. This was especially true in South Carolina and Louisiana, where conscienceless promoters and other pocket-padders used politically inexperienced blacks as pawns. The worst “black-andwhite” legislatures purchased, as “legislative supplies,” such “stationery” as hams, perfumes, suspenders, bonnets, corsets, champagne, and a cofﬁ n. One “thrifty” carpetbag governor in a single year “saved” $100,000 from a salary of $8,000. Yet this sort of corruption was by no means conﬁ ned to the South in these postwar years. The crimes of the Reconstruction governments were no more outrageous than the scams and felonies being perpetrated in the North at the same time, especially in Boss Tweed’s New York.

The Ku Klux Klan
 Deeply embittered, some Southern whites resorted to savage mea sures against “radical” rule. Many whites resented the success and ability of black legislators as

 much as they resented alleged “corruption.” A number of secret orga ni zations mushroomed forth, the most notorious of which was the “Invisible Empire of the South,” or Ku Klux Klan, founded in Tennessee in 1866. Besheeted nightriders, their horses’ hooves mufﬂed, would approach the cabin of an “upstart” black and hammer on the door. In ghoulish tones one thirsty horseman would demand a bucket of water. Then, under pretense of drinking, he would pour it into a rubber attachment concealed beneath his mask and gown, smack his lips, and declare that this was the ﬁ rst water he had tasted since he was killed at the Battle of Shiloh. If fright did not produce the desired effect, force was employed. Such tomfoolery and terror proved partially effective. Many ex-bondsmen and white “carpetbaggers,” quick to take a hint, shunned the polls. Those stubborn souls who persisted in their “upstart” ways were ﬂogged, mutilated, or even murdered. In one Louisiana parish in 1868, whites in two days killed or wounded two hundred victims; a pile of twenty-ﬁve bodies was found half-buried in the woods. By such atrocious practices were blacks “kept in their place”—that is, down. The Klan became a refuge for numerous bandits and cutthroats. Any scoundrel could don a sheet.



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 Congress, outraged by this night-riding lawlessness, passed the harsh Force Acts of 1870 and 1871. Federal troops were able to stamp out much of the “lash law,” but by this time the Invisible Empire had already done its work of intimidation. Many of the outlawed groups continued their tactics in the guise of “dancing clubs,” “missionary societies,” and “riﬂe clubs.” White resistance undermined attempts to empower blacks politically. The white South, for many decades, openly ﬂouted the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments. Wholesale disfranchisement of blacks, starting conspicuously about 1890, was achieved by

 The following excerpt is part of a heartrending appeal to Congress in 1871 by a group of Kentucky blacks:

“


 We believe you are not familiar with the description of the Ku Klux Klans riding nightly over the country, going from county to county, and in the county towns, spreading terror wherever they go by robbing, whipping, ravishing, and killing our people without provocation, compelling colored people to break the ice and bathe in the chilly waters of the Kentucky River. “The [state] legislature has adjourned. They refused to enact any laws to suppress Ku-Klux disorder. We regard them [the KuKluxers] as now being licensed to continue their dark and bloody deeds under cover of the dark night. They refuse to allow us to testify in the state courts where a white man is concerned. We ﬁnd their deeds are perpetrated only upon colored men and white Republicans. We also ﬁnd that for our services to the government and our race we have become the special object of hatred and persecution at the hands of the Democratic Party. Our people are driven from their homes in great numbers, having no redress only [except] the United States court, which is in many cases unable to reach them.

”


 The Ku Klux Klan, Tennessee, 1868 This night-riding terrorist has even masked the identity of his horse.

 intimidation, fraud, and trickery. Among various underhanded schemes were literacy tests, unfairly administered by whites to the advantage of illiterate whites. In the eyes of white Southerners, the goal of white supremacy fully justiﬁed these dishonorable devices.

 A black leader protested to whites in 1868,

“


 It is extraordinary that a race such as yours, professing gallantry, chivalry, education, and superiority, living in a land where ringing chimes call child and sire to the Gospel of God—that with all these advantages on your side, you can make war upon the poor defenseless black man.

”


The Impeachment Crisis




Impeachment Drama
 The impeachment proceedings against President Andrew Johnson, among the most severe constitutional crises in the Republic’s history, were high political theater, and tickets were in sharp demand.

Johnson Walks the
Impeachment Plank
 Radicals meanwhile had been sharpening their hatchets for President Johnson. Annoyed by the obstruction of the “drunken tailor” in the White House, they falsely accused him of maintaining there a harem of “dissolute women.” Not content with curbing his authority, they decided to remove him altogether by constitutional processes.* As an initial step, Congress in 1867 passed the Tenure of Ofﬁce Act—as usual, over Johnson’s veto. Contrary to precedent, the new law required the president to secure the consent of the Senate before he could remove his appointees once they had been approved by that body. One purpose was to freeze into the cabinet the secretary of war, Edwin M. Stanton, a holdover from the Lincoln administration. Although outwardly loyal to Johnson, he was secretly serving as a spy and informer for the radicals. Johnson provided the radicals with a pretext to begin impeachment proceedings when he abruptly dismissed Stanton early in 1868. The House of Representatives immediately voted 126 to 47 to impeach

 *For impeachment, see Art. I, Sec. II, para. 5; Art. I, Sec. III, paras. 6, 7; Art. II, Sec. IV, in the Appendix.

 Johnson for “high crimes and misdemeanors,” as required by the Constitution, charging him with various violations of the Tenure of Ofﬁce Act. Two additional articles related to Johnson’s verbal assaults on the Congress, involving “disgrace, ridicule, hatred, contempt, and reproach.”

A
Not-Guilty Verdict  for Johnson With evident zeal the radical-led Senate now sat as a court to try Johnson on the dubious impeachment charges. The House conducted the prosecution. The trial aroused intense public interest and, with one thousand tickets printed, proved to be the biggest show of 1868. Johnson kept his dignity and sobriety and maintained a discreet silence. His battery of attorneys argued that the president, convinced that the Tenure of Ofﬁce Act was unconstitutional, had ﬁ red Stanton merely to put a test case before the Supreme Court. (That slow-moving tribunal ﬁ nally ruled indirectly in Johnson’s favor ﬁ fty-eight years later.) House prosecutors, including oily-tongued Benjamin F. Butler and embittered Thaddeus Stevens, had a harder time building a compelling case for impeachment. On May 16, 1868, the day for the ﬁ rst voting in the Senate, the tension was electric, and heavy breathing could be heard in the galleries. By a margin of only one



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 vote, the radicals failed to muster the two-thirds majority for Johnson’s removal. Seven independentminded Republican senators, courageously putting country above party, voted “not guilty.” Several factors shaped the outcome. Fears of creating a destabilizing precedent played a role, as did principled opposition to abusing the constitutional mechanism of checks and balances. Political considerations also ﬁgured conspicuously. As the vice presidency remained vacant under Johnson, his successor would have been radical Republican Benjamin Wade, the president pro tempore of the Senate. Wade was disliked by many members of the business community for his high-tariff, soft-money, pro-labor views and was distrusted by moderate Republicans. Meanwhile, Johnson indicated through his attorney that he would stop obstructing Republican policies in return for remaining in ofﬁce. Diehard radicals were infuriated by their failure to muster a two-thirds majority for Johnson’s removal. “The Country is going to the Devil!” cried the crippled Stevens as he was carried from the hall. But the nation, though violently aroused, accepted the verdict with a good temper that did credit to its political maturity. In a less stable republic, an armed uprising might have erupted against the president. The nation thus narrowly avoided a dangerous precedent that would have gravely weakened one of the three branches of the federal government. Johnson was clearly guilty of bad speeches, bad judgment, and bad temper, but not of “high crimes and misdemeanors.” From the standpoint of the radicals, his greatest crime had been to stand inﬂexibly in their path.

The Purchase of Alaska
 Johnson’s administration, though largely reduced to a ﬁgurehead, achieved its most enduring success in the ﬁeld of foreign relations. The Russians by 1867 were in a mood to sell the vast and chilly expanse of land now known as Alaska. They had already overextended themselves in North America, and they saw that in the likely event of another war with Britain, they probably would lose their defenseless northern province to the sea-dominant British. Alaska, moreover, had been ruthlessly “furred out” and was a growing economic liability. The Russians were therefore quite eager to unload their “frozen asset” on the Americans, and they put out seductive feelers in Washington. They preferred the United States to any

 Map 22.2 Alaska and the Lower Forty-eight States (a size comparison) Interactive Map

 other purchaser, primarily because they wanted to strengthen further the Republic as a barrier against their ancient enemy, Britain. In 1867 Secretary of State William Seward, an ardent expansionist, signed a treaty with Russia that transferred Alaska to the United States for the bargain price of $7.2 million (see Map 22.2). But Seward’s enthusiasm for these frigid wastes was not shared by his ignorant or uninformed countrymen, who jeered at Seward’s Folly, “Seward’s Icebox,” “Frigidia,” and “Walrussia.” The American people, still preoccupied with Reconstruction and other internal vexations, were economy-minded and anti-expansionist. Then why did Congress and the American public sanction the purchase? For one thing Russia, alone among the powers, had been conspicuously friendly to the North during the recent Civil War. Americans did not feel that they could offend their great and good friend, the tsar, by hurling his walrus-covered icebergs back into his face. Besides, the territory was rumored to be teeming with furs, ﬁsh, and gold, and it might yet “pan out” proﬁtably—as it later did with natural resources, including oil and gas. So Congress and the country accepted “Seward’s Polar Bear Garden,” somewhat derisively but nevertheless hopefully.

The Heritage of
Reconstruction
 Many white Southerners regarded Reconstruction as a more grievous wound than the war itself. It left a fes-

 Reconstruction's Legacy



 The Republicans acted from a mixture of idealism and political expediency. They wanted both to protect the freed slaves and to promote the fortunes of the Republican party. In the end their efforts backﬁ red badly. Reconstruction conferred only ﬂeeting beneﬁts on blacks and virtually extinguished the Republican party in the South for nearly one hundred years. Moderate Republicans never fully appreciated the extensive effort necessary to make the freed slaves completely independent citizens, nor the lengths to which Southern whites would go to preserve their system of racial dominance. Had Thaddeus Stevens’s radical program of drastic economic reforms and heftier protection of political rights been enacted, things might well have been different. But deep-seated racism, ingrained American resistance to tampering with property rights, and rigid loyalty to the principle of local self-government, combined with spreading indifference in the North to the plight of blacks, formed too formidable an obstacle. Despite good intentions by Republicans, the Old South was in many ways more resurrected than reconstructed.

 The remarkable ex-slave Frederick Douglass (1817?– 1895) wrote in 1882, Is This a Republican Form of Government? by Thomas Nast, Harper’s Weekly, 1876 The nation’s most prominent political cartoonist expressed his despair at the tragic way that Reconstruction had ended— with few real gains for the former slaves.

 tering scar that would take generations to heal. They resented the upending of their social and racial system, the political empowerment of blacks, and the insult of federal intervention in their local affairs. Yet few rebellions have ended with the victors sitting down to a love feast with the vanquished. Given the explosiveness of the issues that had caused the war, and the bitterness of the ﬁghting, the wonder is that Reconstruction was not far harsher than it was. The fact is that Lincoln, Johnson, and most Republicans had no clear picture at war’s end of what federal policy toward the South should be. Policymakers groped for the right policies, inﬂuenced as much by Southern responses to defeat and emancipation as by any plans of their own to impose a speciﬁc program on the South.

“


 Though slavery was abolished, the wrongs of my people were not ended. Though they were not slaves, they were not yet quite free. No man can be truly free whose liberty is dependent upon the thought, feeling, and action of others, and who has himself no means in his own hands for guarding, protecting, defending, and maintaining that liberty. Yet the Negro after his emancipation was precisely in this state of destitution. . . . He was free from the individual master, but the slave of society. He had neither money, property, nor friends. He was free from the old plantation, but he had nothing but the dusty road under his feet. He was free from the old quarter that once gave him shelter, but a slave to the rains of summer and the frosts of winter. He was, in a word, literally turned loose, naked, hungry, and destitute, to the open sky.

”




Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 CHRONOLOGY

 Lincoln announces “10 percent” Reconstruction plan



 Lincoln vetoes Wade-Davis Bill



 Lincoln assassinated Johnson issues Reconstruction proclamation Congress refuses to seat Southern congressmen Freedmen’s Bureau established Southern states pass Black Codes



 Congress passes Civil Rights Bill over Johnson’s veto Congress passes Fourteenth Amendment Johnson-backed candidates lose congressional election Ex parte Milligan case Ku Klux Klan founded

KEY TERMS
Freedmen’s Bureau (518) “10 percent” Reconstruction plan (519) Wade-Davis Bill (519) Black Codes (521) Paciﬁc Railroad Act (522) Civil Rights Bill (522) Fourteenth Amendment (523) Reconstruction Act (525) Fifteenth Amendment (526) 


Reconstruction Act
 Tenure of Ofﬁce Act United States purchases Alaska from Russia



 Johnson impeached and acquitted Johnson pardons Confederate leaders



 Fifteenth Amendment ratiﬁed

1870–


Force Acts




 Freedmen’s Bureau ended



 Reconstruction ends

PEOPLE TO KNOW
Ex parte Milligan (526) Redeemers (527) Woman’s Loyal League (527) Union League (527) scalawags (528) carpetbaggers (528) Ku Klux Klan (529) Force Acts (530) Tenure of Ofﬁce Act (531) Seward’s Folly (532) 
Oliver O. Howard
Andrew Johnson
Thaddeus Stevens
Hiram Revels


Edwin M. Stanton
Benjamin Wade
William Seward


How Radical Was Reconstruction?


F


 ew topics have triggered as much intellectual warfare as the “dark and bloody ground” of Reconstruction. The period provoked questions—sectional, racial, and constitutional—about which people felt

 deeply and remain deeply divided even today. Scholarly argument goes back conspicuously to a Columbia University historian, William A. Dunning, whose students in the early 1900s published a series of histories

Varying Viewpoints


 of the Reconstruction South. Dunning and his disciples were inﬂuenced by the turn-of-the-century spirit of sectional conciliation as well as by current theories about black racial inferiority. Sympathizing with the white South, they wrote about the Reconstruction period as a kind of national disgrace, foisted upon a prostrate region by vindictive and self-seeking radical Republican politicians. If the South had wronged the North by seceding, the North had wronged the South by reconstructing. A second cycle of scholarship in the 1920s was impelled by a widespread suspicion that the Civil War itself had been a tragic and unnecessary blunder. Attention now shifted to Northern politicians. Scholars like Howard Beale further questioned the motives of the radical Republicans. To Beale and others, the radicals had masked a ruthless desire to exploit Southern labor and resources behind a false front of “concern” for the freed slaves. Moreover, Northern advocacy of black voting rights was merely a calculated attempt to ensure a Republican political presence in the defeated South. The unfortunate Andrew Johnson, in this view, had valiantly tried to uphold constitutional principles in the face of this cynical Northern onslaught. Although ignored by his contemporaries, scholar, black nationalist, and founder of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People W. E. B. Du Bois wrote a sympathetic history of Reconstruction in 1935 that became the basis for historians’ interpretations ever since. Following World War II, Kenneth Stampp and others, inﬂuenced by the modern civil rights movement, built on Du Bois’s argument and claimed that Reconstruction had been a noble though ultimately failed attempt to extend American principles of equity and justice. The radical Republicans and the carpetbaggers were now heroes, whereas Andrew Johnson was castigated for his obsti-



 nate racism. By the early 1970s, this view had become orthodoxy, and it generally holds sway today. Yet some scholars, such as Michael Benedict and Leon Litwack, disillusioned with the inability to achieve full racial justice in the 1960s and 1970s, began once more to scrutinize the motives of Northern politicians immediately after the Civil War. They claimed to discover that Reconstruction had never been very radical and that the Freedmen’s Bureau and other agencies had merely allowed white planters to maintain their dominance over local politics as well as over the local economy. More recently, Eric Foner has powerfully reasserted the argument that Reconstruction was a truly radical and noble attempt to establish an interracial democracy. Drawing upon the work of Du Bois, Foner has emphasized the comparative approach to American Reconstruction. Clearly, Foner has admitted, Reconstruction did not create full equality, but it did allow blacks to form political orga ni zations and churches, to vote, and to establish some mea sure of economic independence. In South Africa, the Caribbean, and other areas once marked by slavery, these opportunities were much harder to come by. Many of the beneﬁts of Reconstruction were erased by whites in the South during the Gilded Age, but in the twentieth century, the constitutional principles and organizations developed during Reconstruction provided the focus and foundation for the modern civil rights movement—which some have called the second Reconstruction. Steven Hahn’s A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles in the Rural South from Slavery to the Great Migration (2003) is the latest contribution to the literature on Reconstruction. Hahn emphasizes the assertiveness and ingenuity of African Americans in creating new political opportunities for themselves after emancipation.

To Learn More
Richard N. Current, Those Terrible Carpetbaggers (1988)
Eric Foner, Forever Free: The Story of Emancipation and
Reconstruction (2005)
———, Nothing but Freedom (1983)
Dewey W. Grantham, Life and Death of the Solid South
(1988)
Steven Hahn, A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political
 Struggles in the Rural South from Slavery to the Great Migration (2003) James M. McPherson, Ordeal by Fire: The Civil War and Reconstruction (1981) Michael Perman, Emancipation and Reconstruction (rev. ed., 2003)

Lawrence Powell, New Masters: Northern Planters During
 the Civil War and Reconstruction (1980) Julie Saville, The Work of Reconstruction (1994) Booker T. Washington, Up from Slavery (1901) Heather Andrea Williams, Self-Taught: African American Education in Slavery and Freedom (2005) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

 Sail, sail thy best, ship of Democracy, Of value is thy freight, ’tis not the Present only, The Past is also stored in thee, Thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone, not of the Western continent alone, Earth’s résumé entire floats on thy keel, O ship, is steadied by thy spars, With thee Time voyages in trust, the antecedent nations sink or swim with thee, With all their ancient struggles, martyrs, heroes, epics, wars, thou bear’st the other continents, Theirs, theirs as much as thine, the destination-port triumphant. . . . Walt Whitman Thou Mother with Thy Equal Brood, 1872

T HE
American Pageant 

 This page intentionally left blank

The Ordeal of
Reconstruction





1865–1877
 With malice toward none, with charity for all, with ﬁrmness in the right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to ﬁnish the work we are in, to bind up the nation’s wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and orphan, to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.

T


 he battle was done, the buglers silent. Bone-weary and bloodied, the American people, North and South, now faced the staggering challenges of peace. Four questions loomed large. How would the South, physically devastated by war and socially revolutionized by emancipation, be rebuilt? How would liberated blacks fare as free men and women? How would the Southern states be reintegrated into the Union? And who would direct the process of Reconstruction—the Southern states themselves, the president, or Congress?

The Problems of Peace
 Other questions also clamored for answers. What should be done with the captured Confederate ringleaders, all

 of whom were liable to charges of treason? During the war a popular Northern song had been “Hang Jeff Davis to a Sour Apple Tree,” and even innocent children had lisped it. Davis was temporarily clapped into irons during the early days of his two-year imprisonment. But he and his fellow “conspirators” were ﬁnally released, partly because the odds were that no Virginia jury would convict them. All rebel leaders were ﬁ nally pardoned by President Johnson as a sort of Christmas present in 1868. But Congress did not remove all remaining civil disabilities until thirty years later and only posthumously restored Davis’s citizenship more than a century later. Dismal indeed was the picture presented by the war-racked South when the rattle of musketry faded. Not only had an age perished, but a civilization had collapsed, in both its economic and its social structure.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


Charleston, South
Carolina, in Ruins,
 April 1865 Rebel troops evacuating Charleston blew up military supplies to deny them to General William Tecumseh Sherman’s forces. The explosions ignited ﬁres that all but destroyed the city.

 The moonlight-and-magnolia Old South, largely imaginary in any case, had forever gone with the wind. Handsome cities of yesteryear, such as Charleston and Richmond, were rubble-strewn and weed-choked. An Atlantan returned to his once-fair hometown and remarked, “Hell has laid her egg, and right here it hatched.” Economic life had creaked to a halt. Banks and businesses had locked their doors, ruined by runaway inﬂation. Factories were smokeless, silent, dismantled. The transportation system had broken down completely. Before the war ﬁve different railroad lines had converged on Columbia, South Carolina; now the nearest connected track was twenty-nine miles away. Efforts to untwist the rails corkscrewed by Sherman’s soldiers proved bumpily unsatisfactory. Agriculture—the economic lifeblood of the South— was almost hopelessly crippled. Once-white cotton ﬁelds now yielded a lush harvest of nothing but green weeds. The slave-labor system had collapsed, seed was scarce, and livestock had been driven off by plundering Yankees. Pathetic instances were reported of men hitching themselves to plows, while women and children gripped the handles. Not until 1870 did the se-

 ceded states produce as large a cotton crop as that of the fateful year 1860, and much of that yield came from new acreage in the Southwest. The princely planter aristocrats were humbled by the war—at least temporarily. Reduced to proud poverty, they faced charred and gutted mansions, lost investments, and almost worthless land. Their investments of more than $2 billion in slaves, their primary form of wealth, had evaporated with emancipation. Beaten but unbent, many high-spirited white Southerners remained dangerously deﬁant. They cursed the “damnyankees” and spoke of “your government” in Washington instead of “our government.” One Southern bishop refused to pray for President Andrew Johnson, though Johnson proved to be in sore need of divine guidance. Conscious of no crime, these former Confederates continued to believe that their view of secession was correct and that the “lost cause” was still a just war. One popular anti-Union song ran, I’m glad I fought agin her, I only wish we’d won, And I ain’t axed any pardon for anything I’ve done. Such attitudes boded ill for the prospects of painlessly binding up the Republic’s wounds.

From Slavery to Freedom


 Freedmen Deﬁne Freedom Confusion abounded in the still-smoldering South about the precise meaning of “freedom” for blacks. Emancipation took effect haltingly and unevenly in different parts of the conquered Confederacy. As Union armies marched in and out of various localities, many blacks found themselves emancipated and then reenslaved. A North Carolina slave estimated that he had celebrated freedom about twelve times. Blacks from one Texas county ﬂeeing to the free soil of the liberated county next door were attacked by slaveowners as they swam across the river that marked the county line. The next day trees along the riverbank were bent with swinging corpses—a grisly warning to others dreaming of liberty. Other planters resisted emancipation more legalistically, stubbornly protesting that slavery was lawful until state legislatures or the Supreme Court declared otherwise. For many slaves the shackles of bondage were not struck off in a single mighty blow; long-suffering blacks often had to wrench free of their chains link by link. The variety of responses to emancipation, by whites as well as blacks, illustrated the sometimes startling complexity of the master-slave relationship. Loyalty to



 the plantation master prompted some slaves to resist the liberating Union armies, while other slaves’ pentup bitterness burst forth violently on the day of liberation. Many newly emancipated slaves, for example, joined Union troops in pillaging their masters’ possessions. In one instance a group of Virginia slaves laid twenty lashes on the back of their former master—a painful dose of his own favorite medicine. Prodded by the bayonets of Yankee armies of occupation, all masters were eventually forced to recognize their slaves’ permanent freedom. The oncecommanding planter would assemble his former human chattels in front of the porch of the “big house” and announce their liberty. Though some blacks initially responded to news of their emancipation with suspicion and uncertainty, they soon celebrated their newfound freedom. Many took new names in place of the ones given by their masters and demanded that whites formally address them as “Mr.” or “Mrs.” Others abandoned the coarse cottons that had been their only clothing as slaves and sought silks, satins, and other ﬁ nery. Though many whites perceived such behavior as insubordinate, they were forced to recognize the realities of emancipation. “Never before had I a word of impudence from any of our black folk,” wrote one white Southerner, “but they are not ours any longer.”

The Day of Jubilo This French
 illustration of “Emancipated Negroes Celebrating the Emancipation Proclamation” may have been somewhat fanciful, but it captured well the exhilaration that came with freedom.



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


Educating Young Freedmen and Freedwomen,
 1870s Freed slaves in the South regarded schooling as the key to improving their children’s lives and the fulﬁllment of a long-sought right that had been denied blacks in slavery. These well-dressed schoolchildren are lined up outside their rural, one-room schoolhouse alongside their teachers, both black and white.

 Houston H. Holloway, age twenty at the time of his emancipation, recalled his feelings upon hearing of his freedom:

“


 I felt like a bird out of a cage. Amen. Amen. Amen. I could hardly ask to feel any better than I did that day. . . . The week passed off in a blaze of glory.

”


 The reunion of long-lost relatives also inspired joy; one Union ofﬁcer wrote home,

“


 Men are taking their wives and children, families which had been for a long time broken up are united and oh! such happiness. I am glad I am here.

”


 Tens of thousands of emancipated blacks took to the roads, some to test their freedom, others to search for long-lost spouses, parents, and children. Emancipation thus strengthened the black family, and many newly freed men and women formalized “slave marriages” for personal and pragmatic reasons, including the desire to make their children legal heirs. Other blacks left their former masters to work in towns and cities, where existing black communities provided protection and mutual assistance. Whole communities sometimes moved together in search of opportunity. From 1878 to 1880, some twenty-ﬁve thousand blacks from Louisiana, Texas, and Mississippi surged in a mass exodus to Kansas. The westward ﬂood of these “Exodusters” was stemmed only when steamboat captains refused to transport more black migrants across the Mississippi River. The church became the focus of black community life in the years following emancipation. As slaves, blacks had worshiped alongside whites, but now they formed their own churches pastored by their own ministers. Black churches grew robustly. The 150,000member black Baptist Church of 1850 reached 500,000 by 1870, while the African Methodist Episcopal Church

 Letter from a Freedman to His Old Master, 1865 hat was it like to experience the transition from slavery to freedom? Four million Southern blacks faced this exhilarating and formidable prospect with the end of the war. For historians, recovering the African American perspective on emancipation is challenging. Unlike their white masters, freed blacks left few written records. But one former slave captured in a letter to his “Old Master” (whose surname he bore) the heroic determination of many blacks to build new independent and digniﬁed lives for themselves and their families. During the war Jourdon Anderson escaped slavery in Tennessee with his wife and two daughters. After relocating to the relative safety of Ohio, he received a communication from his former owner asking him to return. In his bold reply, reportedly “dictated by the old servant” himself, Anderson expressed his family’s new expectations for life as free people and an uneasiness about his former master’s intentions. He made reference to his “comfortable home,” his daughters’ schooling, the church that he and his wife were free to attend regularly, and the peace of mind that came with knowing that “my girls [would not be] brought to shame by the violence and wickedness of their young masters.” To test the white man’s sincerity, Anderson and his wife asked for the astronomical ﬁgure of $11,680 in back wages from decades as slaves. He closed by reiterating that “the great desire of my life is to give my children an education and have them form virtuous habits.” This rare letter demonstrates that many black correspondents may have been illiterate, but they were hardly inarticulate. And they asserted themselves as parents, workers, and citizens not only from the distance of a former free state like Ohio but also deep within the former slave states of the South. Was the tone of Anderson’s letter (and postscript) serious or tonguein-cheek? What did “freedom” mean for Anderson and other blacks in the months following emancipation? How did the eventual accomplishments of Reconstruction correspond with the initial expectations of people like Anderson and his former owner?

W






Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 quadrupled in size from 100,000 to 400,000 in the ﬁ rst decade after emancipation. These churches formed the bedrock of black community life, and they soon gave rise to other benevolent, fraternal, and mutual aid societies. All these orga ni zations helped blacks protect their newly won freedom. Emancipation also meant education for many blacks. Learning to read and write had been a privilege generally denied to them under slavery. Freedmen wasted no time establishing societies for self-improvement, which undertook to raise funds to purchase land, build schoolhouses, and hire teachers. One member of a North Carolina education society asserted that “a schoolhouse would be the ﬁ rst proof of their independence.” Southern blacks soon found, however, that the demand outstripped the supply of qualiﬁed black teachers. They accepted the aid of Northern white women sent by the American Missionary Association, who volunteered their ser vices as teachers. They also turned to the federal government for help. The freed blacks were going to need all the friends—and power— they could muster in Washington.

 The Freedmen’s Bureau Abolitionists had long preached that slavery was a degrading institution. Now the emancipators were faced with the brutal reality that the freedmen were overwhelmingly unskilled, unlettered, without property or money, and with scant knowledge of how to survive as free people. To cope with this problem throughout the conquered South, Congress created the Freedmen’s Bureau on March 3, 1865. On paper at least, the bureau was intended to be a kind of primitive welfare agency. It was to provide food, clothing, medical care, and education both to freedmen and to white refugees. Heading the bureau was a

 Women from the North enthusiastically embraced the opportunity to go south and teach in Freedmen’s Bureau schools for emancipated blacks. One volunteer explained her motives:

“


 I thought I must do something, not having money at my command, what could I do but give myself to the work. . . . I would go to them, and give them my life if necessary.

”


 warmly sympathetic friend of blacks, Union general Oliver O. Howard, who later founded and served as president of Howard University in Washington, D.C. The bureau achieved its greatest successes in education. It taught an estimated 200,000 blacks how to read. Many former slaves had a passion for learning, partly because they wanted to close the gap between themselves and whites and partly because they longed to read the Word of God. In one elementary class in North Carolina sat four generations of the same family, ranging from a six-year-old child to a seventy-ﬁve-yearold grandmother. But in other areas, the bureau’s accomplishments were meager—or even mischievous. Although the bureau was authorized to settle former slaves on forty-acre tracts conﬁscated from the Confederates, little land actually made it into blacks’ hands. Instead local administrators often collaborated with planters in expelling blacks from towns and cajoling them into signing labor contracts to work for their former masters. Still, the white South resented the bureau as a meddlesome federal interloper that threatened to upset white racial dominance. President Andrew Johnson, who shared the white supremacist views of most white Southerners, repeatedly tried to kill it, and it expired in 1872.

Johnson: The Tailor President
 Few presidents have ever been faced with a more perplexing sea of troubles than that confronting Andrew Johnson. What manner of man was this medium-built, dark-eyed, black-haired Tennessean, now chief executive by virtue of the bullet that killed Lincoln? No citizen, not even Lincoln, has ever reached the White House from humbler beginnings. Born to impoverished parents in North Carolina and orphaned early, Johnson never attended school but was apprenticed to a tailor at age ten. Ambitious to get ahead, he taught himself to read, and later his wife taught him to write and do simple arithmetic. Like many another self-made man, he was inclined to overpraise his maker. Johnson early became active in politics in Tennessee, where he had moved when seventeen years old. He shone as an impassioned champion of poor whites against the planter aristocrats, although he himself ultimately owned a few slaves. He excelled as a two-ﬁsted stump speaker before angry and heckling crowds, who on occasion greeted his political oratory with cocked pistols, not just cocked ears. Elected to Congress, he attracted much favorable attention in the

 Johnson's Plans for the South



Crushed by the Constitution
 President Andrew Johnson revered the U.S. Constitution but eventually felt its awesome weight in his impeachment trial.

 North (but not the South) when he refused to secede with his own state. After Tennessee was partially “redeemed” by Union armies, he was appointed war governor and served courageously in an at mosphere of danger. Political exigency next thrust Johnson into the vice presidency. Lincoln’s Union party in 1864 needed to attract support from the War Democrats and other proSouthern elements, and Johnson, a Democrat, seemed to be the ideal man. Unfortunately, he appeared at the vice-presidential inaugural ceremonies the following March in a scandalous condition. He had recently been afﬂ icted with typhoid fever, and although not known as a heavy drinker, he was urged by his friends to take a stiff bracer of whiskey. This he did—with unfortunate results. “Old Andy” Johnson was no doubt a man of parts— unpolished parts. He was intelligent, able, forceful, and gifted with homespun honesty. Steadfastly devoted to duty and to the people, he was a dogmatic champion of states’ rights and the Constitution. He would often present a copy of the document to visitors, and he was buried with one as a pillow. Yet the man who had raised himself from the tailor’s bench to the president’s chair was a misﬁt. A Southerner who did not understand the North, a Tennessean who had earned the distrust of the South, a Democrat who had never been accepted by the Republicans, a president who had never been elected to the

 ofﬁce, he was not at home in a Republican White House. Hotheaded, contentious, and stubborn, he was the wrong man in the wrong place at the wrong time. A Reconstruction policy devised by angels might well have failed in his tactless hands.

Presidential Reconstruction
 Even before the shooting war had ended, the political war over Reconstruction had begun. Abraham Lincoln believed that the Southern states had never legally withdrawn from the Union. Their formal restoration to the Union would therefore be relatively simple. Accordingly, Lincoln in 1863 proclaimed his “10 percent” Reconstruction plan. It decreed that a state could be reintegrated into the Union when 10 percent of its voters in the presidential election of 1860 had taken an oath of allegiance to the United States and pledged to abide by emancipation. The next step would be formal erection of a state government. Lincoln would then recognize the puriﬁed regime. Lincoln’s proclamation provoked a sharp reaction in Congress, where Republicans feared the restoration of the planter aristocracy to power and the possible reenslavement of blacks. Republicans therefore rammed through Congress in 1864 the Wade-Davis Bill. The bill required that 50 percent of a state’s voters take the oath of allegiance and demanded stronger safeguards for



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 emancipation than Lincoln’s as the price of readmission to the Union. Lincoln “pocket-vetoed” this bill by refusing to sign it after Congress had adjourned. Republicans were outraged. They refused to seat delegates from Louisiana after that state had reorga nized its government in accordance with Lincoln’s 10 percent plan in 1864. The controversy surrounding the Wade-Davis Bill had revealed deep differences between the president and Congress. Unlike Lincoln, many in Congress insisted that the seceders had indeed left the Union—had “committed suicide” as republican states—and had therefore forfeited all their rights. They could be readmitted only as “conquered provinces” on such conditions as Congress should decree. This episode further revealed differences among Republicans. Two factions were emerging. The majority moderate group tended to agree with Lincoln that the seceded states should be restored to the Union as simply and swiftly as reasonable—though on Congress’s terms, not the president’s. The minority radical group believed that the South should atone more painfully for its sins. Before the South should be restored, the radicals wanted its social structure uprooted, the haughty planters punished, and the newly emancipated blacks protected by federal power. Some of the radicals were secretly pleased when the assassin’s bullet felled Lincoln, for the martyred president had shown tenderness toward the South. Spiteful “Andy” Johnson, who shared their hatred for the planter aristocrats, would presumably also share their desire to reconstruct the South with a rod of iron. Johnson soon disillusioned them. He agreed with Lincoln that the seceded states had never legally been outside the Union. Thus he quickly recognized several of Lincoln’s 10 percent governments, and on May 29, 1865, he issued his own Reconstruction proclamation (see Table 22.1). It disfranchised certain leading Con-

Before President Andrew Johnson (1808–1875)
 softened his Southern policy, his views were radical. Speaking on April 21, 1865, he declared,

“


 It is not promulgating anything that I have not heretofore said to say that traitors must be made odious, that treason must be made odious, that traitors must be punished and impoverished. They must not only be punished, but their social power must be destroyed. If not, they will still maintain an ascendancy, and may again become numerous and powerful; for, in the words of a former Senator of the United States, ‘When traitors become numerous enough, treason becomes respectable.’

”


 federates, including those with taxable property worth more than $20,000, though they might petition him for personal pardons. It called for special state conventions, which were required to repeal the ordinances of secession, repudiate all Confederate debts, and ratify the slave-freeing Thirteenth Amendment. States that complied with these conditions, Johnson declared, would be swiftly readmitted to the Union. Johnson, savoring his dominance over the hightoned aristocrats who now begged his favor, granted pardons in abundance. Bolstered by the political resurrection of the planter elite, the recently rebellious states moved rapidly in the second half of 1865 to organize governments. But as the pattern of the new governments became clear, Republicans of all stripes grew furious.

Table 22.1 Principal Reconstruction Proposals and Plans
Year


Proposal or Plan


1864–1865
1865–1866
1866–1867
1867–1877


 Lincoln’s 10 percent proposal Johnson’s version of Lincoln’s proposal Congressional plan: 10 percent plan with Fourteenth Amendment Congressional plan of military Reconstruction: Fourteenth Amendment plus black suffrage, later established nationwide by Fifteenth Amendment

The Black Codes


The Baleful Black Codes
 Among the ﬁ rst acts of the new Southern regimes sanctioned by Johnson was the passage of the iron-toothed Black Codes. These laws were designed to regulate the affairs of the emancipated blacks, much as the slave statutes had done in pre–Civil War days. Mississippi passed the ﬁ rst such law in November 1865, and other Southern states soon followed suit. The Black Codes varied in severity from state to state (Mississippi’s was the harshest and Georgia’s the most lenient), but they had much in common. The Black Codes aimed, ﬁ rst of all, to ensure a stable and subservient labor force. The crushed Cotton Kingdom could not rise from its weeds until the ﬁelds were once again put under hoe and plow—and many whites wanted to make sure that they retained the tight control they had exercised over black ﬁeld hands and plow drivers in the days of slavery. Dire penalties were therefore imposed by the codes on blacks who “jumped” their labor contracts, which usually committed them to work for the same employer for one year, and generally at pittance wages. Violators could be made to forfeit back wages or could be forcibly dragged back to work by a paid “Negro-catcher.” In Mississippi the captured freedmen could be ﬁ ned and then hired out to pay their ﬁ nes—an arrangement that closely resembled slavery itself.



 Early in 1866 one congressman quoted a Georgian:

“


 The blacks eat, sleep, move, live, only by the tolerance of the whites, who hate them. The blacks own absolutely nothing but their bodies; their former masters own everything, and will sell them nothing. If a black man draws even a bucket of water from a well, he must ﬁrst get the permission of a white man, his enemy. . . . If he asks for work to earn his living, he must ask it of a white man; and the whites are determined to give him no work, except on such terms as will make him a serf and impair his liberty.

”


 The codes also sought to restore as nearly as possible the pre-emancipation system of race relations. Freedom was legally recognized, as were some other privileges, such as the right to marry. But all the codes forbade a black to serve on a jury; some even barred blacks from renting or leasing land. A black could be punished for “idleness” by being sentenced to work on a chain gang. Nowhere were blacks allowed to vote. These oppressive laws mocked the ideal of freedom, so recently purchased by buckets of blood. The

Sharecroppers Picking Cotton
 Although many freed slaves found themselves picking cotton on their former masters’ plantations, they took comfort that they were at least paid wages and could work as a family unit. In time, however, they became ensnared in the web of debt that their planter bosses spun to keep a free labor force tightly bound to them.



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 Black Codes imposed terrible burdens on the unfettered blacks, struggling against mistreatment and poverty to make their way as free people. The worst features of the Black Codes would eventually be repealed, but their revocation could not by itself lift the liberated blacks into economic independence. Lacking capital, and with little to offer but their labor, thousands of impoverished former slaves slipped into the status of sharecropper farmers, as did many landless whites. Luckless sharecroppers gradually sank into a morass of virtual peonage and remained there for generations. Formerly slaves to masters, countless blacks as well as poorer whites in effect became slaves to the soil and to their creditors. Yet the dethroned planter aristocracy resented even this pitiful concession to freedom. Sharecropping was the “wrong policy,” said one planter. “It makes the laborer too independent; he becomes a partner, and has a right to be consulted.” The Black Codes made an ugly impression in the North. If the former slaves were being re-enslaved, people asked one another, had not the Boys in Blue spilled their blood in vain? Had the North really won the war?

Congressional Reconstruction
 These questions grew more insistent when the congressional delegations from the newly reconstituted Southern states presented themselves in the Capitol in December 1865. To the shock and disgust of the Republicans, many former Confederate leaders were on hand to claim their seats. The appearance of these ex-rebels was a natural but costly blunder. Voters of the South, seeking able representatives, had turned instinctively to their experienced statesmen. But most of the Southern leaders were tainted by active association with the “lost cause.” Among them were four former Confederate generals, ﬁve colonels, and various members of the Richmond cabinet and Congress. Worst of all, there was the shrimpy but brainy Alexander Stephens, ex–vice president of the Confederacy, still under indictment for treason. The presence of these “whitewashed rebels” infuriated the Republicans in Congress. The war had been fought to restore the Union, but not on these kinds of terms. The Republicans were in no hurry to embrace their former enemies—virtually all of them Democrats—in the chambers of the Capitol. While the South

 had been “out” from 1861 to 1865, the Republicans in Congress had enjoyed a relatively free hand. They had passed much legislation that favored the North, such as the Morrill Tariff, the Paciﬁc Railroad Act, and the Homestead Act. Now many Republicans balked at giving up this political advantage. On the ﬁ rst day of the congressional session, December 4, 1865, they banged shut the door in the face of the newly elected Southern delegations. Looking to the future, the Republicans were alarmed to realize that a restored South would be stronger than ever in national politics. Before the war a black slave had counted as three-ﬁ fths of a person in apportioning congressional representation. Now the slave was ﬁve-ﬁ fths of a person. Eleven Southern states had seceded and been subdued by force of arms. But now, owing to full counting of free blacks, the rebel states were entitled to twelve more votes in Congress, and twelve more presidential electoral votes, than they had previously enjoyed. Again, angry voices in the North raised the cry, Who won the war? Republicans had good reason to fear that ultimately they might be elbowed aside. Southerners might join hands with Democrats in the North and win control of Congress or maybe even the White House. If this happened, they could perpetuate the Black Codes, virtually re-enslaving blacks. They could dismantle the economic program of the Republican party by lowering tariffs, rerouting the transcontinental railroad, repealing the free-farm Homestead Act, and possibly even repudiating the national debt. President Johnson thus deeply disturbed the congressional Republicans when he announced on December 6, 1865, that the recently rebellious states had satisﬁed his conditions and that in his view the Union was now restored.

 Johnson Clashes with Congress A clash between president and Congress was now inevitable. It exploded into the open in February 1866, when the president vetoed a bill (later repassed) extending the life of the controversial Freedmen’s Bureau. Aroused, the Republicans swiftly struck back. In March 1866 they passed the Civil Rights Bill, which conferred on blacks the privilege of American citizenship and struck at the Black Codes. President Johnson resolutely vetoed this forward-looking mea sure on constitutional grounds, but in April congressmen steamrollered it over his veto—something they repeat-

Johnson Versus Congressional Republicans


 edly did henceforth. The hapless president, dubbed “Sir Veto” and “Andy Veto,” had his presidential wings clipped, as Congress increasingly assumed the dominant role in running the government. One critic called Johnson “the dead dog of the White House.” The Republicans now undertook to rivet the principles of the Civil Rights Bill into the Constitution as the Fourteenth Amendment. They feared that the Southerners might one day win control of Congress and repeal the hated law. The proposed amendment, approved by Congress and sent to the states in June 1866 and ratiﬁed in 1868, was sweeping. It (1) conferred civil rights, including citizenship but excluding the fran-



 chise, on the freedmen; (2) reduced proportionately the representation of a state in Congress and in the Electoral College if it denied blacks the ballot; (3) disqualiﬁed from federal and state ofﬁce former Confederates who as federal ofﬁceholders had once sworn “to support the Constitution of the United States”; and (4) guaranteed the federal debt, while repudiating all Confederate debts. (See the text of the Fourteenth Amendment in the Appendix.) The radical faction was disappointed that the Fourteenth Amendment did not grant the right to vote, but all Republicans were agreed that no state should be welcomed back into the Union fold without ﬁ rst ratifying the Fourteenth Amendment. Yet President Johnson advised the Southern states to reject it, and all of the “sinful eleven,” except Tennessee, deﬁantly spurned the amendment. Their spirit was reﬂected in a Southern song: And I don’t want no pardon for what I was or am, I won’t be reconstructed and I don’t give a damn.

Swinging ’Round the
 Circle with Johnson

 An Inﬂexible President, 1866 This Republican cartoon shows Johnson knocking blacks out of the Freedmen’s Bureau by his veto.

 As 1866 lengthened, the battle grew between the Congress and the president. The root of the controversy was Johnson’s “10 percent” governments that had passed the most stringent Black Codes. Congress had tried to temper the worst features of the codes by extending the life of the embattled Freedmen’s Bureau and passing the Civil Rights Bill. Both mea sures Johnson had vetoed. Now the issue was whether Reconstruction was to be carried on with or without the Fourteenth Amendment. The Republicans would settle for nothing less. The crucial congressional elections of 1866—more crucial than some presidential elections—were fast approaching. Johnson was naturally eager to escape from the clutch of Congress by securing a majority favorable to his soft-on-the-South policy. Invited to dedicate a Chicago monument to Stephen A. Douglas, he undertook to speak at various cities en route in support of his views. Johnson’s famous “swing ’round the circle,” beginning in the late summer of 1866, was a seriocomedy of errors. The president delivered a series of “give ’em hell” speeches, in which he accused the radicals in Congress of having planned large-scale antiblack riots and murder in the South. As he spoke, hecklers hurled insults at



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 him. Reverting to his stump-speaking days in Tennessee, he shouted back angry retorts, amid cries of “You be damned” and “Don’t get mad, Andy.” The dignity of his high ofﬁce sank to a new low, as the old charges of drunkenness were revived. As a vote-getter, Johnson was highly successful— for the opposition. His inept speechmaking heightened the cry “Stand by Congress” against the “Tailor of the Potomac.” When the ballots were counted, the Republicans had rolled up more than a two-thirds majority in both houses of Congress.

Republican Principles
 and Programs The Republicans now had a veto-proof Congress and virtually unlimited control of Reconstruction policy. But moderates and radicals still disagreed over the best course to pursue in the South.

Republicans Campaigning in
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, 1868
 The soldiers’ caps and regimental ﬂags demonstrate the continuing federal military presence in the Reconstruction South. Radical Republican congressman Thaddeus Stevens said that Reconstruction must “revolutionize Southern institutions, habits, and manners. . . . The foundation of their institutions . . . must be broken up and relaid, or all our blood and treasure have been spent in vain.”

 The radicals in the Senate were led by the courtly and principled idealist Charles Sumner, long since recovered from his prewar caning on the Senate ﬂoor, who tirelessly labored not only for black freedom but for racial equality. In the House the most powerful radical was Thaddeus Stevens, crusty and vindictive congressman from Pennsylvania. Seventy-four years old in 1866, he was a curious ﬁgure, with a protruding lower lip, a heavy black wig covering his bald head, and a deformed foot. An unswerving friend of blacks, he had defended runaway slaves in court without fee and, before dying, insisted on burial in a black cemetery. His affectionate devotion to blacks was matched by his vitriolic hatred of rebellious white Southerners. A masterly parliamentarian with a razor-sharp mind and withering wit, Stevens was a leading ﬁgure on the Joint (House-Senate) Committee on Reconstruction. Still opposed to rapid restoration of the Southern states, the radicals wanted to keep them out as long as possible and apply federal power to bring about a dras-

Military Reconstruction


 though the moderates, as the majority faction, had the upper hand. And one thing both groups had come to agree on by 1867 was the necessity to enfranchise black voters, even if it took federal troops to do it.

Representative Thaddeus Stevens (1792–1868), in
 a congressional speech on January 3, 1867, urged the ballot for blacks out of concern for them and out of bitterness against Southern whites:

“


 I am for Negro suffrage in every rebel state. If it be just, it should not be denied; if it be necessary, it should be adopted; if it be a punishment to traitors, they deserve it.

Reconstruction by the Sword


”


 tic social and economic transformation in the South. But moderate Republicans, more attuned to the timehonored principles of states’ rights and self-government, recoiled from the full implications of the radical program. They preferred policies that restrained the states from abridging citizens’ rights, rather than policies that directly involved the federal government in individual lives. The actual policies adopted by Congress showed the inﬂuence of both these schools of thought,

 Against a backdrop of vicious and bloody race riots that had erupted in several Southern cities, Congress passed the Reconstruction Act on March 2, 1867 (see Map 22.1). Supplemented by later mea sures, this drastic legislation divided the South into ﬁve military districts, each commanded by a Union general and policed by blue-clad soldiers, about twenty thousand all told. The act also temporarily disfranchised tens of thousands of former Confederates. Congress additionally laid down stringent conditions for the readmission of the seceded states. The wayward states were required to ratify the Fourteenth Amendment, giving the former slaves their rights as citizens. The bitterest pill of all to white Southerners

 Map 22.1 Military Reconstruction, 1867 (ﬁve districts and commanding generals) For many white Southerners, military Reconstruction amounted to turning the knife in the wound of defeat. An often-repeated story of later years had a Southerner remark, “I was sixteen years old before I discovered that damnyankee was two words.” Boundaries of the five Military Districts

 VA.

Interactive Map




MILITARY DISTRICT 1

 Tennessee escaped military regime.

 1870 Date refers to year of readmission to the Union

General Schofield


N.C.


 TENNESSEE

 ARKANSAS

MILITARY DISTRICT 4
General Ord 
 TEXAS

 MISS.

MILITARY DISTRICT 5
General Sheridan 


 ALABAMA

MILITARY DISTRICT 2

General Sickles


 GEORGIA



S.C.


MILITARY DISTRICT 3
General Pope 
 LOUISIANA

 FLORIDA



Years “Redeemer”
 governments established Established 1869 –1871 Established 1873 –1874 Established 1876 –1877

 Presidential electoral vote by party Independent Democratic Republican Democratic



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 was the stipulation that they guarantee in their state constitutions full suffrage for their former adult male slaves. Yet the act, reﬂecting moderate sentiment, stopped short of giving the freedmen land or education at federal expense. The overriding purpose of the moderates was to create an electorate in Southern states that would vote those states back into the Union on acceptable terms and thus free the federal government from direct responsibility for the protection of black rights. As later events would demonstrate, this approach proved woefully inadequate to the cause of justice for blacks. The radical Republicans were still worried. The danger loomed that once the unrepentant states were readmitted, they would amend their constitutions so as to withdraw the ballot from blacks. The only ironclad safeguard was to incorporate black suffrage in the federal Constitution. This goal was ﬁ nally achieved by the Fifteenth Amendment, passed by Congress in 1869 and ratiﬁed by the required number of states in 1870 (see the Appendix). Military Reconstruction of the South not only usurped certain functions of the president as commander in chief but set up a martial regime of dubious legality. The Supreme Court had already ruled, in the

 At a constitutional convention in Alabama, freed people afﬁrmed their rights in the following declaration:

“


 We claim exactly the same rights, privileges and immunities as are enjoyed by white men—we ask nothing more and will be content with nothing less. . . . The law no longer knows white nor black, but simply men, and consequently we are entitled to ride in public conveyances, hold ofﬁce, sit on juries and do everything else which we have in the past been prevented from doing solely on the ground of color.

”


 case Ex parte Milligan (1866), that military tribunals could not try civilians, even during wartime, in areas where the civil courts were open. Peacetime military rule seemed starkly contrary to the spirit of the Constitution. But the circumstances were extraordinary in the Republic’s history, and for the time being the Supreme Court avoided offending the Republican Congress.

Table 22.2 Southern Reconstruction by State


State


Readmitted to
Representation
 in Congress

Home Rule (Democratic
 or “Redeemer” Regime) Reestablished

Tennessee


July 24, 1866


Arkansas
North Carolina
Alabama
Florida


June 22, 1868
June 25, 1868
June 25, 1868
June 25, 1868




Louisiana
South Carolina
Virginia
Mississippi
Texas
Georgia


June 25, 1868
June 25, 1868
January 26, 1870
February 23, 1870
March 30, 1870
[June 25, 1868] July 15, 1870




Comments
 Ratiﬁed Fourteenth Amendment in 1866 and hence avoided military Reconstruction*

 Federal troops restationed in 1877, as result of Hayes-Tilden electoral bargain Same as Florida Same as Florida

 Readmitted June 25, 1868, but returned to military control after expulsion of blacks from legislature

 *For many years Tennessee was the only state of the secession to observe Lincoln’s birthday as a legal holiday. Many states in the South still observe the birthdays of Jefferson Davis and Robert E. Lee.

Amending the Constitution


 Prodded into line by federal bayonets, the Southern states got on with the task of constitution making. By 1870 all of them had reorga nized their governments and had been accorded full rights (see Table 22.2). The hated “bluebellies” remained until the new Republican regimes—usually called “radical” regimes—appeared to be ﬁ rmly entrenched. Yet when the federal troops ﬁnally left a state, its government swiftly passed back into the hands of white Redeemers, or “Home Rule” regimes, which were inevitably Democratic. Finally, in 1877, the last federal muskets were removed from state politics, and the “solid” Democratic South congealed.

No Women Voters
 The passage of the three Reconstruction-era Amendments—the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth— delighted former abolitionists but deeply disappointed advocates of women’s rights. Women had played a prominent part in the prewar abolitionist movement and had often pointed out that both women and blacks lacked basic civil rights, especially the crucial right to vote. The struggle for black freedom and the crusade for women’s rights, therefore, were one and the same in the eyes of many women. Yet during the war, feminist leaders such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony had temporarily suspended their own demands and worked wholeheartedly for the cause of black emancipation. The Woman’s Loyal League had gathered nearly 400,000 signatures on petitions asking Congress to pass a constitutional amendment prohibiting slavery. Now, with the war ended and the Thirteenth Amendment passed, feminist leaders believed that their time had come. They reeled with shock, however,

 The prominent suffragist and abolitionist Susan B. Anthony (1820–1906) was outraged over the proposed exclusion of women from the Fourteenth Amendment. In a conversation with her former male allies Wendell Phillips and Theodore Tilton, she reportedly held out her arm and declared,

“


 Look at this, all of you. And hear me swear that I will cut off this right arm of mine before I will ever work for or demand the ballot for the negro and not the woman.

”




 when the wording of the Fourteenth Amendment, which deﬁ ned equal national citizenship, for the ﬁ rst time inserted the word male into the Constitution in referring to a citizen’s right to vote. Both Stanton and Anthony campaigned actively against the Fourteenth Amendment despite the pleas of Frederick Douglass, who had long supported woman suffrage but believed that this was “the Negro’s hour.” When the Fifteenth Amendment proposed to prohibit denial of the vote on the basis of “race, color, or previous condition of servitude,” Stanton and Anthony wanted the word sex added to the list. They lost this battle, too. Fifty years would pass before the Constitution granted women the right to vote.

The Realities of Radical
Reconstruction in the South
 Blacks now had freedom, of a sort. Their friends in Congress had only haltingly and somewhat belatedly secured the franchise for them. Both Presidents Lincoln and Johnson had proposed to give the ballot gradually to selected blacks who qualiﬁed for it through education, property ownership, or military ser vice. Moderate Republicans and even many radicals at ﬁ rst hesitated to bestow suffrage on the freedmen. The Fourteenth Amendment, in many ways the heart of the Republican program for Reconstruction, had fallen short of guaranteeing the right to vote. (It envisioned for blacks the same status as that of women—citizenship without voting rights.) But by 1867 hesitation had given way to a hard determination to enfranchise the former slaves wholesale and immediately, while thousands of white Southerners were being denied the vote. By glaring contrast, most of the Northern states, before ratiﬁcation of the Fifteenth Amendment in 1870, withheld the ballot from their tiny black minorities. White Southerners naturally concluded that the Republicans were hypocritical in insisting that blacks in the South be allowed to vote. Having gained their right to suffrage, Southern black men seized the initiative and began to organize politically. Their primary vehicle became the Union League, originally a pro-Union orga ni zation based in the North. Assisted by Northern blacks, freedmen turned the League into a network of political clubs that educated members in their civic duties and campaigned for Republican candidates. The league’s mission soon expanded to include building black churches and schools, representing black grievances before local



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


Freedmen Voting, Richmond,
 Virginia, 1871 The exercise of democratic rights by former slaves constituted a political and social revolution in the South and was bitterly resented by whites.

 employers and government, and recruiting militias to protect black communities from white retaliation. Though African American women did not obtain the right to vote, they too assumed new political roles. Black women faithfully attended the parades and rallies common in black communities during the early years of Reconstruction and helped assemble mass meetings in the newly constructed black churches. They even showed up at the constitutional conventions held throughout the South in 1867, monitoring the proceedings and participating in informal votes outside the convention halls. But black men elected as delegates to the state constitutional conventions held the greater political authority. They formed the backbone of the black political community. At the conventions, they sat down with whites to hammer out new state constitutions, which most importantly provided for universal male suffrage. Though the subsequent elections produced no black governors or majorities in state senates, black political participation expanded exponentially during Reconstruction. Between 1868 and 1876, fourteen black congressmen and two black senators, Hiram Revels and Blanche K. Bruce, both of Mississippi, served in Washington, D.C. Blacks also served in state governments as

 lieutenant governors and representatives, and in local governments as mayors, magistrates, sheriffs, and justices of the peace. The sight of former slaves holding ofﬁce deeply offended their onetime masters, who lashed out with particular fury at the freedmen’s white allies, labeling them scalawags and carpetbaggers. The so-called scalawags were Southerners, often former Unionists and Whigs. The former Confederates accused them, often with wild exaggeration, of plundering the treasuries of the Southern states through their political inﬂuence in the radical governments. The carpetbaggers, on the other hand, were supposedly sleazy Northerners who had packed all their worldly goods into a carpetbag suitcase at war’s end and had come South to seek personal power and proﬁt. In fact, most were former Union soldiers and Northern businessmen and professionals who wanted to play a role in modernizing the “New South.” How well did the radical regimes rule? The radical legislatures passed much desirable legislation and introduced many badly needed reforms. For the ﬁ rst time in Southern history, steps were taken toward establishing adequate public schools. Tax systems were streamlined; public works were launched; and property rights

Radical Reconstruction




Black Reconstruction
 A composite portrait of the ﬁrst black senators and representatives in the Forty-ﬁrst and Forty-second Congresses. Senator Hiram Revels, on the left, was elected in 1870 to the seat that had been occupied by Jefferson Davis when the South seceded.

 were guaranteed to women. Many welcome reforms were retained by the all-white “Redeemer” governments that later returned to power. Despite these achievements, graft ran rampant in many “radical” governments. This was especially true in South Carolina and Louisiana, where conscienceless promoters and other pocket-padders used politically inexperienced blacks as pawns. The worst “black-andwhite” legislatures purchased, as “legislative supplies,” such “stationery” as hams, perfumes, suspenders, bonnets, corsets, champagne, and a cofﬁ n. One “thrifty” carpetbag governor in a single year “saved” $100,000 from a salary of $8,000. Yet this sort of corruption was by no means conﬁ ned to the South in these postwar years. The crimes of the Reconstruction governments were no more outrageous than the scams and felonies being perpetrated in the North at the same time, especially in Boss Tweed’s New York.

The Ku Klux Klan
 Deeply embittered, some Southern whites resorted to savage mea sures against “radical” rule. Many whites resented the success and ability of black legislators as

 much as they resented alleged “corruption.” A number of secret orga ni zations mushroomed forth, the most notorious of which was the “Invisible Empire of the South,” or Ku Klux Klan, founded in Tennessee in 1866. Besheeted nightriders, their horses’ hooves mufﬂed, would approach the cabin of an “upstart” black and hammer on the door. In ghoulish tones one thirsty horseman would demand a bucket of water. Then, under pretense of drinking, he would pour it into a rubber attachment concealed beneath his mask and gown, smack his lips, and declare that this was the ﬁ rst water he had tasted since he was killed at the Battle of Shiloh. If fright did not produce the desired effect, force was employed. Such tomfoolery and terror proved partially effective. Many ex-bondsmen and white “carpetbaggers,” quick to take a hint, shunned the polls. Those stubborn souls who persisted in their “upstart” ways were ﬂogged, mutilated, or even murdered. In one Louisiana parish in 1868, whites in two days killed or wounded two hundred victims; a pile of twenty-ﬁve bodies was found half-buried in the woods. By such atrocious practices were blacks “kept in their place”—that is, down. The Klan became a refuge for numerous bandits and cutthroats. Any scoundrel could don a sheet.



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 Congress, outraged by this night-riding lawlessness, passed the harsh Force Acts of 1870 and 1871. Federal troops were able to stamp out much of the “lash law,” but by this time the Invisible Empire had already done its work of intimidation. Many of the outlawed groups continued their tactics in the guise of “dancing clubs,” “missionary societies,” and “riﬂe clubs.” White resistance undermined attempts to empower blacks politically. The white South, for many decades, openly ﬂouted the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments. Wholesale disfranchisement of blacks, starting conspicuously about 1890, was achieved by

 The following excerpt is part of a heartrending appeal to Congress in 1871 by a group of Kentucky blacks:

“


 We believe you are not familiar with the description of the Ku Klux Klans riding nightly over the country, going from county to county, and in the county towns, spreading terror wherever they go by robbing, whipping, ravishing, and killing our people without provocation, compelling colored people to break the ice and bathe in the chilly waters of the Kentucky River. “The [state] legislature has adjourned. They refused to enact any laws to suppress Ku-Klux disorder. We regard them [the KuKluxers] as now being licensed to continue their dark and bloody deeds under cover of the dark night. They refuse to allow us to testify in the state courts where a white man is concerned. We ﬁnd their deeds are perpetrated only upon colored men and white Republicans. We also ﬁnd that for our services to the government and our race we have become the special object of hatred and persecution at the hands of the Democratic Party. Our people are driven from their homes in great numbers, having no redress only [except] the United States court, which is in many cases unable to reach them.

”


 The Ku Klux Klan, Tennessee, 1868 This night-riding terrorist has even masked the identity of his horse.

 intimidation, fraud, and trickery. Among various underhanded schemes were literacy tests, unfairly administered by whites to the advantage of illiterate whites. In the eyes of white Southerners, the goal of white supremacy fully justiﬁed these dishonorable devices.

 A black leader protested to whites in 1868,

“


 It is extraordinary that a race such as yours, professing gallantry, chivalry, education, and superiority, living in a land where ringing chimes call child and sire to the Gospel of God—that with all these advantages on your side, you can make war upon the poor defenseless black man.

”


The Impeachment Crisis




Impeachment Drama
 The impeachment proceedings against President Andrew Johnson, among the most severe constitutional crises in the Republic’s history, were high political theater, and tickets were in sharp demand.

Johnson Walks the
Impeachment Plank
 Radicals meanwhile had been sharpening their hatchets for President Johnson. Annoyed by the obstruction of the “drunken tailor” in the White House, they falsely accused him of maintaining there a harem of “dissolute women.” Not content with curbing his authority, they decided to remove him altogether by constitutional processes.* As an initial step, Congress in 1867 passed the Tenure of Ofﬁce Act—as usual, over Johnson’s veto. Contrary to precedent, the new law required the president to secure the consent of the Senate before he could remove his appointees once they had been approved by that body. One purpose was to freeze into the cabinet the secretary of war, Edwin M. Stanton, a holdover from the Lincoln administration. Although outwardly loyal to Johnson, he was secretly serving as a spy and informer for the radicals. Johnson provided the radicals with a pretext to begin impeachment proceedings when he abruptly dismissed Stanton early in 1868. The House of Representatives immediately voted 126 to 47 to impeach

 *For impeachment, see Art. I, Sec. II, para. 5; Art. I, Sec. III, paras. 6, 7; Art. II, Sec. IV, in the Appendix.

 Johnson for “high crimes and misdemeanors,” as required by the Constitution, charging him with various violations of the Tenure of Ofﬁce Act. Two additional articles related to Johnson’s verbal assaults on the Congress, involving “disgrace, ridicule, hatred, contempt, and reproach.”

A
Not-Guilty Verdict  for Johnson With evident zeal the radical-led Senate now sat as a court to try Johnson on the dubious impeachment charges. The House conducted the prosecution. The trial aroused intense public interest and, with one thousand tickets printed, proved to be the biggest show of 1868. Johnson kept his dignity and sobriety and maintained a discreet silence. His battery of attorneys argued that the president, convinced that the Tenure of Ofﬁce Act was unconstitutional, had ﬁ red Stanton merely to put a test case before the Supreme Court. (That slow-moving tribunal ﬁ nally ruled indirectly in Johnson’s favor ﬁ fty-eight years later.) House prosecutors, including oily-tongued Benjamin F. Butler and embittered Thaddeus Stevens, had a harder time building a compelling case for impeachment. On May 16, 1868, the day for the ﬁ rst voting in the Senate, the tension was electric, and heavy breathing could be heard in the galleries. By a margin of only one



Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 vote, the radicals failed to muster the two-thirds majority for Johnson’s removal. Seven independentminded Republican senators, courageously putting country above party, voted “not guilty.” Several factors shaped the outcome. Fears of creating a destabilizing precedent played a role, as did principled opposition to abusing the constitutional mechanism of checks and balances. Political considerations also ﬁgured conspicuously. As the vice presidency remained vacant under Johnson, his successor would have been radical Republican Benjamin Wade, the president pro tempore of the Senate. Wade was disliked by many members of the business community for his high-tariff, soft-money, pro-labor views and was distrusted by moderate Republicans. Meanwhile, Johnson indicated through his attorney that he would stop obstructing Republican policies in return for remaining in ofﬁce. Diehard radicals were infuriated by their failure to muster a two-thirds majority for Johnson’s removal. “The Country is going to the Devil!” cried the crippled Stevens as he was carried from the hall. But the nation, though violently aroused, accepted the verdict with a good temper that did credit to its political maturity. In a less stable republic, an armed uprising might have erupted against the president. The nation thus narrowly avoided a dangerous precedent that would have gravely weakened one of the three branches of the federal government. Johnson was clearly guilty of bad speeches, bad judgment, and bad temper, but not of “high crimes and misdemeanors.” From the standpoint of the radicals, his greatest crime had been to stand inﬂexibly in their path.

The Purchase of Alaska
 Johnson’s administration, though largely reduced to a ﬁgurehead, achieved its most enduring success in the ﬁeld of foreign relations. The Russians by 1867 were in a mood to sell the vast and chilly expanse of land now known as Alaska. They had already overextended themselves in North America, and they saw that in the likely event of another war with Britain, they probably would lose their defenseless northern province to the sea-dominant British. Alaska, moreover, had been ruthlessly “furred out” and was a growing economic liability. The Russians were therefore quite eager to unload their “frozen asset” on the Americans, and they put out seductive feelers in Washington. They preferred the United States to any

 Map 22.2 Alaska and the Lower Forty-eight States (a size comparison) Interactive Map

 other purchaser, primarily because they wanted to strengthen further the Republic as a barrier against their ancient enemy, Britain. In 1867 Secretary of State William Seward, an ardent expansionist, signed a treaty with Russia that transferred Alaska to the United States for the bargain price of $7.2 million (see Map 22.2). But Seward’s enthusiasm for these frigid wastes was not shared by his ignorant or uninformed countrymen, who jeered at Seward’s Folly, “Seward’s Icebox,” “Frigidia,” and “Walrussia.” The American people, still preoccupied with Reconstruction and other internal vexations, were economy-minded and anti-expansionist. Then why did Congress and the American public sanction the purchase? For one thing Russia, alone among the powers, had been conspicuously friendly to the North during the recent Civil War. Americans did not feel that they could offend their great and good friend, the tsar, by hurling his walrus-covered icebergs back into his face. Besides, the territory was rumored to be teeming with furs, ﬁsh, and gold, and it might yet “pan out” proﬁtably—as it later did with natural resources, including oil and gas. So Congress and the country accepted “Seward’s Polar Bear Garden,” somewhat derisively but nevertheless hopefully.

The Heritage of
Reconstruction
 Many white Southerners regarded Reconstruction as a more grievous wound than the war itself. It left a fes-

 Reconstruction's Legacy



 The Republicans acted from a mixture of idealism and political expediency. They wanted both to protect the freed slaves and to promote the fortunes of the Republican party. In the end their efforts backﬁ red badly. Reconstruction conferred only ﬂeeting beneﬁts on blacks and virtually extinguished the Republican party in the South for nearly one hundred years. Moderate Republicans never fully appreciated the extensive effort necessary to make the freed slaves completely independent citizens, nor the lengths to which Southern whites would go to preserve their system of racial dominance. Had Thaddeus Stevens’s radical program of drastic economic reforms and heftier protection of political rights been enacted, things might well have been different. But deep-seated racism, ingrained American resistance to tampering with property rights, and rigid loyalty to the principle of local self-government, combined with spreading indifference in the North to the plight of blacks, formed too formidable an obstacle. Despite good intentions by Republicans, the Old South was in many ways more resurrected than reconstructed.

 The remarkable ex-slave Frederick Douglass (1817?– 1895) wrote in 1882, Is This a Republican Form of Government? by Thomas Nast, Harper’s Weekly, 1876 The nation’s most prominent political cartoonist expressed his despair at the tragic way that Reconstruction had ended— with few real gains for the former slaves.

 tering scar that would take generations to heal. They resented the upending of their social and racial system, the political empowerment of blacks, and the insult of federal intervention in their local affairs. Yet few rebellions have ended with the victors sitting down to a love feast with the vanquished. Given the explosiveness of the issues that had caused the war, and the bitterness of the ﬁghting, the wonder is that Reconstruction was not far harsher than it was. The fact is that Lincoln, Johnson, and most Republicans had no clear picture at war’s end of what federal policy toward the South should be. Policymakers groped for the right policies, inﬂuenced as much by Southern responses to defeat and emancipation as by any plans of their own to impose a speciﬁc program on the South.

“


 Though slavery was abolished, the wrongs of my people were not ended. Though they were not slaves, they were not yet quite free. No man can be truly free whose liberty is dependent upon the thought, feeling, and action of others, and who has himself no means in his own hands for guarding, protecting, defending, and maintaining that liberty. Yet the Negro after his emancipation was precisely in this state of destitution. . . . He was free from the individual master, but the slave of society. He had neither money, property, nor friends. He was free from the old plantation, but he had nothing but the dusty road under his feet. He was free from the old quarter that once gave him shelter, but a slave to the rains of summer and the frosts of winter. He was, in a word, literally turned loose, naked, hungry, and destitute, to the open sky.

”




Chapter 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 1865–1877


 CHRONOLOGY

 Lincoln announces “10 percent” Reconstruction plan



 Lincoln vetoes Wade-Davis Bill



 Lincoln assassinated Johnson issues Reconstruction proclamation Congress refuses to seat Southern congressmen Freedmen’s Bureau established Southern states pass Black Codes



 Congress passes Civil Rights Bill over Johnson’s veto Congress passes Fourteenth Amendment Johnson-backed candidates lose congressional election Ex parte Milligan case Ku Klux Klan founded

KEY TERMS
Freedmen’s Bureau (518) “10 percent” Reconstruction plan (519) Wade-Davis Bill (519) Black Codes (521) Paciﬁc Railroad Act (522) Civil Rights Bill (522) Fourteenth Amendment (523) Reconstruction Act (525) Fifteenth Amendment (526) 


Reconstruction Act
 Tenure of Ofﬁce Act United States purchases Alaska from Russia



 Johnson impeached and acquitted Johnson pardons Confederate leaders



 Fifteenth Amendment ratiﬁed

1870–


Force Acts




 Freedmen’s Bureau ended



 Reconstruction ends

PEOPLE TO KNOW
Ex parte Milligan (526) Redeemers (527) Woman’s Loyal League (527) Union League (527) scalawags (528) carpetbaggers (528) Ku Klux Klan (529) Force Acts (530) Tenure of Ofﬁce Act (531) Seward’s Folly (532) 
Oliver O. Howard
Andrew Johnson
Thaddeus Stevens
Hiram Revels


Edwin M. Stanton
Benjamin Wade
William Seward


How Radical Was Reconstruction?


F


 ew topics have triggered as much intellectual warfare as the “dark and bloody ground” of Reconstruction. The period provoked questions—sectional, racial, and constitutional—about which people felt

 deeply and remain deeply divided even today. Scholarly argument goes back conspicuously to a Columbia University historian, William A. Dunning, whose students in the early 1900s published a series of histories

Varying Viewpoints


 of the Reconstruction South. Dunning and his disciples were inﬂuenced by the turn-of-the-century spirit of sectional conciliation as well as by current theories about black racial inferiority. Sympathizing with the white South, they wrote about the Reconstruction period as a kind of national disgrace, foisted upon a prostrate region by vindictive and self-seeking radical Republican politicians. If the South had wronged the North by seceding, the North had wronged the South by reconstructing. A second cycle of scholarship in the 1920s was impelled by a widespread suspicion that the Civil War itself had been a tragic and unnecessary blunder. Attention now shifted to Northern politicians. Scholars like Howard Beale further questioned the motives of the radical Republicans. To Beale and others, the radicals had masked a ruthless desire to exploit Southern labor and resources behind a false front of “concern” for the freed slaves. Moreover, Northern advocacy of black voting rights was merely a calculated attempt to ensure a Republican political presence in the defeated South. The unfortunate Andrew Johnson, in this view, had valiantly tried to uphold constitutional principles in the face of this cynical Northern onslaught. Although ignored by his contemporaries, scholar, black nationalist, and founder of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People W. E. B. Du Bois wrote a sympathetic history of Reconstruction in 1935 that became the basis for historians’ interpretations ever since. Following World War II, Kenneth Stampp and others, inﬂuenced by the modern civil rights movement, built on Du Bois’s argument and claimed that Reconstruction had been a noble though ultimately failed attempt to extend American principles of equity and justice. The radical Republicans and the carpetbaggers were now heroes, whereas Andrew Johnson was castigated for his obsti-



 nate racism. By the early 1970s, this view had become orthodoxy, and it generally holds sway today. Yet some scholars, such as Michael Benedict and Leon Litwack, disillusioned with the inability to achieve full racial justice in the 1960s and 1970s, began once more to scrutinize the motives of Northern politicians immediately after the Civil War. They claimed to discover that Reconstruction had never been very radical and that the Freedmen’s Bureau and other agencies had merely allowed white planters to maintain their dominance over local politics as well as over the local economy. More recently, Eric Foner has powerfully reasserted the argument that Reconstruction was a truly radical and noble attempt to establish an interracial democracy. Drawing upon the work of Du Bois, Foner has emphasized the comparative approach to American Reconstruction. Clearly, Foner has admitted, Reconstruction did not create full equality, but it did allow blacks to form political orga ni zations and churches, to vote, and to establish some mea sure of economic independence. In South Africa, the Caribbean, and other areas once marked by slavery, these opportunities were much harder to come by. Many of the beneﬁts of Reconstruction were erased by whites in the South during the Gilded Age, but in the twentieth century, the constitutional principles and organizations developed during Reconstruction provided the focus and foundation for the modern civil rights movement—which some have called the second Reconstruction. Steven Hahn’s A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles in the Rural South from Slavery to the Great Migration (2003) is the latest contribution to the literature on Reconstruction. Hahn emphasizes the assertiveness and ingenuity of African Americans in creating new political opportunities for themselves after emancipation.

To Learn More
Richard N. Current, Those Terrible Carpetbaggers (1988)
Eric Foner, Forever Free: The Story of Emancipation and
Reconstruction (2005)
———, Nothing but Freedom (1983)
Dewey W. Grantham, Life and Death of the Solid South
(1988)
Steven Hahn, A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political
 Struggles in the Rural South from Slavery to the Great Migration (2003) James M. McPherson, Ordeal by Fire: The Civil War and Reconstruction (1981) Michael Perman, Emancipation and Reconstruction (rev. ed., 2003)

Lawrence Powell, New Masters: Northern Planters During
 the Civil War and Reconstruction (1980) Julie Saville, The Work of Reconstruction (1994) Booker T. Washington, Up from Slavery (1901) Heather Andrea Williams, Self-Taught: African American Education in Slavery and Freedom (2005) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

 PART

 FOUR

Forging an
Industrial Society





1865–1909


A


 nation of farmers fought the Civil War in the 1860s. By the time the Spanish-American War broke out in 1898, America was an industrial nation. For generations Americans had plunged into the wilderness and plowed their ﬁelds. Now they settled in cities and toiled in factories. Between the Civil War and the century’s end, economic and technological change came so swiftly and massively that it seemed to many Americans that a whole new civilization had emerged. In some ways it had. The sheer scale of the new industrial society was dazzling. Transcontinental railroads knit the country together from sea to sea. New industries like oil and steel grew to staggering size— and made megamillionaires out of entrepreneurs like oilman John D. Rockefeller and steel maker Andrew Carnegie.

 Drawn by the allure of industrial employment, Americans moved to the city, much like their counterparts in industrializing Europe, Russia, and Japan. In 1860 only about 20 percent of the population were city dwellers. By 1900 that proportion doubled, as rural Americans and European immigrants alike ﬂocked to mill town and metropolis in search of steady jobs. These sweeping changes challenged the spirit of individualism that Americans had celebrated since the seventeenth century. Even on the western frontier, that historic bastion of rugged loners, the hand of government was increasingly felt, as large armies were dispatched to subdue the Plains Indians and federal authority was invoked to regulate the use of natural resources. The rise of powerful monopolies called into question the government’s traditional hands-off policy

 Factory Workers, with Railroad Spikes, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, 1898 Immigrant and native-born workers alike bent their backs to build industrial America.

Forging an Industrial Society


 toward business, and a growing band of reformers increasingly clamored for government regulation of private enterprise. The mushrooming cities, with their need for transport systems, schools, hospitals, sanitation, and ﬁ re and police protection, required bigger governments and budgets than an earlier generation could have imagined. As never before, Americans struggled to adapt old ideals of private autonomy to the new realities of industrial civilization. With economic change came social and political turmoil. Labor violence brought bloodshed to places such as Chicago and Homestead, Pennsylvania. Small farmers, squeezed by debt and foreign competition, rallied behind the People’s, or “Populist,” party, a radical movement of the 1880s and 1890s that attacked the power of Wall Street, big business, and the banks. Antiimmigrant sentiment swelled. Bitter disputes over tariffs and monetary policy deeply divided the country, setting debtors against lenders, farmers against manufacturers, the West and South against the Northeast. And in this unfamiliar era of big money and expanding government, corruption ﬂourished, from town hall to Congress, fueling loud cries for political reform. The bloodiest conﬂ ict of all pitted Plains Indians against the relentless push of westward expansion. As railroads drove their iron arrows through the heart of the West, the Indians lost their land and life-sustaining buffalo herds. By the 1890s, after three decades of ﬁerce ﬁghting with the U.S. Army, the Indians who had once



 roamed across the vast rolling prairies were struggling to preserve their shattered cultures within the conﬁ nement of reservations. The South remained the one region largely untouched by the Industrial Revolution sweeping the rest of America. A few sleepy southern hamlets did become boomtowns, but for the most part, the South’s rural way of life remained unperturbed. The post-emancipation era inﬂ icted new forms of racial injustice on African Americans, the vast majority of whom continued to live in the Old South. State legislatures systematically deprived black Americans of their political rights, including the right to vote. Segregation of schools, housing, and all kinds of public facilities made a mockery of African Americans’ Reconstruction-era hopes for equality before the law. The new wealth and power of industrial America nurtured a growing sense of national self-conﬁdence. Literature ﬂowered, and a golden age of philanthropy dawned. The reform spirit spread. So did a restless appetite for overseas expansion. In a brief war against Spain in 1898, the United States, born in a revolutionary war of independence and long the champion of democratic rights, seized control of the Philippines and itself became an imperial power. Uncle Sam’s venture into empire touched off a bitter national debate about America’s role in the world and ushered in a long period of argument over the responsibilities, at home as well as abroad, of a modern industrial state.

Dearborn Street, Chicago
Loop, Around 1900
 “America is energetic, but Chicago is in a fever,” marveled a visiting Englishman about turn-of-thecentury Chicago. Street scenes like this were common in America’s booming new cities, especially in the “Lord of the Midwest.”

Political Paralysis
 in the Gilded Age




1869–1896
 Grant . . . had no right to exist. He should have been extinct for ages. . . . That, two thousand years after Alexander the Great and Julius Caesar, a man like Grant should be called—and should actually and truly be— the highest product of the most advanced evolution, made evolution ludicrous. . . . The progress of evolution, from President Washington to President Grant, was alone evidence enough to upset Darwin. . . . Grant . . . should have lived in a cave and worn skins. HENRY ADAMS, THE EDUCATION OF HENRY ADAMS, 1907

T


 he population of the post–Civil War Republic continued to vault upward by vigorous leaps, despite the awful bloodletting in both Union and Confederate ranks. Census takers reported over 39 million people in 1870, a gain of 26.6 percent over the preceding decade, as the immigrant tide surged again. The United States was now the third-largest nation in the Western world, ranking behind Russia and France. But the civic health of the United States did not keep pace with its physical growth. The Civil War and its aftermath spawned waste, extravagance, speculation, and graft. Disillusionment ran deep among idealistic Americans in the postwar era. They had spilled their blood for the Union, emancipation, and Abraham

 Lincoln, who had promised “a new birth of freedom.” Instead they got a bitter dose of corruption and political stalemate—beginning with Ulysses S. Grant, a great soldier but an utterly inept politician.

The “Bloody Shirt”
Elects Grant
 Wrangling between Congress and President Andrew Johnson had soured the people on professional politicians in the Reconstruction era, and the notion still prevailed that a good general would make a good president. Stubbly-bearded General Grant was by far the

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Stain of Corruption


 most popular northern hero to emerge from the war. Grateful citizens of Philadelphia, Washington, and his hometown of Galena, Illinois, passed the hat and in each place presented him with a house. New Yorkers tendered him a check for $105,000. The general, silently pufﬁ ng on his cigar, unapologetically accepted these gifts as his just deserts for having rescued the Union. Grant was a hapless greenhorn in the political arena. His one presidential vote had been cast for the Democratic ticket in 1856. A better judge of horseﬂesh than of humans, his cultural background was breathtakingly narrow. He once reportedly remarked that Venice (Italy) would be a ﬁ ne city if only it were drained. The Republicans, freed from the Union party coalition of war days, enthusiastically nominated Grant for the presidency in 1868. The party’s platform sounded a clarion call for continued Reconstruction of the South under the glinting steel of federal bayonets. Yet Grant, always a man of few words, struck a highly popular note in his letter of acceptance when he said, “Let us have peace.” This noble sentiment became a leading campaign slogan and was later engraved on his tomb beside the Hudson River. Expectant Democrats, meeting in their own nominating convention, denounced military Reconstruction but could agree on little else. Wealthy eastern delegates demanded a plank promising that federal war bonds be redeemed in gold—even though many of the bonds had been purchased with badly depreciated paper greenbacks. Poorer midwestern delegates answered with the “Ohio Idea,” which called for redemption in greenbacks. Debt-burdened agrarian Democrats thus hoped to keep more money in circulation and keep interest rates lower. This dispute introduced a bitter contest over monetary policy that continued to convulse the Republic until the century’s end. Midwestern delegates got the platform but not the candidate. The nominee, former New York governor Horatio Seymour, scuttled the Democrats’ faint hope for success by repudiating the Ohio Idea. Republicans whipped up enthusiasm for Grant by energetically “waving the bloody shirt”—that is, reviving gory memories of the Civil War—which became for the ﬁ rst time a prominent feature of a presidential campaign.* “Vote

 *The expression is said to have derived from a speech by Representative Benjamin F. Butler of Massachusetts, who allegedly waved before the House the bloodstained nightshirt of a Klan-ﬂogged carpetbagger.



 as You Shot” was a powerful Republican slogan aimed at Union army veterans. Grant won, with 214 electoral votes to 80 for Seymour. But the former general scored a majority of only 300,000 in the popular vote (3,013,421 to 2,706,829). Most white voters apparently supported Seymour, and the ballots of three still-unreconstructed southern states (Mississippi, Texas, and Virginia) were not counted at all. An estimated 500,000 former slaves gave Grant his margin of victory. To remain in power, the Republican party somehow had to continue to control the South—and to keep the ballot in the hands of the grateful freedmen. Republicans could not take future victories “for Granted.”

The Era of Good Stealings
 A few skunks can pollute a large area. Although the great majority of businesspeople and government ofﬁcials continued to conduct their affairs with decency and honor, the whole postwar at mosphere stunk of corruption. The Man in the Moon, it was said, had to hold his nose when passing over America. Freewheeling railroad promoters sometimes left gullible bond buyers with only “two streaks of rust and a right of way.” Unethical stock-market manipulators were a cinder in the public eye. Too many judges and legislators put their power up for hire. Cynics deﬁ ned an honest politician as one who, when bought, would stay bought. Notorious in the ﬁ nancial world were two millionaire partners, “Jubilee Jim” Fisk and Jay Gould. The corpulent and unscrupulous Fisk provided the “brass,” while the undersized and cunning Gould provided the brains. The crafty pair concocted a plot in 1869 to corner the gold market. Their slippery game would work only if the federal Treasury refrained from selling gold. The conspirators worked on President Grant directly and also through his brother-in-law, who received $25,000 for his complicity. For weeks Fisk and Gould madly bid the price of gold skyward, so they could later proﬁt from its heightened value. But on “Black Friday” (September 24, 1869), the bubble broke when the Treasury, contrary to Grant’s supposed assurances, was compelled to release gold. The price of gold plunged, and scores of honest businesspeople were driven to the wall. A congressional probe concluded that Grant had done nothing crooked, though he had acted stupidly and indiscreetly. The infamous Tweed Ring in New York City vividly displayed the ethics (or lack of ethics) typical of the



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


 age. Burly “Boss” Tweed—240 pounds of rascality— employed bribery, graft, and fraudulent elections to milk the metropolis of as much as $200 million. Honest citizens were cowed into silence. Protesters found their tax assessments raised.

 In a famous series of newspaper interviews in 1905, George Washington Plunkitt (1842–1924), a political “boss” in the same Tammany Hall Democratic political “machine” that had spawned William Marcy (“Boss”) Tweed, candidly described his ethical and political principles:

 Tweed’s luck ﬁ nally ran out. The New York Times secured damning evidence in 1871 and courageously published it, though offered $5 million not to do so. Gifted cartoonist Thomas Nast pilloried Tweed mercilessly, after spurning a heavy bribe to desist. The portly thief reportedly complained that his illiterate followers could not help seeing “them damn pictures.” New York attorney Samuel J. Tilden headed the prosecution, gaining fame that later paved the path to his presidential nomination. Unbailed and unwept, Tweed died behind bars.

“


 Everybody is talkin’ these days about Tammany men growin’ rich on graft, but nobody thinks of drawin’ the distinction between honest graft and dishonest graft. There’s all the difference in the world between the two. Yes, many of our men have grown rich in politics. I have myself. I’ve made a big fortune out of the game, and I’m gettin’ richer every day, but I’ve not gone in for dishonest graft—blackmailin’ gamblers, saloonkeepers, disorderly people, etc.—and neither has any of the men who have made big fortunes in politics. “There’s an honest graft, and I’m an example of how it works. I might sum up the whole thing by sayin’: ‘I seen my opportunities and I took ’em.’ “Just let me explain by examples. My party’s in power in the city, and it’s goin’ to undertake a lot of public improvements. Well, I’m tipped off, say, that they’re going to lay out a new park at a certain place. “I see my opportunity and I take it. I go to that place and I buy up all the land I can in the neighborhood. Then the board of this or that makes its plan public, and there is a rush to get my land, which nobody cared particular for before. “Ain’t it perfectly honest to charge a good price and make a proﬁt on my investment and foresight? Of course, it is. Well, that’s honest graft.

”


Can the Law Reach Him? 1872 Cartoonist Thomas
 Nast attacked “Boss” Tweed in a series of cartoons like this one that appeared in Harper’s Weekly in 1872. Here Nast depicts the corrupt Tweed as a powerful giant, towering over a puny law force.

The Stirrings of Reform




A
Carnival of Corruption  More serious than Boss Tweed’s peccadilloes were the misdeeds of the federal government. President Grant’s cabinet was a rodent’s nest of grafters and incompetents. Favor seekers haunted the White House, plying Grant himself with cigars, wines, and horses. His election was a godsend to his in-laws of the Dent family, several dozen of whom attached themselves to the public payroll. The easygoing Grant was ﬁ rst tarred by the Crédit Mobilier scandal, which erupted in 1872. Union Paciﬁc Railroad insiders had formed the Crédit Mobilier construction company and then cleverly hired themselves at inﬂated prices to build the railroad line, earning dividends as high as 348 percent. Fearing that Congress might blow the whistle, the company furtively distributed shares of its valuable stock to key congressmen. A newspaper exposé and congressional investigation of the scandal led to the formal censure of two congressmen and the revelation that the vice president of the United States had accepted payments from Crédit Mobilier. The breath of scandal in Washington also reeked of alcohol. In 1874–1875 the sprawling Whiskey Ring robbed the Treasury of millions in excise-tax revenues. “Let no guilty man escape,” declared President Grant. But when his own private secretary turned up among the culprits, he volunteered a written statement to the jury that helped exonerate the thief. Further rottenness in the Grant administration came to light in 1876, forcing Secretary of War William Belknap to resign after pocketing bribes from suppliers to the Indian reservations. Grant, ever loyal to his crooked cronies, accepted Belknap’s resignation “with great regret.”

The Liberal Republican
Revolt of 1872
 By 1872 a powerful wave of disgust with Grantism was beginning to build up throughout the nation, even before some of the worst scandals had been exposed. Reform-minded citizens banded together to form the Liberal Republican party. Voicing the slogan “Turn the Rascals Out,” they urged puriﬁcation of the Washington administration as well as an end to military Reconstruction. The Liberal Republicans muffed their chance when their Cincinnati nominating convention astounded the

Can Greeley and the Democrats “Swallow” Each
 Other? 1872 This cartoon by Thomas Nast is a Republican gibe at the forced alliance between these former foes. General William Tecumseh Sherman wrote from Paris to his brother, “I feel amazed to see the turn things have taken. Grant who never was a Republican is your candidate; and Greeley who never was a Democrat, but quite the reverse, is the Democratic candidate.”

 country by nominating the brilliant but erratic Horace Greeley for the presidency. Although Greeley was the fearless editor of the New York Tribune, he was dogmatic, emotional, petulant, and notoriously unsound in his political judgments. More astonishing still was the action of the ofﬁcehungry Democrats, who foolishly proceeded to endorse Greeley’s candidacy. In swallowing Greeley the Democrats “ate crow” in large gulps, for the eccentric editor had long blasted them as traitors, slave shippers, saloon keepers, horse thieves, and idiots. Yet Greeley pleased the Democrats, North and South, when he pleaded for clasping hands across “the bloody chasm.” The Republicans dutifully renominated Grant. The voters were thus presented with a choice between two candidates who had made their careers in ﬁelds other than politics and who were both eminently unqualiﬁed, by temperament and lifelong training, for high political ofﬁce.



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


 In the mud-spattered campaign that followed, regular Republicans denounced Greeley as an atheist, a communist, a free-lover, a vegetarian, a brown-bread eater, and a cosigner of Jefferson Davis’s bail bond. Democrats derided Grant as an ignoramus, a drunkard, and a swindler. But the regular Republicans, chanting “Grant us another term,” pulled the president through. The count in the electoral column was 286 to 66, in the popular column 3,596,745 to 2,843,446. Liberal Republican agitation frightened the regular Republicans into cleaning their own house before they were thrown out of it. The Republican Congress in 1872 passed a general amnesty act, removing political disabilities from all but some ﬁve hundred former Confederate leaders. Congress also moved to reduce high Civil War tariffs and to fumigate the Grant administration with mild civil-ser vice reform. Like many American third parties, the Liberal Republicans left some enduring footprints, even in defeat.

 Depression, Deﬂation, and Inﬂation Grant’s woes deepened in the paralyzing economic panic of 1873. Bursting with startling rapidity, the crash was one of those periodic plummets that rollercoastered the economy in this age of unbridled capitalist expansion. Overreaching promoters had laid more railroad track, sunk more mines, erected more factories, and sowed more grainﬁelds than existing markets could bear. Bankers, in turn, had made too many imprudent loans to ﬁ nance those enterprises. When profits failed to materialize, loans went unpaid, and the whole credit-based house of cards ﬂuttered down. The United States did not suffer alone. Nations worldwide underwent a similar economic collapse in 1873. Boom times became gloom times as more than ﬁ fteen thousand American businesses went bankrupt. In New York City, an army of unemployed riotously battled police. Black Americans were hard hit. The Freedman’s Savings and Trust Company had made unsecured loans to several companies that went under. Black depositors who had entrusted over $7 million to the bank lost their savings, and black economic development and black conﬁdence in savings institutions went down with it. Hard times inﬂ icted the worst punishment on debtors, who intensiﬁed their clamor for inﬂationary policies. Proponents of inﬂation breathed new life into

 the issue of greenbacks. During the war $450 million of the “folding money” had been issued, but it had depreciated under a cloud of popular mistrust and dubious legality.* By 1868 the Treasury had already withdrawn $100 million of the “battle-born currency” from circulation, and “hard-money” people every where looked forward to its complete disappearance. But now afﬂ icted agrarian and debtor groups—“cheap-money” supporters—clamored for a reissuance of the greenbacks. With a crude but essentially accurate grasp of monetary theory, they reasoned that more money meant cheaper money and, hence, rising prices and easier-to-pay debts. Creditors, of course, reasoning from the same premises, advocated precisely the opposite policy. They had no desire to see the money they had loaned repaid in depreciated dollars. They wanted deﬂation, not inﬂation. The “hard-money” advocates carried the day. In 1874 they persuaded a confused Grant to veto a bill to print more paper money. They scored another victory in the Resumption Act of 1875, which pledged the government to the further withdrawal of greenbacks from circulation and to the redemption of all paper currency in gold at face value, beginning in 1879. Down but not out, debtors now looked for relief to another precious metal, silver. The “sacred white metal,” they claimed, had received a raw deal. In the early 1870s, the Treasury stubbornly and unrealistically maintained that an ounce of silver was worth only one-sixteenth as much as an ounce of gold, though open-market prices for silver were higher. Silver miners thus stopped offering their shiny product for sale to the federal mints. With no silver ﬂowing into the federal coffers, Congress formally dropped the coinage of silver dollars in 1873. Fate then played a sly joke when new silver discoveries later in the 1870s shot production up and forced silver prices down. Westerners from silver-mining states joined with debtors in assailing the “Crime of ’73,” demanding a return to the “Dollar of Our Daddies.” Like the demand for more greenbacks, the demand for the coinage of more silver was nothing more nor less than another scheme to promote inﬂation.

 *The Supreme Court in 1870 declared the Civil War Legal Tender Act unconstitutional. With the concurrence of the Senate, Grant thereupon added to the bench two justices who could be counted on to help reverse that decision, which happened in 1871. This is how the Court grew to its current size of nine justices.

Partisan Competition


 David A. Wells (1828–1898), a leading economist of the era, described the global dimensions of the depression that struck the United States in 1873:

“


 Its most noteworthy peculiarity has been its universality; affecting nations that have been involved in war as well as those which have maintained peace; those which have a stable currency, based on gold, and those which have an unstable currency, based on promises which have not been kept; those which live under systems of free exchange of commodities, and those whose exchanges are more or less restricted. It has been grievous in old communities like England and Germany, and equally so in Australia, South Africa, and California, which represent the new; it has been a calamity exceeding[ly] heavy to be borne, alike by the inhabitants of sterile Newfoundland and Labrador, and of the sunny, fruitful sugar-islands of the East and West Indies.

”


 Hard-money Republicans resisted this scheme and counted on Grant to hold the line against it. He did not disappoint them. The Treasury began to accumulate gold stocks against the appointed day for resumption of metallic-money payments. Coupled with the reduction of greenbacks, this policy was called “contraction.” It had a noticeable deﬂationary effect—the amount of money per capita in circulation actually decreased between 1870 and 1880, from $19.42 to $19.37. Contraction probably worsened the impact of the depression. But the new policy did restore the government’s credit rating, and it brought the embattled greenbacks up to their full face value. When Redemption Day came in 1879, few greenback holders bothered to exchange the lighter and more convenient bills for gold. Republican hard-money policy had a political backlash. It helped elect a Democratic House of Representatives in 1874, and in 1878 it spawned the Greenback Labor party, which polled over a million votes and elected fourteen members of Congress. The contest over monetary policy was far from over.



Pallid Politics in
 the Gilded Age The political seesaw was delicately balanced throughout most of the Gilded Age (a sarcastic name given to the three-decade-long post–Civil War era by Mark Twain in 1873). Even a slight nudge could tip the teetertotter to the advantage of the opposition party. Every presidential election was a squeaker, and the majority party in the House of Representatives switched six times in the eleven sessions between 1869 and 1891. In only three sessions did the same party control the House, the Senate, and the White House. Wobbling in such shaky equilibrium, politicians tiptoed timidly, producing a political record that was often trivial and petty. Few signiﬁcant economic issues separated the major parties. Democrats and Republicans saw very nearly eye-to-eye on questions like the tariff and civil-ser vice reform, and majorities in both parties substantially agreed even on the much-debated currency question. Yet despite their rough agreement on these national matters, the two parties were ferociously competitive with each other. They were tightly and efﬁciently organized, and they commanded ﬁerce loyalty from their members. Voter turnouts reached heights unmatched before or since. Nearly 80 percent of eligible voters cast their ballots in presidential elections in the three decades after the Civil War. On election days droves of the party faithful tramped behind marching bands to the polling places, and “ticket splitting,” or failing to vote the straight party line, was as rare as a silver dollar. How can this apparent paradox of political consensus and partisan fervor be explained? The answer lies in the sharp ethnic and cultural differences in the membership of the two parties—in distinctions of style and tone, and especially of religious sentiment. Republican voters tended to adhere to those creeds that traced their lineage to Puritanism. They stressed strict codes of personal morality and believed that government should play a role in regulating both the economic and the moral affairs of society. Democrats, among whom immigrant Lutherans and Roman Catholics ﬁgured heavily, were more likely to adhere to faiths that took a less stern view of human weakness. Their religions professed toleration of differences in an imperfect world, and they spurned government efforts to impose a single moral standard on the entire



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


 society. These differences in temperament and religious values often produced raucous political contests at the local level, where issues like prohibition and education loomed large. Democrats had a solid electoral base in the South and in the northern industrial cities, teeming with immigrants and controlled by well-oiled political machines. Republican strength lay largely in the Midwest and the rural and small-town Northeast. Grateful freedmen in the South continued to vote Republican in signiﬁcant numbers. Another important bloc of Republican ballots came from the members of the Grand Army of the Republic (GAR)—a politically potent fraternal orga ni zation of several hundred thousand Union veterans of the Civil War. The lifeblood of both parties was patronage—disbursing jobs by the bucketful in return for votes, kickbacks, and party ser vice. Boisterous inﬁghting over patronage beset the Republican party in the 1870s and 1880s. A “Stalwart” faction, led by the handsome and imperious Roscoe (“Lord Roscoe”) Conkling, U.S. senator from New York, unblushingly embraced the timehonored system of swapping civil-ser vice jobs for votes.

Paper Broadsides for the 1876 Election
 Then, as now, the parties printed voting instructions to encourage citizens to vote the straight party line.

 Opposed to the Conklingites were the so-called HalfBreeds, who ﬂ irted coyly with civil-ser vice reform, but whose real quarrel with the Stalwarts was over who should grasp the ladle that dished out the spoils. The champion of the Half-Breeds was James G. Blaine of Maine, a radiantly personable congressman with an elastic conscience. But despite the color of their personalities, Conkling and Blaine succeeded only in stalemating each other and deadlocking their party.

The Hayes-Tilden
Standoff, 1876
 Hangers-on around Grant, like ﬂeas urging their ailing dog to live, begged the “Old Man” to try for a third term in 1876. The general, blind to his own ineptitudes, showed a disquieting willingness. But the House, by a lopsided bipartisan vote of 233 to 18, derailed the third-term bandwagon. It passed a resolution that sternly reminded the country—and Grant—of the antidictator implications of the two-term tradition.

The Compromise of 1877


 With Grant out of the running and with the Conklingites and Blaineites neutralizing each other, the Republicans turned to a compromise candidate, Rutherford B. Hayes, who was obscure enough to be dubbed “The Great Unknown.” His foremost qualiﬁcation was the fact that he hailed from the electorally doubtful but potent state of Ohio, where he had served three terms as governor. So crucial were the “swing” votes of Ohio in the cliffhanging presidential contests of the day that the state produced more than its share of presidential candidates. A political saying of the 1870s paraphrased Shakespeare: Some are born great, Some achieve greatness, And some are born in Ohio. Pitted against the humdrum Hayes was the Democratic nominee, Samuel J. Tilden, who had risen to fame as the man who bagged Boss Tweed in New York. Campaigning against Republican scandal, Tilden racked up 184 electoral votes of the needed 185, with 20 votes in

OR R-2/C-1

VT NH ME 5 5 7

MONTANA TERR. IDAHO TERR.

 NV

DAKOTA TERR.

ARIZONA TERR.

 CO

KS INDIAN TERR.

NEW MEXICO TERR.

 WI

 IA

 NE

UTAH TERR.

 CA

 MN

WYOMING TERR.

 TX

 IL

 MO

 OH

KY TN

AR LA

 IN

 MS

 AL

 MA

 NY

 MI

 GA

PA WV VA 5 11 NC SC

RI NJ CT 4 9 6 DE MD

 FL

Popular Vote


Hayes (Republican)


Uncontested
Electoral
Electoral Vote
Vote
185 50%


Tilden (Democrat)




4,288,546 51.0%


Candidate (Party)


184 50%


 four states—three of them in the South—doubtful because of irregular returns (see Map 23.1). Surely Tilden could pick up at least one of these, especially in view of the fact that he had polled 247,448 more popular votes than Hayes, 4,284,020 to 4,036,572. Both parties scurried to send “visiting statesmen” to the contested southern states of Louisiana, South Carolina, and Florida. All three disputed states submitted two sets of returns, one Democratic and one Republican. As the weeks drifted by, the paralysis tightened, generating a dramatic constitutional crisis. The Constitution merely speciﬁes that the electoral returns from the states shall be sent to Congress, and in the presence of the House and Senate, they shall be opened by the president of the Senate (see the Twelfth Amendment in the Appendix). But who should count them? On this point the Constitution was silent. If counted by the president of the Senate (a Republican), the Republican returns would be selected. If counted by the Speaker of the House (a Democrat), the Democratic returns would be chosen. How could the impasse be resolved?

The Compromise of 1877 and
 the End of Reconstruction



WASH. TERR.



4,034,311 48.0%


Contested
Territories


Map 23.1 Hayes-Tilden Disputed Election of 1876
 (with electoral vote by state) Nineteen of the twenty disputed votes composed the total electoral count of Louisiana, South Carolina, and Florida. The twentieth was one of Oregon’s three votes, cast by an elector who turned out to be ineligible because he was a federal ofﬁceholder (a postmaster), contrary to the Constitution (see Art. II, Sec. I, para. 2). Interactive Map

 Clash or compromise was the stark choice. The danger loomed that there would be no president on Inauguration Day, March 4, 1877. “Tilden or Blood!” cried Democratic hotheads, and some of their “Minute Men” began to drill with arms. But behind the scenes, frantically laboring statesmen gradually hammered out an agreement in the Henry Clay tradition—the Compromise of 1877. The election deadlock itself was to be broken by the Electoral Count Act, which Congress passed early in 1877. It set up an electoral commission consisting of ﬁ fteen men selected from the Senate, the House, and the Supreme Court (see Table 23.1). In February 1877, about a month before Inauguration Day, the Senate and House met together in an electric at mosphere to settle the dispute. The roll of the states was tolled off alphabetically. When Florida was reached—the ﬁ rst of the three southern states with two sets of returns—the disputed documents were referred to the electoral commission, which sat in a nearby chamber. After prolonged discussion the members agreed, by the partisan vote of eight Republicans to seven Democrats, to accept the Republican returns. Outraged Democrats in Congress, smelling defeat, undertook to launch a ﬁ libuster “until hell froze over.”



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


Table 23.1 Composition of the Electoral
Commission, 1877
Members


Republicans


Democrats










Senate (Republican
 majority) House (Democratic majority) Supreme Court total

 Renewed deadlock was avoided by the rest of the complex Compromise of 1877, already partially concluded behind closed doors. The Democrats reluctantly agreed that Hayes might take ofﬁce in return for his withdrawing intrusive federal troops from the two states in which they remained, Louisiana and South Carolina. Among various concessions, the Republicans assured the Democrats a place at the presidential patronage trough and support for a bill subsidizing the Texas and Paciﬁc Railroad’s construction of a southern transcontinental line. Not all of these promises were kept in later years, including the Texas and Paciﬁc subsidy. But the deal held together long enough to break the dangerous electoral standoff. The Democrats permitted Hayes to receive the remainder of the disputed

The End of Reconstruction,
 1877 President Hayes’s “Let ’em Alone” policy replaces the carpetbags and bayonets of the Grant administration, signifying the end of federal efforts to promote racial equality in the South—until the “second Reconstruction” of the civil rights era nearly a century later.

 returns—all by the partisan vote of 8 to 7. So close was the margin of safety that the explosive issue was settled only three days before the new president was ofﬁcially sworn into ofﬁce. The nation breathed a collective sigh of relief. The compromise bought peace at a price. Partisan violence was averted by sacriﬁcing the civil rights of southern blacks. With the Hayes-Tilden deal, the Republican party quietly abandoned its commitment to racial equality. That commitment had been weakening in any case. Many Republicans had begun to question the worthiness of Reconstruction and were less willing to send dollars and enlisted sons to bolster southern state governments. The Civil Rights Act of 1875 was in a sense the last feeble gasp of the congressional radical Republicans. The act supposedly guaranteed equal accommodations in public places and prohibited racial discrimination in jury selection, but the law was born toothless and stayed that way for nearly a century. The Supreme Court pronounced much of the act unconstitutional in the Civil Rights Cases (1883). The Court declared that the Fourteenth Amendment prohibited only government violations of civil rights, not the denial of civil rights by individuals. When President Hayes withdrew the blue-clad federal troops that were propping up Reconstruction governments, the bayonet-backed Republican regimes collapsed.

The Emergence of Jim Crow


The Birth of Jim Crow in the
Post-Reconstruction South
 The Democratic South speedily solidiﬁed and swiftly suppressed the now-friendless blacks. Reconstruction, for better or worse, was ofﬁcially ended. Shamelessly relying on fraud and intimidation, white Democrats (“Redeemers”) reassumed political power in the South and exercised it ruthlessly. Blacks who tried to assert their rights faced unemployment, eviction, and physical harm. Many blacks (as well as poor whites) were forced into sharecropping and tenant farming. Former slaves often found themselves at the mercy of former masters who were now their landlords and creditors. Through the “crop-lien” system, storekeepers extended credit to small farmers for food and supplies and in return took



 a lien on their harvests. Shrewd merchants manipulated the system so that farmers remained perpetually in debt to them. For generations to come, southern blacks were condemned to eke out a threadbare living under conditions scarcely better than slavery (see Map 23.2). With white southerners back in the political saddle, daily discrimination against blacks grew increasingly oppressive. What had started as the informal separation of blacks and whites in the immediate postwar years developed by the 1890s into systematic state-level legal codes of segregation known as Jim Crow laws. Southern states also enacted literacy requirements, voter-registration laws, and poll taxes—and tolerated violent intimidation of black voters—to ensure fullscale disfranchisement of the South’s freedmen. The Supreme Court validated the South’s segregationist social order in the case of Plessy v. Ferguson (1896). It

 Jim Crow Justice In 1893 a black man named Henry Smith was burned at the stake in Paris, Texas, for supposedly molesting a four-year-old white girl. Hundreds of gawkers poured into the city from the surrounding county to watch the gruesome spectacle. Public executions like this one, or the more common lynching of black men, were aimed at intimidating African Americans into accepting second-class status in the Jim Crow South.



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896




 Tenant farmer’s residence

Roa


 ht ’s

 r ive

Br
 an ch

 d

Gin House
 Master’s House

Slave Quarters
 hC Branc

 k ree

?
Sabrina Dalton
Lizzie Dalton
 r ive

Frank
Maxey
Joe Bug
Jim Reid
Nancy
Pope
Cane Pope
Gub
Church
Barrow
Willis Bryant
School
Lem Bryant
Gin House
Lewis Watson
Reuben Barrow
Tom Wright
Ben Thomas
Granny
Tom
Omy Barrow
 Landlord’s Thomas House Peter Barrow Ro Milly Barrow ad Handy Old Isaac Barrow Calvin Tom Parker Tang

Little R


W
 rig

Little R


 Wooded areas

Beckton
Barrow
Lem
Douglas


 k rk FoFr o lll'sl’s SSyy

Map 23.2 A Southern
Plantation, Before and
After the Civil War
 The emancipated blacks moved out of the slave quarters and into humble cabins dispersed around the plantation. The master had now become the landlord and the employer, and the slaves had become tenant farmers and sharecroppers—but were they better off? Interactive Map

Table 23.2 Persons in United States Lynched
 (by race), 1882–1970* Year

Whites


Blacks


Total










 *There were no lynchings in 1965–1970. In every year from 1882 (when records were ﬁ rst kept) to 1964, the number of lynchings corresponded roughly to the ﬁgures given here. The worst year was 1892, when 161 blacks and 69 whites were lynched (total 230); the next worst was 1884, when 164 whites and 51 blacks were lynched (total 215).

 ruled that “separate but equal” facilities were constitutional under the “equal protection” clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. But in reality the quality of African American life was grotesquely unequal to that of whites. Segregated in inferior schools and separated from whites in virtually all public facilities, including railroad cars, theaters, and even restrooms, blacks were assaulted daily by galling reminders of their secondclass citizenship. To ensure the stability of this political and economic “new order,” southern whites dealt harshly with any black who dared to violate the South’s racial code of conduct. A record number of blacks were lynched during the 1890s, most often for the “crime” of asserting themselves as equals (see Table 23.2). It would take a second Reconstruction, nearly a century later, to redress the racist imbalance of southern society.

 Class Conﬂicts and Ethnic Clashes The year 1877 marked more than the end of Reconstruction. As the curtains ofﬁcially closed on regional warfare, they opened on scenes of class struggle. The explosive atmosphere was largely a by-product of the long years of depression and deﬂation following the panic

 Class Conﬂicts and Ethnic Clashes

 of 1873. Railroad workers faced particularly hard times, while they watched the railroads continue to rake in huge proﬁts. When the presidents of the nation’s four largest railroads collectively decided in 1877 to cut employees’ wages by 10 percent, the workers struck back. President Hayes’s decision to call in federal troops to quell the unrest brought the striking laborers an outpouring of working-class support. Work stoppages spread like wildﬁre in cities from Baltimore to St. Louis. When the battling between workers and soldiers ended after several weeks, over one hundred people were dead. The failure of the great railroad strike exposed the weakness of the labor movement in the face of massive government intervention on the side of the railroads. The federal courts, United States Army, state militias, and local police all lent their muscle to keeping the engines of big business operating at full throttle, and the workers be damned. Meanwhile, racial and ethnic ﬁssures among workers fractured labor unity. Divisions were particularly acute between the Irish and the Chinese in Cal i fornia (see “Makers of America: The Chinese,” pp. 550–551). By 1880 the Golden State counted seventy-ﬁve thousand Asian newcomers, about 9 percent of its entire population. Mostly poor, uneducated, single males, they derived predominantly from the Taishan district of K’uang-t’ung (Guangdong) province in southern China. They had originally come to America to dig in the goldﬁelds and to sledgehammer the tracks of the transcontinental railroads across the West. When the gold supply petered out and the tracks were laid, many—perhaps half of those who arrived before the 1880s—returned home to China with their meager savings. Those who remained in America faced extraordinary hardships. They worked at the most menial jobs, often as cooks, laundrymen, or domestic servants. Without women or families, they were deprived of the children who in other immigrant communities eased their parents’ assimilation through their exposure to the English language and American customs in school. The phrase “not a Chinaman’s chance” emerged in this era to describe the daunting odds against which they struggled. In San Francisco Irish-born demagogue Denis Kearney incited his followers to violent abuse of the hapless Chinese. The Kearneyites, many of whom were recently arrived immigrants from Europe, hotly resented the competition of cheap labor from the still more recently arrived Chinese. The beef-eater, they claimed, had no chance against the rice-eater in a lifeand-death struggle for jobs and wages. The present tens of thousands of Chinese “coolies” were regarded as a



 menace, the prospective millions as a calamity. Taking to the streets, gangs of Kearneyites terrorized the Chinese by shearing off their precious pigtails. Some victims were murdered outright. Congress slammed the door on Chinese immigrant laborers when it passed the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882, prohibiting nearly all further immigration from China. The door stayed shut until 1943. Some exclusionists even tried to strip native-born Chinese Americans of their citizenship, but the Supreme Court ruled in U.S. v. Wong Kim Ark in 1898 that the Fourteenth Amendment guaranteed citizenship to all persons born in the United States. This doctrine of “birthright citizenship” (or jus soli, the “right of the soil,” as contrasted with jus sanguinis, the “right of blood-tie,” which based citizenship on the parents’ nationality) provided important protections to Chinese Americans as well as to other immigrant communities.

The First Blow at the Chinese Question, 1877
 Caucasian workers, seething with economic anxiety and ethnic prejudice, savagely mistreated the Chinese in California in the 1870s.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Chinese American Migration 
B


 etween 1800 and 1925, at least 3 million Chinese left their homeland to labor around the globe. The once-great Chinese Empire was disintegrating at the same time that its population was exploding, creating severe land shortages and opening up the unstable country to European imperial powers bent on unlocking the riches of a nation closed to outsiders for centuries. Chinese men, faced with economic hardship and political turmoil in their homeland and lured by labor shortages as far aﬁeld as Southeast Asia, Australia, and the Americas, migrated by the tens of thousands to work the plantations and dig the mines that fueled a burgeoning global economy. By 1900 more than 300,000 Chinese had entered the United States to contribute their muscle to building the West, wrenching minerals from stubborn rock and helping to lay the transcontinental railroads that stitched together the American nation (see Table 23.3).

A
Chinese Railroad Worker Totes His Tools to Work 



 Although those who set off from China for destinations as diverse as Vietnam, Cuba, Peru, and the United States included a few merchants and artisans, most were unskilled country folk. In some cases families pooled their money to send out a son, but most travelers, desperately poor, obtained their passage through Chinese middlemen, who advanced them ship fare in return for their promise to work off their debts after they landed. This contracting sometimes led to conditions so cruel that the practice was ignominiously called “pig selling.” The ﬁ rst Chinese arrived in Spanish America as early as 1565, but few followed those earliest pioneers. Until the 1848 discovery of gold in Cal i fornia, there were fewer than 50 Chinese living in the United States. But by 1852 at least 25,000 Chinese had arrived in Cal ifornia, which they dubbed the “golden mountain.” At that decade’s end, Chinese workers made up nearly a quarter of the state’s manual laborers, even though they were only a tenth of the population. Employers nationwide viewed the Chinese as cheap labor, recruiting them to cut sugar cane in the South and break strikes in New Eng land shoe factories. A treaty negotiated with China in 1868 by the American diplomat Anson Burlingame guaranteed important civil rights to Chinese immigrants. The Chinese America of the late nineteenth century was overwhelmingly a bachelor society. Women of good repute rarely made the passage. Of the very few Chinese women who ventured to Cal i fornia at this time, most became prostitutes. Many of them had been deceived by the false promise of honest jobs. Although a stream of workers returned to their homeland, many Chinese stayed. “Chinatowns” sprang up wherever economic opportunities presented themselves—in railroad towns, farming villages, and cities. Chinese in these settlements spoke their own language, enjoyed the fellowship of their own compatriots, and sought safety from prejudice and violence, never rare in American society. Many immigrant clubs, American adaptations of Chinese traditions of loyalty to clan or region, were established in these communities. Rivaling such clubs and associations were the secret societies known as tongs. The word tong—literally, “meeting hall”—acquired a sinister reputation among non-

Chinese Butcher Shop, San Francisco, ca. 1890


 Chinese, for the tongs counted the poorest and shadiest immigrants among their members. These were people without ties to a clan, those individuals most alienated from traditional Chinese orga ni zations and from American society as well. Mounting anti-Chinese agitation forced the repudiation of the Burlingame Treaty in 1880, and in 1882 the Chinese Exclusion Act barred nearly all Chinese from the United States for six decades. Slowly, however, those men and the few women who remained raised families and reared a new generation of Chinese Americans. They were joined by thousands more immigrants who made the journey illegally or took advantage of the few exceptions permissible under the Exclusion Act. But this second generation still suffered from discrimination, eking out their living in jobs despised by Caucasian laborers or taking daunting risks in small entrepreneurial ventures. Yet many hard-working Chinese did manage to open their own restaurants, laundries, and other small businesses. The enterprises formed a solid economic foundation for their small community and the much larger one that would emerge by the late twentieth century with a huge inﬂux of new immigrants arriving from China.

Table 23.3 Population of Chinese Ancestry in the
United States, 1850–2000
Year


1970††


Population


4,018†
34,933
63,199
105,465
107,488
89,863
435,062
806,027
1,645,472
2,432,585


Males per
One Female


Percentage
U.S.-Born


Total Chinese
Immigrants in
Preceding Decade*


—


—
—


—
41,397
64,301
123,201
61,711
14,799


N.A.
N.A.
N.A.
.94


N.A.
N.A.
N.A.


34,764
124,326
346,747
419,114


 *Includes Chinese immigrants in Hawaii after 1898; by 1970 Hawaii was a state. †Estimated. ††The passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882 sharply reduced the Chinese population in the United States. Liberalization of American immigration laws and Chinese policies beginning in the 1970s , however, has led to a great increase in population of Chinese ancestry in the United States. (Sources: U.S. Census Bureau, relevant years; U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Statistical Yearbook of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, 2000.)





Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


 Garﬁeld and Arthur As the presidential campaign of 1880 approached, “Rutherfraud” Hayes was a man without a party, denounced and repudiated by the Republican Old Guard. The Republican party sought a new standard-bearer for 1880 and ﬁ nally settled on a dark-horse candidate, James A. Garﬁeld, from the electorally powerful state of Ohio. His vice-presidential running mate was a notorious Stalwart henchman, Chester A. Arthur of New York. Energetically waving the bloody shirt, Garﬁeld barely squeaked out a victory over the Democratic candidate and Civil War hero, Winﬁeld Scott Hancock. He

 polled only 39,213 more votes than Hancock—4,453,295 to 4,414,082—but his margin in the electoral column was a comfortable 214 to 155. The new president was energetic and able, but he was immediately ensnared in a political conﬂ ict between his secretary of state, James G. Blaine, and Blaine’s Stalwart nemesis, Senator Roscoe Conkling. Then, as the Republican factions dueled, tragedy struck. A disappointed and mentally deranged ofﬁce seeker, Charles J. Guiteau, shot President Garﬁeld in the back in a Washington railroad station. Garﬁeld lingered in agony for eleven weeks and died on September 19, 1881. Guiteau, when seized, reportedly cried, “I am a Stalwart. Arthur is now President of the United States.” The implication was that now the Conklingites would all get good jobs. Guiteau’s attorneys argued that he was not guilty because of his incapacity to distinguish right from wrong—an early instance of the “insanity defense.” The defendant himself demonstrated his weak grip on reality when he asked all those who had beneﬁted politically from the assassination to contribute to his defense fund. These tactics availed little. Guiteau was found guilty of murder and hanged. Garﬁeld’s death had one positive outcome: it shocked politicians into reforming the shameful spoils system. The unlikely instrument of reform was Chester Arthur. Observers at ﬁ rst underestimated him. His record of cronyism and his fondness for ﬁ ne wines and elegant clothing (including eighty pairs of trou-

 Theodore Roosevelt (1858–1919), an ardent civilservice reformer, condemned the patronage system as

“


 The Ofﬁce Makes the Man, 1881 Besieged by his former New York cronies, Arthur tries to assert the dignity of his new presidential ofﬁce.

 tending to degrade American politics. . . . The men who are in ofﬁce only for what they can make out of it are thoroughly unwholesome citizens, and their activity in politics is simply noxious. . . . Decent private citizens must inevitably be driven out of politics if it is suffered to become a mere selﬁsh scramble for plunder, where victory rests with the most greedy, the most cunning, the most brazen. The whole patronage system is inimical to American institutions; it forms one of the gravest problems with which democratic and republican government has to grapple.

”


The Election of 1884


 sers) suggested that he was little more than a foppish dandy. But Arthur surprised his critics by prosecuting several fraud cases and giving his former Stalwart pals the cold shoulder. Disgust with Garﬁeld’s murder gave the Republican party itself a previously undetected taste for reform. The medicine ﬁ nally applied to the long-suffering federal government was the Pendleton Act of 1883— the so-called Magna Carta of civil-ser vice reform. It made compulsory campaign contributions from federal employees illegal, and it established the Civil Service Commission to make appointments to federal jobs on the basis of competitive examinations rather than “pull.” Although at ﬁ rst covering only about 10 percent of federal jobs, civil-ser vice reform did rein in the most blatant abuses. Yet like many well-intentioned reforms, it bred unintended problems of its own. With the

PRESIDENT ARTHUR 10%
McKINLEY 
 13,780 offices out of 131,208 106,205 offices out of 256,000

41%


 WILSON

71%


 497,603 offices out of 691,116

 ROOSEVELT

72%


 662,832 offices out of 920,310

 TRUMAN

87%


NIXON G.H.W. BUSH

90%


57%


 2,278,446 offices out of 2,603,267 2,393,000 offices out of 2,645,000 1,694,000 offices out of 2,940,000

 CLINTON

49%


 1,351,072 offices out of 2,734,338

G.W. BUSH

49%


 1,298,263 offices out of 2,670,857

 Figure 23.1 Civil-Service Employment The total number of civil-service jobs has remained relatively stable since the 1950s, even as the government has expanded in size and budget. The decline in classiﬁed civil-service jobs (those subject to competitive requirements) in recent decades reﬂects the changes mandated by the Postal Reorganization Act of 1971, which moved U.S. Postal Service employees from competitive to excepted service. Excepted jobs are not subject to rigid civil-service laws passed by Congress. (Source: U.S. Ofﬁce of Personnel Management.)



 “plum” federal posts now beyond their reach, politicians were forced to look elsewhere for money, “the mother’s milk of politics.” Increasingly, they turned to the bulging coffers of the big corporations. A new breed of “boss” emerged—less skilled at mobilizing small armies of immigrants and other voters on election day, but more adept at milking dollars from manufacturers and lobbyists. The Pendleton Act partially divorced politics from patronage, but it helped drive politicians into “marriages of convenience” with big-business leaders (see Figure 23.1). President Arthur’s surprising display of integrity offended too many powerful Republicans. His ungrateful party turned him out to pasture, and in 1886 he died of a cerebral hemorrhage.

The Blaine-Cleveland
Mudslingers of 1884
 James G. Blaine’s persistence in pursuit of his party’s presidential nomination ﬁnally paid off in 1884. The dashing Maine politician, blessed with almost every political asset except a reputation for honesty, was the clear choice of the Republican convention in Chicago. But many reform-minded Republicans gagged on Blaine’s candidacy. Blaine’s enemies publicized the ﬁshy-smelling “Mulligan letters,” written by Blaine to a Boston businessman and linking the powerful politician to a corrupt deal involving federal favors to a southern railroad. At least one of the damning documents ended with the furtive warning “Burn this letter.” Some reformers, unable to swallow Blaine, bolted to the Democrats. They were sneeringly dubbed Mugwumps, a word of Indian derivation meant to suggest that they were “sanctimonious” or “holier-than-thou.”* Victory-starved Democrats turned enthusiastically to a noted reformer, Grover Cleveland. A burly bachelor with a soup-straining mustache and a taste for chewing tobacco, Cleveland was a solid but not brilliant lawyer of forty-seven. He had rocketed from the mayor’s ofﬁce in Buffalo to the governorship of New York and the presidential nomination in three short years. Known as “Grover the Good,” he enjoyed a welldeserved reputation for probity in ofﬁce. But Cleveland’s admirers soon got a shock. Resolute Republicans, digging for dirt in the past of bachelor

 *Latter-day punsters gibed that the Mugwumps were priggish politicians who sat on the fence with their “mugs” on one side and their “wumps” on the other.



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


Little Lost Mugwumps Who Had
Gone Astray James G. Blaine,
 depicted as Little Bo Peep, tries to woo the errant Mugwump reformers back into the Republican fold in 1884.

 Cleveland, unearthed the report that he had been involved in an amorous affair with a Buffalo widow. She had an illegitimate son, now eight years old, for whom Cleveland had made ﬁ nancial provision. Democratic elders were demoralized. They hurried to Cleveland and urged him to lie like a gentleman, but their ruggedly honest candidate insisted, “Tell the truth.” The campaign of 1884 sank to perhaps the lowest level in American experience, as the two parties grunted

 “I Want My Pa!” Malicious anti-Cleveland cartoon.

 and shoved for the hog trough of ofﬁce. Few fundamental differences separated them. Even the bloody shirt had faded to a pale pink.* Personalities, not principles, claimed the headlines. Crowds of Democrats surged through city streets, chanting—to the rhythm of left, left, left, right, left—“Burn, burn, burn this letter!” Republicans taunted in return, “Ma, ma, where’s my pa?” Deﬁant Democrats shouted back, “Gone to the White House, ha, ha, ha!” The contest hinged on the state of New York, where Blaine blundered badly in the closing days of the campaign. A witless Republican clergyman damned the Democrats in a speech as the party of “Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion”—insulting with one swift stroke the culture, the faith, and the patriotism of New York’s numerous Irish American voters. Blaine was present at the time but lacked the presence of mind to repudiate the statement immediately. The pungent phrase, shortened to “RRR,” stung and stuck. Blaine’s silence seemed to give assent, and the wavering Irishmen who deserted his camp helped account for Cleveland’s paper-thin plurality of about a thousand votes in New York State, enough to give him the presidency. Cleveland swept the solid South and squeaked into of-

 *Neither candidate had served in the Civil War. Cleveland had hired a substitute to go in his stead while he supported his widowed mother and two sisters. Blaine was the only Republican presidential candidate from Grant through McKinley (1868 to 1900) who had not been a Civil War ofﬁcer.

Cleveland Battles for a Lower Tariff


 ﬁce with 219 to 182 electoral votes and 4,879,507 to 4,850,293 popular votes.

“Old Grover” Takes Over
 Bull-necked Cleveland in 1885 was the ﬁ rst Democrat to take the oath of presidential ofﬁce since Buchanan, twenty-eight years earlier. Huge question marks hung over his ample frame (5 feet 11 inches, 250 pounds). Could the “party of disunion” be trusted to govern the Union? Would desperate Democrats, ravenously hungry after twenty-four years of exile, trample the frail sprouts of civil-ser vice reform in a stampede to the patronage trough? Could Cleveland restore a mea sure

 Battling over Lowering the Tariff in the 1880s Advocates for both higher and lower tariffs claimed to be protecting American workers. In fact, workers were affected differently, depending on their jobs. Some U.S. manufacturing ﬁ rms beneﬁted from a protective tariff that shielded them from foreign competition, while others suffered from high duties on raw materials. Recognizing this tension, the American Federation of Labor declared neutrality on the tariff question in 1882.



 of respect and power to the maligned and enfeebled presidency? Cleveland was a man of principles, most of them safely orthodox by the standards of his day. A staunch apostle of the hands-off creed of laissez-faire, the new president caused the hearts of businesspeople and bankers to throb with contentment. He summed up his political philosophy in 1887 when he vetoed a bill to provide seeds for drought-ravaged Texas farmers. “Though the people support the government,” he declared, “the government should not support the people.” As tactless as a mirror and as direct as a bulldozer, he was outspoken, unbending, and profanely hot-tempered. At the outset Cleveland narrowed the North-South chasm by naming to his cabinet two former Confederates. As for the civil ser vice, Cleveland was whipsawed between the demands of the Democratic faithful for jobs and the demands of the Mugwumps, who had helped elect him, for reform. Believing in the merit system, Cleveland at ﬁ rst favored the cause of the reformers, but he eventually caved in to the carpings of Democratic bosses and ﬁ red almost two-thirds of the 120,000 federal employees, including 40,000 incumbent (Republican) postmasters, to make room for “deserving Democrats.” Military pensions gave Cleveland some of his most painful political headaches. The politically powerful Grand Army of the Republic (GAR) routinely lobbied hundreds of private pension bills through a compliant Congress. Beneﬁts were granted to deserters, to bounty jumpers, to men who never served, and to former soldiers who in later years had incurred disabilities in no way connected with war ser vice. A Democrat and a nonveteran, Cleveland was in an awkward position when it came to ﬁghting the pension-grabbers. But the conscience-driven president read each bill carefully, vetoed several hundred of them, and then laboriously penned individual veto messages for Congress.

Cleveland Battles for
 a Lower Tariff Cleveland also risked his political neck by prodding the hornet’s nest of the tariff issue. During the Civil War, tariff schedules had been jacked up to new high levels, partly to raise revenues for the insatiable military machine. American industry, which was preponderantly in Republican hands, had proﬁted from this protection and hated to see the sheltering beneﬁts reduced in



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


 peacetime. But the high duties continued to pile up revenue at the customshouses, and by 1881 the Treasury was running an annual surplus amounting to an embarrassing $145 million. Most of the government’s income, in those pre–income tax days, came from the tariff. Congress could reduce the vexatious surplus in two ways. One was to squander it on pensions and “porkbarrel” bills and thus curry favor with veterans and other self-seeking groups. The other was to lower the tariff—something the big industrialists vehemently opposed. Grover Cleveland, the rustic Buffalo attorney, had known little and cared less about the tariff before entering the White House. But as he studied the subject, he was much impressed by the arguments for downward revision of the tariff schedules. Lower barriers would mean lower prices for consumers and less protection for monopolies. Most important, they would mean an end to the Treasury surplus, a standing mockery of Cleveland’s professed belief in ﬁscal orthodoxy and small-government frugality. After much hesitation Cleveland saw his duty and overdid it. With his characteristic bluntness, Cleveland tossed an appeal for lower tariffs like a bombshell into the lap of Congress in late 1887. The response was electric. Cleveland succeeded admirably in smoking the issue out into the open. Democrats were deeply frustrated by

 the obstinacy of their chief. Republicans rejoiced at his apparent recklessness, bellowing loudly that lower tariffs would mean higher taxes, lower wages, and increased unemployment. The old warrior Blaine gloated, “There’s one more President for us in [tariff ] protection.” For the ﬁ rst time in years, a real issue divided the two parties as the 1888 presidential election loomed. Dismayed Democrats, seeing no alternative, somewhat dejectedly renominated Grover Cleveland in their St. Louis convention. Eager Republicans turned to Benjamin Harrison, whose grandfather was former president William Henry (“Tippecanoe”) Harrison. The tariff was the prime issue. The two parties ﬂooded the country with some 10 million pamphlets on the subject. The specter of a lowered tariff spurred the Republicans to frantic action. In an impressive demonstration of the post–Pendleton Act politics of alliances with big business, they raised a war chest of some $3 million— the heftiest yet—largely by “frying the fat” out of nervous industrialists. The money was widely used to line up corrupt “voting cattle” known as “repeaters” and “ﬂoaters.” In Indiana, always a crucial “swing” state, votes were shamelessly purchased for as much as $20 each. On election day Harrison nosed out Cleveland, 233 to 168 electoral votes. A change of about 7,000 ballots in New York would have reversed the outcome. Cleveland actually polled more popular votes, 5,537,857 to 5,447,129, but he nevertheless became the ﬁ rst sitting president to be voted out of his chair since Martin Van Buren in 1840.

The Billion-Dollar Congress


 Weighing the Candidates, 1888 Novelties like this were widely distributed in late-nineteenth-century political campaigns. This miniature scale could be adjusted in either candidate’s favor. Here the Republican Harrison rather improbably outweighs the corpulent Democratic candidate, Grover Cleveland.

 After a four-year famine, the Republicans under Harrison licked their lips hungrily for the bounty of federal ofﬁces. They yearned to lavish upon the party faithful the fat surpluses produced by the high tariffs. But in the House of Representatives, they had only three more votes than the necessary quorum of 163 members, and the Democrats were preparing to obstruct all House business by refusing to answer roll calls, demanding roll calls to determine the presence of a quorum, and employing other delaying tactics. Into this tense cockpit stepped the new Republican Speaker of the House, Thomas B. Reed of Maine. A hulking ﬁgure who towered six feet three inches, he was renowned as a master debater. He spoke with a harsh nasal drawl and wielded a verbal harpoon of sarcasm. To one congressman who quoted Henry Clay that

Populist Protest




 boosting rates to their highest peacetime level ever (an average of 48.4 percent on dutiable goods). Sponsored in the House by rising Republican star William McKinley of Ohio, the new tariff act brought fresh woes to farmers. Debt-burdened farmers had no choice but to buy manufactured goods from highpriced protected American industrialists, but were compelled to sell their own agricultural products into highly competitive, unprotected world markets. Mounting discontent against the McKinley Tariff caused many rural voters to rise in wrath. In the congressional elections of 1890, the Republicans lost their precarious majority and were reduced to just 88 seats, as compared with 235 Democrats. Even the muchtouted McKinley went down to defeat. Ominously for conser vatives, the new Congress also included nine members of the Farmers’ Alliance, a militant orga ni zation of southern and western farmers.

The Drumbeat
 of Discontent

Thomas B. Reed of Maine, Republican Speaker of the
 House, 1890 Sometimes referred to as “Czar” Reed, he served as Speaker for six years, dramatically increasing the power of the ofﬁce in line with his dictum that “the best system is to have one party govern and the other party watch.”

 he would “rather be right than be president,” Reed caustically retorted that he “would never be either.” Opponents cringed at the crack of his quip. Reed soon bent the intimidated House to his imperious will. He counted as present Democrats who had not answered the roll and who, rule book in hand, furiously denied that they were legally there. By such tactics “Czar” Reed utterly dominated the “Billion-Dollar” Congress—the ﬁ rst in history to appropriate that sum. Congress showered pensions on Civil War veterans and increased government purchases of silver. To keep the revenues ﬂowing in—and to protect Republican industrialists from foreign competition—the Billion-Dollar Congress also passed the McKinley Tariff Act of 1890,

 Politics was no longer “as usual” in 1892, when the newly formed People’s party, or “Populists,” burst upon the scene. Rooted in the Farmers’ Alliance of frustrated farmers in the great agricultural belts of the West and South, the Populists met in Omaha and adopted a scorching platform that denounced “the proliﬁc womb of governmental injustice.” They demanded inﬂation through free and unlimited coinage of silver at the rate of sixteen ounces of silver to one ounce of gold. They further called for a graduated income tax; government ownership of the railroads, telegraph, and telephone; the direct election of U.S. senators; a one-term limit on the presidency; the adoption of the initiative and referendum to allow citizens to shape legislation more directly; a shorter workday; and immigration restriction. As their presidential candidate, the Populists uproariously nominated the eloquent old Greenbacker, General James B. Weaver. An epidemic of nationwide strikes in the summer of 1892 raised the prospect that the Populists could weld together a coalition of aggrieved workers and indebted farmers in a revolutionary joint assault on the capitalist order. At Andrew Carnegie’s Homestead steel plant near Pittsburgh, company ofﬁcials called in three hundred armed Pinkerton detectives in July to crush the deﬁant Homestead Strike by steelworkers angry over pay cuts. Strikers, armed with riﬂes and dynamite, forced their assailants to surrender after a vicious battle



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


Minnesota Farmers Loading
 a Husker-Shredder, 1890s The purchase of technologically advanced farm equipment increased the productivity of farmers but also saddled them with debt. Many sought debt relief in the 1890s by clamoring for inﬂationary schemes, including the monetization of silver.

 that left ten people dead and some sixty wounded. Troops were eventually summoned, and both the strike and the union were broken. That same month, federal troops bloodily smashed a strike among silver miners in Idaho’s fabled Coeur d’Alene district.

 The Populists made a remarkable showing in the 1892 presidential election (see Map 23.3). Singing “Good-by, Party Bosses,” they rolled up 1,029,846 popular votes and 22 electoral votes for General Weaver. They thus became one of the few third parties in U.S. history to break into the electoral column. But they fell far short of an electoral majority. Industrial laborers, especially in the urban East, did not rally to the Populist banner in appreciable numbers. Populist electoral votes came from only six midwestern and western states, four of which (Kansas, Colorado, Idaho, and Nevada) fell completely into the Populist basket. The South, although a hotbed of agrarian agitation, proved especially unwilling to throw in its lot with the new party. Race was the reason. The more than one million southern black farmers orga nized in the Colored Farmers’ National Alliance shared a host of complaints with poor white farmers, and for a time their common economic goals promised to overcome their

 The Homestead Strike, 1892 Three hundred armed Pinkerton detectives ﬂoated on barges down the Monongahela River to the site of the Carnegie steel plant at Homestead, Pennsylvania. Met by a deﬁant and disciplined force of strikers, they were compelled to surrender. Here the Pinkerton men are shown disembarking from their barges after their capitulation, while the jeering strikers ashore exult in their victory.



The Election of 1892


 racial differences. Recognizing the crucial edge that black votes could give them in the South, Populist leaders like Georgia’s Tom Watson reached out to the black community. Watson was a wiry redhead who could “talk like the thrust of a Bowie knife.” He declared, “There is no reason why the black man should not understand that the law that hurts me, as a farmer, hurts him, as a farmer.” Many blacks were disillusioned enough with the Republican party to respond. Alarmed, the conser vative white “Bourbon” elite in the South played cynically upon historic racial antagonisms to counter the Populists’ appeal for interracial solidarity and woo back poor whites. Southern blacks were heavy losers. The Populistinspired reminder of potential black political strength led to the near-total extinction of what little African American suffrage remained in the South. White southerners more aggressively than ever used literacy tests

 A popular protest song of the 1890s among western farmers was titled “The Hayseed.” One stanza ran,

 I once was a tool of oppression, And as green as a sucker could be, And monopolies banded together To beat a poor hayseed like me.

 and poll taxes to deny blacks the ballot. The notorious grandfather clause exempted from those requirements anyone whose forebear had voted in 1860—when, of course, black slaves had not voted at all. More than half a century would pass before southern blacks could again vote in considerable numbers. Accompanying this disfranchisement were more severe Jim Crow laws,

 Map 23.3 Presidential Election of 1892 (showing vote by county) Note the concentration of Populist strength in the semiarid farming regions of the western half of the country. (Compare this with Map 26.4, showing average annual precipitation with major agricultural products as of 1900, on p. 647). Interactive Map

 WASH.

N.H.
VT. R-4

R-4


 MONT.

 ME.

R-4


N. DAK.

R-3


R-6


D-1/R-1/P-1


 OREGON

 MINN.

R-3/P-1


 MASS.

R-9


 IDAHO

S. DAK.

P-3


 WISC.

R-4


 WYO.

D-12


R-3


R-13


R-8


UTAH TERR.

 CALIF.

 ILL.

D-24


COLO. P-4

OKLA. TERR. NEW MEXICO TERR.

IND. D-15

R-32


 OHIO

D-12


D-13


D-8


D-11


D-12


S.C.


 ARK.

D-9


D-8


MISS. D-9

 TEXAS

 MD.

N.C.


TENN. IND. TERR.

N.J. D-6


D-10
D-3


 VA.

D-6


 KY.

D-17


 CONN.

 DEL.

D-1/R-22


W. VA.


 MO.

KANSAS P-10

ARIZONA TERR.

R.I.
R-4


 PA.

 IOWA

 NEB.

D-8/R-1


D-36


MICH. D-5/R-9

NEV. P-3

R-15


N.Y.


ALA. D-11

 GA.

D-13


 LA.

D-15


D-8


FLA. D-4

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Cleveland (Democrat)




62%


5,555,426


46.1%


Harrison (Republican)




33%


5,182,690


43.0%




5%


1,029,846


8.5%


 Weaver (People’s)

Territories, Indian
 reservations, unsettled, etc.



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


The Kansas Legislature,
 1893 Riﬂe-bearing Populists seized the Kansas capitol after the election of 1892 to make good their claim that they had won at the polls. Republicans disagreed and eventually prevailed when sergeants at arms, shown here, restored order.

 designed to enforce racial segregation in public places, including hotels and restaurants, and backed up by atrocious lynchings and other forms of intimidation. The conser vative crusade to eliminate the black vote also had dire consequences for the Populist party

 itself. Even Tom Watson abandoned his interracial appeals and, in time, became a vociferous racist himself. After 1896 the Populist party lapsed increasingly into vile racism and staunchly advocated black disfranchisement. Such were the bitterly ironic fruits of the Populist campaign in the South.

Cleveland and Depression
 With the Populists divided and the Republicans discredited, Grover Cleveland took ofﬁce once again in 1893, the only president ever reelected after defeat. He was the same old bull-necked and bullheaded Cleveland, with a little more weight, polish, conservatism, and self-assertiveness. But though it was the same old

 Thomas Edward Watson (1865–1922) Populist leader Tom Watson of Georgia began his public career promoting interracial political cooperation, though he sometimes despaired that many poor white farmers preferred to “hug the chains of . . . wretchedness rather than do any experimenting on [the race] question.” Watson himself eventually succumbed to racism. In 1913 he proclaimed that “the Negro has no comprehension of virtue, honesty, truth, gratitude, and principle. The South has to lynch him occasionally, and ﬂog him, now and then, to keep him from blaspheming the Almighty by his conduct . . . and color.”

The Return of Cleveland


 Cleveland, it was not the same old country. Debtors were up in arms, workers were restless, and the advance shadows of panic were falling. Hardly had Cleveland seated himself in the presidential chair when the devastating depression of 1893 burst about his burly frame. Lasting for about four years, it was the most punishing economic downturn of the nineteenth century. Contributing causes were the splurge of overbuilding and speculation, labor disorders, and the ongoing agricultural depression. Free-silver agitation—the cry to expand the money supply with unlimited coinage of silver—had also damaged American credit abroad, and the usual pinch on American ﬁ nances had come when European banking houses began to call in loans from the United States. Distress ran deep and far. About eight thousand American businesses collapsed in six months. Dozens of railroad lines went into the hands of receivers. Soup kitchens fed the unemployed, while gangs of hoboes (“tramps”) wandered aimlessly about the country. Local charities did their feeble best, but the federal government, bound by the let-nature-take-its-course philosophy of the times, saw no legitimate way to relieve the suffering masses. Cleveland, who had earlier been bothered by a surplus, was now burdened with a deepening deﬁcit. The Treasury was required to issue legal tender notes for the silver bullion that it bought. Owners of the paper currency would then present it for gold, and by law the notes had to be reissued. New holders would repeat the process, thus draining away precious gold in an “endless-chain” operation. Alarmingly, the gold reserve in the Treasury dropped below $100 million, which was popularly regarded as the safe minimum for supporting about $350 million in outstanding paper money. Cleveland saw no alternative but to halt the bleeding away of gold by engineering a repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890. For this purpose he summoned Congress into an extra session in the summer of 1893. Unknown to the country, complications threatened from another quarter. A malignant growth had developed on the roof of Cleveland’s mouth, and it had to be removed on a private yacht with extreme secrecy. If the president had died under the surgeon’s knife, his place would have been taken by the “softmoney” vice president, Adlai E. Stevenson—an eventuality that would have deepened the crisis. In Congress the debate over the repeal of the silver act was meanwhile running its heated course. A silver-tongued young Democratic congressman from



 Nebraska, thirty-three-year-old William Jennings Bryan, held the galleries spellbound for three hours as he championed the cause of free silver. The friends of silver announced that “hell would freeze over” before Congress would pass the repeal mea sure. But an angered Cleveland used his job-granting power to break the ﬁlibuster in the Senate. He thus alienated the Democratic silverites like Bryan and disrupted his party at the very outset of his administration. Repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act only partially stopped the hemorrhaging of gold from the Treasury. In February 1894 the gold reserve sank to a dismaying $41 million. The United States was now in grave danger of going off the gold standard—a move that would render the nation’s currency volatile and unreliable as a mea sure of value and that would also mortally cripple America’s international trade. Cleveland ﬂoated two Treasury bond issues in 1894, totaling over $100 million, but the “endless-chain” operations continued relentlessly. Early in 1895 Cleveland turned in desperation to J. P. Morgan, “the bankers’ banker” and the head of a Wall Street syndicate. After tense negotiations at the White House, the bankers agreed to lend the government $65 million in gold. They were obviously in business for proﬁt, so they charged a commission amounting to about $7 million. But they did make a signiﬁcant concession when they agreed to obtain one-half of the gold abroad and take the necessary steps to dam it up in the leaky Treasury. The loan, at least temporarily, helped restore conﬁdence in the nation’s ﬁ nances.

Cleveland Breeds a Backlash
 The bond deal stirred up a storm. The Wall Street ogre, especially in the eyes of the silverites and other debtors, symbolized all that was wicked and grasping in American politics. President Cleveland’s secretive dealings with the mighty “Jupiter” Morgan were savagely condemned as a “sellout” of the national government. But Cleveland was certain that he had done no wrong. Sarcastically denying that he was “Morgan’s errand boy,” Cleveland asserted, “Without shame and without repentance I confess my share of the guilt.” Cleveland suffered further embarrassment with the passage of the Wilson-Gorman Tariff in 1894. The Democrats had pledged to lower tariffs, but by the time their tariff bill made it through Congress, it had been so loaded with special-interest protection that it made scarcely a dent in the high McKinley Tariff rates. An



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


 outraged Cleveland grudgingly allowed the bill, which also contained a 2 percent tax on incomes over $4,000, to become law without his signature. When the Supreme Court struck down the income-tax provision in 1895,* the Populists and other disaffected groups found proof that the courts were only the tools of the plutocrats. Democratic political fortunes naturally suffered in the face of these several setbacks. The tariff dynamite that had blasted the Republicans out of the House in 1890 now dislodged the Democrats, with a strong helping hand from the depression. The revitalized Republicans, singing “Times Are Mighty Hard,” won the congressional elections of 1894 in a landslide—244 seats to 105 for the Democrats. The Republicans be-

 *It violated the “direct tax” clause. See Art. I, Sec. IX, para. 4 in the Appendix. The Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution, adopted in 1913, permitted an income tax.

 gan to look forward to the presidential race of 1896 with unconcealed glee. Despite his gruff integrity and occasional courage, Grover Cleveland failed utterly to cope with the serious economic crisis that befell the country in 1893. He was tied down in ofﬁce by the same threads that held all the politicians of the day to Lilliputian levels. Grant, Hayes, Garﬁeld, Arthur, Harrison, and Cleveland are often referred to as the “forgettable presidents.” Bewhiskered and bland in person, they left mostly blanks—or blots—on the nation’s political record, as issues like the tariff, the money question, and the rights of labor continued to fester. What little political vitality existed in Gilded Age America was to be found in local settings or in Congress, which overshadowed the White House for most of this period. But before the century ended, down-and-out debtors and disgruntled workers would make one last titanic effort to wring reform out of the political system—in the momentous election of 1896.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Grant defeats Seymour for presidency



 Fisk and Gould corner gold market



 Tweed scandal in New York



 Crédit Mobilier scandal exposed Liberal Republicans break with Grant Grant defeats Greeley for presidency



Panic of 1873




 Whiskey Ring scandal Civil Rights Act of 1875 Resumption Act



 Hayes-Tilden election standoff and crisis



Compromise of 1877
 Reconstruction ends Railroad strikes paralyze nation



 Garﬁeld defeats Hancock for presidency



 Garﬁeld assassinated; Arthur assumes presidency



Chinese Exclusion Act




Civil Rights Cases
 Pendleton Act sets up Civil Service Commission



 Cleveland defeats Blaine for presidency



 Harrison defeats Cleveland for presidency



“Billion-Dollar” Congress
 McKinley Tariff Act Sherman Silver Purchase Act (repealed 1893)



 Homestead steel strike Coeur d’Alene (Idaho) silver miners’ strike People’s party candidate James B. Weaver wins twenty-two electoral votes Cleveland defeats Harrison and Weaver to regain presidency



 Depression of 1893 begins Republicans regain House of Representatives



J. P.
Morgan’s banking syndicate loans $65 million in gold to federal government 


 Plessy v. Ferguson legitimizes “separate but equal” doctrine

Varying Viewpoints


KEY TERMS
“waving the bloody shirt” (539) Tweed Ring (539) Crédit Mobilier scandal (541) panic of 1873 (542) Gilded Age (543) patronage (544) Compromise of 1877 (545) 


PEOPLE TO KNOW
Civil Rights Act of 1875 (546) sharecropping (547) Jim Crow (547) Plessy v. Ferguson (547) Chinese Exclusion Act (549) Pendleton Act (553) Homestead Strike (557) grandfather clause (559) 
Jay Gould
Horace Greeley
Rutherford B. Hayes
 James A. Garﬁeld Chester Arthur

Grover Cleveland
Thomas B. Reed
Tom Watson
William Jennings Bryan
J. P.
Morgan 

The Populists: Radicals or Reactionaries?


T


 aking their cue from contemporary satirical commentaries like Mark Twain and Charles Dudley Warner’s The Gilded Age (1873), the ﬁ rst historians who wrote about the post–Civil War era judged it harshly. They condemned its politicians as petty and corrupt, lamented the emergence of a new plutocratic class, and railed against the arrogance of corporate power. Such a view is conspicuous in Charles and Mary Beard’s The Rise of American Civilization (4 vols., 1927–1942), perhaps the most inﬂuential American history textbook ever written. The Beards were leaders of the so-called progressive school of historical writing that ﬂourished in the early years of the twentieth century. Progressive historians, many of whom grew up in the Gilded Age, shared in a widespread disillusionment that the Civil War had failed to generate a rebirth of American idealism. Their political sympathies were chillingly antibusiness and warmly pro-labor, pro-farmer, and pro-reform. Historians of the progressive persuasion identiﬁed Populism as virtually the only orga nized opposition to the social, economic, and political order that took shape in the last decades of the nineteenth century. The Populists thus became heroes to several generations of writers who bemoaned that order and looked back longingly at Americans’ agrarian past. John D. Hicks, The Populist Revolt (1931), is the classic

 portrayal of the Populists as embattled farmers hurling deﬁance at Wall Street and the robber barons in a last-ditch defense of their simple, honest way of life. Bowed but unbroken by the defeat of their great champion, William Jennings Bryan, in the presidential election of 1896, the Populists, Hicks claimed, left a reforming legacy that ﬂourished again in the progressive era and the New Deal. Hicks’s point of view was the dominant one until the 1950s, when it was sharply criticized by Richard Hofstadter in The Age of Reform (1955). Hofstadter charged that the progressive historians had romanticized the Populists, who were best understood not as picturesque protesters, but as “harassed little country businessmen” bristling with provincial prejudices. The city-born-and-bred Hofstadter argued that the Populist revolt was aimed not just at big business and the money power but also somewhat irrationally at urbanism, immigrants, the East, and modernity itself. Hofstadter thus exposed a “dark side” of Populism, which contained elements of backwoods antiintellectualism, paranoia, and even anti-Semitism. In the 1960s several scholars, inspired by the work of C. Vann Woodward, as well as by sympathy with the protest movements of that turbulent decade, began to rehabilitate the Populists as authentic reformers with genuine grievances. Especially notable in this vein was Lawrence Goodwyn’s Democratic Promise:



Chapter 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 1869–1896


The Populist Movement in America (1976). Goodwyn
 depicted the Populists as reasonable radicals who were justiﬁably resentful of their eclipse by urban industrialism and ﬁ nance capitalism. He also portrayed Populism as the last gasp of popular political participation, a democratic “moment” in American history that expired with the Populists’ absorption into the Democratic party. Two subsequent works, Edward L. Ayers’s Promise of the New South (1992) and Robert C. McMath’s American Populism (1993), synthesized many of the older

 perspectives and presented a balanced view of the Populists as radical in many ways but also limited by their nostalgia for a lost agrarian past. Recently, Eric Rauchway’s Blessed Among Nations (2006) argued that Populism was a reaction to America’s increased reliance on foreign investment. Farmers in southern and western states resented control by foreign capitalists, particularly the British. Although Hofstadter made a similar point ﬁ fty years earlier, the impact of the international economy on domestic politics is reemerging as a direction for new research.

To Learn More
 William Gillette, Retreat from Reconstruction, 1869–1879 (1979) Steven Hahn, A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles in the Rural South from Slavery to the Great Migration (2003) Paul Krause, The Battle for Homestead, 1880–1892: Politics, Culture, and Steel (1992) Roy Morris, Jr., Fraud of the Century: Rutherford B. Hayes, Samuel Tilden, and the Stolen Election of 1876 (2003) Heather Cox Richardson, The Death of Reconstruction: Race, Labor, and Politics in the Post–Civil War North, 1865–1901 (2001) Mark W. Summers, The Era of Good Stealings (1993)

Alan Trachtenberg, The Incorporation of America: Culture
 and Society in the Gilded Age (1982) Robert Wiebe, The Search for Order, 1877–1920 (1967) C. Vann Woodward, Origins of the New South, 1877–1913 (1951) ———, The Strange Career of Jim Crow (rev. ed., 1974)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Industry
Comes of Age





1865–1900
 The wealthy class is becoming more wealthy; but the poorer class is becoming more dependent. The gulf between the employed and the employer is growing wider; social contrasts are becoming sharper; as liveried carriages appear; so do barefooted children.

A


 s the nineteenth century drew to a close, observers were asking, “Why are the best men not in politics?” One answer was that they were being lured away from public life by the lusty attractions of the booming private economy. As America’s Industrial Revolution slipped into high gear, talented men ached for proﬁts, not the presidency. They dreamed of controlling corporations, not the Congress. What the nation lost in civic leadership, it gained in an astounding surge of economic growth. As late as 1870, agriculture was the nation’s biggest business. By 1900 its share of the economy was half that. Until the end of the Civil War, the United States imported more merchandise than it exported. By 1900 it annually delivered more than $600 million worth of manufactured goods to the world’s marketplace. Americans did not achieve this economic transformation all by themselves. Foreign investment,

 labor, trade, and technology made it possible. Although in many ways still a political dwarf, the United States was about to stand up before the world as an industrial colossus—and the lives of millions of working Americans would be transformed in the process.

The Iron Colt Becomes
 an Iron Horse The government-business entanglements that increasingly shaped politics after the Civil War also undergirded the industrial development of the nation. The unparalleled outburst of railroad construction was a crucial case. When Lincoln was shot in 1865, there were only 35,000 miles of steam railways in the United States, mostly east of the Mississippi. By 1900 the ﬁgure had

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 spurted up to 192,556 miles, or more than that for all of Europe combined, and much of the new trackage ran west of the Mississippi (see Figure 24.1). Transcontinental railroad building was so costly and risky as to require government subsidies, as it had

 in many other industrializing nations. Everywhere, the construction of railway systems promised greater national unity and economic growth. The extension of rails into thinly populated regions was unproﬁtable until the areas could be built up, and private promoters

CONTINENT AND COUNTRY TOTAL WORLD

595,767


Total North and
South America
United States


317,925
259,687


Canada


21,624


Brazil


9,300


Mexico


8,600


Argentina


8,255


Other Americas


10,459


Total Europe


220,261


Germany


41,793


France


36,348


Great Britain


32,088


Russia


30,140


Austria-Hungary


26,501


Italy


13,063


Spain


9,860


Sweden


7,910


Other Europe


22,558


Total Asia


31,024


British Empire


25,488


Japan


1,460


China 200
Other Asia


3,876


Total Australia


17,922


Total Africa


8,635


Algeria and Tunis


3,094


Cape Colony


2,873


Egypt


1,541


Other Africa


1,127


50,000


100,000


150,000


200,000


250,000


300,000


350,000


600,000


 Railroad track built in kilometers, 1889

Figure 24.1 Railroads Worldwide, 1889*
 *Another calculation of railway track per 10,000 inhabitants in 1904 revealed that the United States was still far out in front, with 26.4 miles of track compared to 15.2 miles for the second-place country, Sweden. Much farther behind were the major western European nations of France (7.3), Germany (6.1), and Great Britain and Ireland (5.4). [Source: Slason Thompson, Railway Statistics of the United States of America for the Year Ending June 30, 1906, Compared with the Ofﬁcial Reports of 1905 and Recent Statistics of Foreign Railways (1907).] Source: Henry Poor, Poor’s Manual of the Railroads of the United States for 1891 (1891).



The Railroad Age


 were unwilling to suffer heavy initial losses. Congress, impressed by arguments pleading military and postal needs, began to advance liberal loans to two favored cross-continent companies in 1862 and added enormous donations of acreage paralleling the tracks. All told, Washington rewarded the railroads with 155,504,994 acres, and the western states contributed 49 million more—a total area larger than Texas (see Map 24.1). Grasping railroads tied up even more land than this for a number of years. Land grants to railroads were made in broad belts along the proposed route. Within these belts the railroads were allowed to choose alternate mile-square sections in checkerboard fashion. But until they determined the precise location of their tracks and decided which sections were the choicest selections, the railroads withheld all the land from other users. President Grover Cleveland put an end to this foot-dragging practice in 1887 and threw open to

 settlement the still-unclaimed public portions of the land-grant areas. Noisy criticism, especially in later years, was leveled at the “giveaway” of so valuable a birthright to greedy corporations. But the government did receive beneﬁcial returns, including long-term preferential rates for postal ser vice and military trafﬁc. Granting land was also a “cheap” way to subsidize a muchdesired transportation system, because it avoided new taxes for direct cash grants. The railroads could turn the land into gold by using it as collateral for loans from private bankers or, later, by selling it. This they often did, at an average price of $3 an acre. Critics were also prone to overlook the fact that the land did not have even that relatively modest value until the railroads had ribboned it with steel. Frontier villages touched by the magic wand of the iron rail became ﬂourishing cities; those that were

 Map 24.1 Federal Land Grants to Railroads The heavy red lines indicate areas within which the railroads might be given speciﬁc parcels of land. As shown in the inset, land was reserved in belts of various widths on either side of a railroad’s right of way. Until the railroad selected the individual mile-square sections it chose to possess, all such sections within the belt were withdrawn from eligibility for settlement. The “time zones” were introduced in 1883 (see p. 572), and their boundaries have since been adjusted. Interactive Map

Central
Time


C a n a d i a n Pa c i f i c R
R


 MONT.

CANADA MINN.

N. DAK.

N o r t h e r n Pa c i f i c R R


M


WYOMING
Pa 
 cif

 ic R R

NEVADA CALIF.

PAC I F IC OCEAN

Salt Lake
City
UTAH TERR.

 uth

ARIZ. TERR.

 e r n Pa c i fic R R

120°W


&


Atlant ic &
Pa c i f i c R R


So


 NEB.

 pe

Sa


 a nt

L. E


 IND.

ILL.
Fe R R 
 KANS.

 ka

INDIAN TERR.

Pe


St. Louis


 nn s

 y lva

 MO.

R
 nia R

 h

N. MEX. TERR.
El Paso 
Ne


 w

 TENN.

L.
 io ntar

 r Yo

 kC

 n er

Ra


 ilw

PA.
Pittsburgh 
 VA.

 ay

S.C.


Savannah


 ALA.

30°N


 One square mile granted to railroad

New Orleans


M EXICO

 FLA.

Gulf of Mexico


100°W


 Primary federal land grants to railroads





400 Km.


90°W


80°W


N


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

 LA.

 Right of way: 100 yards wide

Boston
MASS. R.I. CONN. 40°N
New York N.J. Philadelphia 70°W DEL. MD. Washington, D.C. 
N.C.


 TEXAS

 One square mile held by government or sold

N.H.


R
 ral R ent

 GA.

 MISS.

PATTERN OF LAND GRANTS

N.Y.


 W.VA.

 KY.

 ARK.

 rie

 OHIO

 IOWA

Kansas City


O


Hamilton


Chicago


 c RR

Denver
 COLO.

 n T o

Los Angeles


U n i o n Pa c i f i


Atchiso


C


San
Francisco


 al entr

Toronto


L.
Michigan 

S. DAK.

 ME.

 VT.

I


L. on
 r Hu

 WIS.

 IDAHO

 Montréal

Ottawa


.
 CH

 OREGON

60°W


 Québec

 pe L. Su rior

Duluth


50°N


 ut

Seattle
 WASH.

Eastern
Time


So


Tacoma


Mountain
Time


Pacific
Time


Vancouver




400 Mi.




Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 bypassed often withered away and became “ghost towns.” Little wonder that communities fought one another for the privilege of playing host to the railroads. Ambitious towns customarily held out monetary and other attractions to the builders, who sometimes blackmailed them into contributing more generously.

Spanning the Continent
 with Rails Deadlock in the 1850s over the proposed transcontinental railroad was broken when the South seceded, leaving the ﬁeld to the North. In 1862, the year after the guns ﬁ rst spoke at Fort Sumter, Congress made provision for starting the long-awaited line. One weighty argument for action was the urgency of bolstering the Union, already disrupted, by binding the Paciﬁc Coast—especially gold-rich Cal i fornia—more securely to the rest of the Republic. The Union Paciﬁc Railroad—note the word Union— was thus commissioned by Congress to thrust westward from Omaha, Nebraska. For each mile of track constructed, the company was granted 20 square miles of land, alternating in 640-acre sections on either side of the track. For each mile the builders were also to receive a generous federal loan, ranging from $16,000 on

Snow Sheds on the Central
 Paciﬁc Railroad in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, by Joseph H. Becker, ca. 1869 Formidable obstacles of climate and terrain confronted the builders of the Central Paciﬁc Railroad in the mountainous heights of California. Note the Chinese laborers in the foreground.

 the ﬂat prairie land to $48,000 for mountainous country. The laying of rails began in earnest after the Civil War ended in 1865, and with juicy loans and land grants available, the “groundhog” promoters made all possible haste. Insiders of the Crédit Mobilier construction company reaped fabulous proﬁts. They slyly pocketed $73 million for some $50 million worth of breakneck construction, spending small change to bribe congressmen to look the other way. Sweaty construction gangs, containing many Irish “Paddies” (Patricks) who had fought in the Union armies, worked at a frantic pace. On one record-breaking day, a sledge-and-shovel army of some ﬁve thousand men laid ten miles of track. A favorite song went like this: Then drill, my Paddies, drill; Drill, my heroes, drill; Drill all day, No sugar in your tay [tea] Workin’ on the U.P. Railway. When hostile Indians attacked in futile efforts to protect what once rightfully had been their land, the laborers would drop their picks and seize their riﬂes. Scores of people—railroad workers and Indians—lost their lives as the rails stretched ever westward. At rail’s end, workers tried their best to ﬁ nd relaxation and conviviality in

Railroads Span the Nation


 Promoting the Union Paciﬁc Railroad, 1869

 their tented towns, known as “hells on wheels,” often teeming with as many as ten thousand men and a sprinkling of painted prostitutes and performers. Rail laying at the Cal i fornia end was undertaken by the Central Paciﬁc Railroad. This line pushed boldly eastward from boomtown Sacramento, over and through the towering, snow-clogged Sierra Nevada. Four farseeing men—the so-called Big Four—were the chief ﬁnancial backers of the enterprise. The quartet included the heavyset, enterprising ex-governor Leland Stanford of Cal i fornia, who had useful political connections, and the burly, energetic Collis P. Huntington, an adept lobbyist. The Big Four cleverly operated through two construction companies, and although they walked away with tens of millions in proﬁts, they kept their hands relatively clean by not becoming involved in the bribing of congressmen. The Central Paciﬁc, which was granted the same princely subsidies as the Union Paciﬁc, had the same



 incentive to haste. Some ten thousand Chinese laborers, sweating from dawn to dusk under their basket hats, proved to be cheap, efﬁcient, and expendable (hundreds lost their lives in premature explosions and other mishaps). The towering Sierra Nevada presented a formidable barrier, and the nerves of the Big Four were strained when their workers could chip only a few inches a day tunneling through solid rock, while the Union Paciﬁc was sledgehammering westward across the open plains. A “wedding of the rails” was ﬁ nally consummated near Ogden, Utah, in 1869, as two locomotives— “facing on a single track, half a world behind each back”— gently kissed cowcatchers. The colorful ceremony included the breaking of champagne bottles and the driv ing of a last ceremonial (golden) spike, with ex-governor Stanford clumsily wielding a silver maul. In all, the Union Paciﬁc built 1,086 miles, the Central Paciﬁc 689 miles. Completion of the transcontinental line—a magniﬁcent engineering feat for that day—was one of America’s most impressive peacetime undertakings. It welded the West Coast more ﬁ rmly to the Union and facilitated a ﬂourishing trade with Asia. It penetrated the arid barrier of the deserts, paving the way for the phenomenal growth of the Great West. Americans compared this electrifying achievement with the Declaration of Independence and the emancipation of the slaves; jubilant Philadelphians again rang the cracked bell of Independence Hall.

Binding the Country
 with Railroad Ties With the westward trail now blazed, four other transcontinental lines were completed before the century’s end. None of them secured monetary loans from the federal government, as did the Union Paciﬁc and the Central Paciﬁc. But all of them except the Great Northern received generous grants of land. The Northern Paciﬁc Railroad, stretching from Lake Superior to Puget Sound, reached its terminus in 1883. The Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe, stretching through the southwestern deserts to Cal i fornia, was completed in 1884. The Southern Paciﬁc ribboned from New Orleans to San Francisco and was consolidated in the same year. The last spike of the last of the ﬁve transcontinental railroads of the nineteenth century was hammered home in 1893. The Great Northern, which ran from



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 The Union Paciﬁc and the Central Paciﬁc Link at Promontory Point, Utah, May 10, 1869 Railroad ﬁnanciers, dignitaries, spectators, and Chinese (Central Paciﬁc) and Irish (Union Paciﬁc) work gangs witnessed the historic joining that created the nation’s ﬁrst transcontinental railroad. After the two locomotives chugged within a few feet of each other, Central Paciﬁc chief and former California governor Leland Stanford tapped a golden spike into a prepared hole on the last tie with a silver-plated maul. The golden spike was whisked away to be preserved for posterity at the Stanford University Museum, but the iron one that replaced it was hardly ordinary. It was wired to a Union Paciﬁc telegraph line, while a copper plate on the maul was connected to a Central Paciﬁc wire. When they touched, they closed a telegraphic circuit that sent the news to cities all over the country.

 Duluth to Seattle north of the Northern Paciﬁc, was the creation of a far-visioned Canadian American, James J. Hill, a bearlike man who was probably the greatest railroad builder of all. His enterprise was so soundly orga nized that it rode through later ﬁ nancial storms with ﬂying colors. Yet the romance of the rails was not without its sordid side. Pioneer builders were often guilty of gross overoptimism. Avidly seeking land bounties and pushing into areas that lacked enough potential population to support a railroad, they sometimes laid down rails that led “from nowhere to nothing.” When prosperity failed to smile upon their coming, they went into bankruptcy, carrying down with them the savings of trusting investors. Many of the large railroads in the post–Civil War decades passed through seemingly endless bankruptcies, mergers, or reorga ni zations.

 In 1892 James Baird Weaver (1833–1912), nominee of the Populists, wrote regarding the railroad magnates,

“


 In their delirium of greed the managers of our transportation systems disregard both private right and the public welfare. Today they will combine and bankrupt their weak rivals, and by the expenditure of a triﬂing sum possess themselves of properties which cost the outlay of millions. Tomorrow they will capitalize their booty for ﬁve times the cost, issue their bonds, and proceed to levy tariffs upon the people to pay dividends upon the fraud.

”


Railroad Revolutions


Railroad Consolidation
 and Mechanization The success of the western lines was facilitated by welding together and expanding the older eastern networks, notably the New York Central. The genius in this enterprise was “Commodore” Cornelius Vanderbilt— burly, boisterous, white-whiskered. Having made his millions in steamboating, he daringly turned, in his late sixties, to a new career in railroading. Though illeducated, ungrammatical, coarse, and ruthless, he was clear-visioned. Offering superior railway ser vice at lower rates, he amassed a fortune of $100 million. His name is perhaps best remembered through his contribution of $1 million to the founding of Vanderbilt University in Tennessee. Two signiﬁcant new improvements proved a boon to the railroads. One was the steel rail, which Vanderbilt helped popularize when he replaced the old iron tracks of the New York Central with the tougher metal.

 Traveling First Class This sumptuously appointed Pullman Palace Car offered its prosperous passengers the comforts of home while they were far away from it.



 Steel was safer and more economical because it could bear a heavier load. A standard gauge of track width likewise came into wide use during the postwar years, thus eliminating the expense and inconvenience of numerous changes from one line to another. Other reﬁ nements played a vital role in railroading. The Westinghouse air brake, generally adopted in the 1870s, was a marvelous contribution to efﬁciency and safety. The Pullman Palace Cars, advertised as “gorgeous traveling hotels,” were introduced on a considerable scale in the 1860s. Alarmists condemned them as “wheeled torture chambers” and potential funeral pyres, for the wooden cars were equipped with swaying kerosene lamps. Appalling accidents continued to be almost daily tragedies, despite safety devices like the telegraph (“talking wires”), double-tracking, and (later) the block signal.

Revolution by Railways
 The metallic ﬁ ngers of the railroads intimately touched countless phases of American life. For the ﬁ rst time, a sprawling nation became united in a physical sense, bound with ribs of iron and steel. The railroads emerged as the nation’s biggest business, employing more people than any other industry and gobbling up nearly 20 percent of investment dollars from foreign and domestic investors alike. More than any other single factor, the railroad network spurred the amazing economic growth of the post–Civil War years. By stitching North America together from ocean to ocean, the pufﬁ ng locomotives opened up the West with its wealth of resources. Trains hauled raw materials to factories and sped them back as ﬁ nished goods for sale across the continent, making the United States the largest integrated national market in the world. The forging of the rails themselves generated the largest single source of orders for the adolescent steel industry. The screeching iron horse especially stimulated mining and agriculture in the West. It took farmers out to their land, carried the fruits of their toil to market, and brought them their manufactured necessities. Clusters of farm settlements paralleled the railroads, just as earlier they had followed the rivers. Railways were a boon for cities and played a leading role in the great cityward movement of the last decades of the century. The iron monsters could carry food to enormous concentrations of people and at the same time ensure them a livelihood by providing both raw materials and markets.



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 Railroad companies also stimulated the mighty stream of immigration. Seeking settlers to whom their land grants might be sold at a proﬁt, they advertised seductively in Europe and sometimes offered to transport the newcomers free to their farms. The land also felt the impact of the railroad—especially the broad, ecologically fragile midsection of the continent that Thomas Jefferson had purchased from France in 1803. Settlers following the railroads plowed up the tallgrass prairies of Iowa, Illinois, Kansas, and Nebraska and planted well-drained, rectangular cornﬁelds. On the shortgrass prairies of the high plains in the Dakotas and Montana, range-fed cattle rapidly displaced the buffalo, which were hunted to nearextinction. The white pine forests of Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota disappeared into lumber that was rushed by rail to prairie farmers, who used it to build houses and fences. Time itself was bent to the railroads’ needs. Until the 1880s every town in the United States had its own “local” time, dictated by the sun’s position. When it was noon in Chicago, it was 11:50 a.m. in St. Louis and 12:18 p.m. in Detroit. For railroad operators worried about keeping schedules and avoiding wrecks, this patchwork of local times was a nightmare. Thus on November 18, 1883, the major rail lines decreed that the continent would henceforth be divided into four “time zones.” Most communities quickly adopted railroad “standard” time. Finally, the railroad, more than any other single factor, was the maker of millionaires. A raw new aristocracy, consisting of “lords of the rail,” replaced the old southern “lords of the lash.” The multiwebbed lines became the playthings of Wall Street, and colossal wealth was amassed by stock speculators and railroad wreckers.

Wrongdoing in
Railroading
 Corruption lurks nearby when fabulous fortunes can materialize overnight. The ﬂeecings administered by the railroad construction companies, such as the Crédit Mobilier, were but the ﬁ rst of the bunco games that the railroad promoters learned to play. Methods soon became more reﬁ ned, as fast-ﬁ ngered ﬁ nanciers executed multimillion-dollar maneuvers beneath the noses of a bedazzled public. Jay Gould was the most adept of these ringmasters of rapacity. For nearly thirty years, he boomed and busted the stocks of the Erie, the Kansas

William H. Vanderbilt, Robber Baron This 1885
 cartoon takes aim at Vanderbilt’s notorious comment, “The public be damned!”

 Paciﬁc, the Union Paciﬁc, and the Texas and Paciﬁc in an incredible circus of speculative skullduggery. One of the favorite devices of the moguls of manipulation was “stock watering.” The term originally referred to the practice of making cattle thirsty by feeding them salt and then having them bloat themselves with water before they were weighed in for sale. Using a variation of this technique, railroad stock promoters grossly inﬂated their claims about a given line’s assets and proﬁtability and sold stocks and bonds far in excess of the railroad’s actual value. “Promoters’ proﬁts” were often the tail that wagged the iron horse itself. Railroad managers were forced to charge extortionate rates and wage ruthless competitive battles in order to pay off the exaggerated ﬁ nancial obligations with which they were saddled. The public interest was frequently trampled underfoot as the railroad titans waged their brutal wars. Crusty old Cornelius Vanderbilt, when told that the law stood in his way, reportedly exclaimed, “Law! What do I care about the law? Hain’t I got the power?” On another occasion he supposedly threatened some associates: “I won’t sue you, for the law is too slow. I’ll ruin you.” His son, William H. Vanderbilt, when asked in 1883 about the discontinuance of a fast mail train, reportedly snorted, “The public be damned!”

Reforms in Railroading


 While abusing the public, the railroaders blandly bought and sold people in public life. They bribed judges and legislatures, employed arm-twisting lobbyists, and elected their own “creatures” to high ofﬁce. They showered free passes on journalists and politicians in profusion. One railroad man noted in 1885 that in the West “no man who has money, or ofﬁcial position, or inﬂuence thinks he ought to pay anything for riding on a railroad.” Railroad kings were, for a time, virtual industrial monarchs. As manipulators of a huge natural monopoly, they exercised more direct control over the lives of more people than did the president of the United States—and their terms were not limited to four years. They increasingly shunned the crude bloodletting of cutthroat competition and began to cooperate with one another to rule the railroad dominion. Sorely pressed to show at least some returns on their bloated investments, they entered into defensive alliances to protect precious proﬁts. The earliest form of combination was the “pool”— an agreement to divide the business in a given area and share the proﬁts. Other rail barons granted secret rebates or kickbacks to powerful shippers in return for steady and assured trafﬁc. Often they slashed their rates on competing lines, but they more than made up the difference on noncompeting ones, where they might actually charge more for a short haul than for a long one. As a result, small farmers usually paid the highest rates, while large customers got the best deals.

Government Bridles
 the Iron Horse It was neither healthy nor politically acceptable that so many people should be at the mercy of so few. Impoverished farmers, especially in the Midwest, began to wonder if the nation had not escaped from the slavery power only to fall into the hands of the money power, as represented by the railroad plutocracy. But the American people, usually quick to respond to political injustice, were slow to combat economic injustice. Dedicated to free enterprise and to the principle that competition is the soul of trade, they cherished a traditionally keen pride in progress. They remembered that Jefferson’s ideals were hostile to government interference with business. Above all, there shimmered the “American dream”: the hope that in a catch-as-catch-can economic system, anyone might become a millionaire.



 The depression of the 1870s goaded the farmers into protesting against being “railroaded” into bankruptcy. Under pressure from organized agrarian groups like the Grange (Patrons of Husbandry), many midwestern legislatures tried to regulate the railroad monopoly. The scattered state efforts screeched to a halt in 1886. The Supreme Court, in the famed Wabash, St. Louis & Paciﬁc Railroad Company v. Illinois case, decreed that individual states had no power to regulate interstate commerce. If the mechanical monster were to be corralled, the federal government would have to do the job. Stiff-necked President Cleveland did not look kindly on effective regulation. But Congress ignored his grumbling indifference and passed the epochal Interstate Commerce Act in 1887. It prohibited rebates and pools and required the railroads to publish their rates openly. It also forbade unfair discrimination against shippers and outlawed charging more for a short haul than for a long one over the same line. Most important, it set up the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to administer and enforce the new legislation. Despite acclaim, the Interstate Commerce Act emphatically did not represent a popular victory over corporate wealth. One of the leading corporation lawyers of the day, Richard Olney, shrewdly noted that the new commission “can be made of great use to the railroads. It satisﬁes the popular clamor for a government supervision of railroads, at the same time that such supervision is almost entirely nominal. . . . The part of wisdom is not to destroy the Commission, but to utilize it.” What the new legislation did do was to provide an orderly forum where competing business interests could resolve their conﬂ icts in peaceable ways. The country could now avoid ruinous rate wars among the railroads and outraged, “conﬁ scatory” attacks on the lines by pitchfork-prodded state legislatures. This was a modest accomplishment but by no means an unimportant one. The Interstate Commerce Act tended to stabilize, not revolutionize, the existing business system. Yet the act still ranks as a red-letter law. It was the ﬁ rst large-scale attempt by Washington to regulate business in the interest of society at large. It heralded the arrival of a series of independent regulatory commissions in the next century, which would irrevocably commit the government to the daunting task of monitoring and guiding the private economy. It



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 foreshadowed the doom of freewheeling, buccaneering business practices and served full notice that there was a public interest in private enterprise that the government was bound to protect.

Miracles of Mechanization
 Postwar industrial expansion, partly a result of the railroad network, rapidly began to assume mammoth proportions. When Lincoln was elected in 1860, the Republic ranked only fourth among the manufacturing nations of the world. By 1894 it had bounded into ﬁ rst place. Why the sudden upsurge? Liquid capital, previously scarce, was now becoming abundant. The word millionaire had not been coined until the 1840s, and in 1861 only a handful of individuals were eligible for this class. But the Civil War, partly through proﬁteering, created immense fortunes, and these accumulations could now be combined with borrowings from foreign capitalists. Investors from abroad loaned more money to the United States in the postwar period than any country had previously received. Unlike in other countries, in America they mostly put the money into private hands, not public coffers. Investors primarily from Britain, but also from France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Switzerland, sometimes owned all or part of an American business. Other times they simply lent their money to the thousands of European companies set up to manage investment in U.S. industry. Either way, Europeans were usually content to let Americans run the business— until hard times hit and they demanded more say over company operations or government economic policies. Innovations in transportation fueled growth, too, by bringing the nation’s amazingly abundant natural resources—particularly coal, oil, and iron—to the factory door. A shipping system through the Great Lakes carried the rich iron deposits in the Mesabi Range of Minnesota to Chicago and Cleveland for reﬁ ning. This priceless bonanza, where mountains of red-rusted ore could be scooped up by steam shovels, ultimately became a cornerstone of a vast steel empire. Copper, bauxite, and zinc made similar journeys from mine to manufacture. The sheer size of the American market encouraged innovators to invent mass-production methods. With cheap transportation crisscrossing the nation and an ever-larger population able and eager to consume, any-

 one who could make an appealing new product available for a good price in large quantities—and ﬁgure out how to market it—thrived. Industrialists continued to reﬁ ne the pre–Civil War “American System” of using specialized machinery to make interchangeable parts, culminating in 1913 with Henry Ford’s fully developed moving assembly line for his Model T (see pp. 256–257 and 782–783). The captains of industry had a major incentive to invent machines: they made it possible to replace expensive skilled labor with unskilled workers, now cheap and plentiful as a result of massive immigration. Steel, the keystone industry, was built largely on the sweat of low-priced immigrant labor from eastern and southern Europe, working in two 12-hour shifts, seven days a week. Just as industry served as a hothouse of invention, brilliant ideas gave rise to whole new lines of business. Between 1860 and 1890, some 440,000 patents were issued. Business operations were facilitated by machines such as the cash register, the stock ticker, and the typewriter (“literary piano”), while the refrigerator car, the electric dynamo, and the electric railway speeded urbanization. One of the most ingenious inventions was the telephone, introduced by Alexander Graham Bell in 1876. America was suddenly turned into a nation of “telephoniacs,” as a gigantic communications network was built on his invention. The social impact of the telephone further expanded when it lured “number please” women away from the stove to the switchboard. Telephone boys were at ﬁ rst employed as operators, but their profanity shocked patrons. The most versatile inventor of all was Thomas Alva Edison (1847–1931), who as a boy had been considered so dull-witted that he was taken out of school. His

 Regarding the exploitation of immigrant labor, Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882) wrote in 1860,

“


 The German and Irish millions, like the Negro, have a great deal of guano in their destiny. They are ferried over the Atlantic, and carted over America, to ditch and to drudge, to make corn cheap, and then to lie down prematurely to make a spot of green grass on the prairie.

”


The Rise of the Trusts




Thomas Alva Edison in His Lab, 1888 Edison was
 dubbed the “Wizard of Menlo Park,” New Jersey, where he lived and established the ﬁrst major industrial research laboratory. Edison was not only an ingenious inventor; he also ﬁgured out how to apply the principles of mass production to his inventions. Phonographs, telephones, telegraphs, incandescent electric lighting, ﬂuoroscopes, kinetoscopes, and many more technological wonders spread throughout the world following their development in Edison’s lab.

 severe deafness enabled him to concentrate without distraction. Edison was a gifted tinkerer and a tireless worker, not a pure scientist. “Genius,” he said, “is one percent inspiration and ninety-nine percent perspiration.” Wondrous devices poured out of his “invention factory” in New Jersey—the phonograph, the mimeograph, the dictaphone, and the moving picture. He is probably best known for his perfection in 1879 of the electric lightbulb, which turned night into day and transformed ancient human habits as well. People had previously slept an average of nine hours a night; now they slept just a bit more than seven.

The Trust Titan Emerges
 Despite pious protests to the contrary, competition was the bugbear of most business leaders of the day. Tycoons like Andrew Carnegie, the steel king; John D. Rockefeller, the oil baron; and J. Pierpont Morgan, the bankers’ banker, exercised their genius in devising ways to circumvent competition. Carnegie integrated every phase of his steel-making operation. His miners scratched the ore from the earth in the Mesabi Range; Carnegie ships ﬂoated it across the Great Lakes;

 Carnegie railroads delivered it to the blast furnaces at Pittsburgh. When the molten metal ﬁnally poured from the glowing crucibles into the waiting ingot molds, no other hands but those in Carnegie’s employ had touched the product. Carnegie thus pioneered the creative entrepreneurial tactic of vertical integration, combining into one orga ni zation all phases of manufacturing from mining to marketing. His goal was to improve efﬁciency by making supplies more reliable, controlling the quality of the product at all stages of production, and eliminating middlemen’s fees. Less justiﬁable on grounds of efﬁciency was the technique of horizontal integration, which simply meant allying with competitors to monopolize a given market. Rockefeller was a master of this stratagem. He perfected a device for controlling bothersome rivals— the trust. Stockholders in various smaller oil companies assigned their stock to the board of directors of his Standard Oil Company, formed in 1870. It then consolidated and concerted the operations of the previously competing enterprises. “Let us prey” was said to be Rockefeller’s unwritten motto. Ruthlessly wielding vast power, Standard Oil soon cornered virtually the entire world petroleum market. Weaker competitors, left out of the trust agreement, were forced to the wall. Rockefeller’s stunning success inspired many imitators, and the word trust came to be generally used to describe any large-scale business combination. The imperial Morgan devised still other schemes for eliminating “wasteful” competition. The depression of the 1890s drove into his welcoming arms many bleeding businesspeople, wounded by cutthroat competition. His prescribed remedy was to consolidate rival enterprises and to ensure future harmony by placing ofﬁcers of his own banking syndicate on their various boards of directors. These came to be known as interlocking directorates.



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


The Octopus, 1904
 This cartoon visually captures a feeling of widespread resentment against Standard Oil as a powerful, sprawling “octopus” whose tentacles controlled all branches of government.

The Supremacy of Steel
 “Steel is king!” might well have been the exultant war cry of the new industrialized generation. The mighty metal ultimately held together the new steel civilization, from skyscrapers to coal scuttles, while providing it with food, shelter, and transportation. Steel making, notably rails for railroads, typiﬁed the dominance of “heavy industry,” which concentrated on making “capital goods,” as distinct from the production of “consumer goods” such as clothes and shoes. Now taken for granted, steel was a scarce commodity in the wood-and-brick America of Abraham Lincoln. Considerable iron went into railroad rails and bridges, but steel was expensive and was used largely for products like cutlery. The early iron horse snorted exclusively (and dangerously) over iron rails. When in the 1870s “Commodore” Vanderbilt of the New York Central began to use steel rails, he was forced to import them from Britain. Yet within an amazing twenty years, the United States had outdistanced all foreign competitors and was pouring out more than one-third of the world’s supply of steel. By 1900 America was producing as much as Britain and Germany combined. What wrought the transformation? Chieﬂy the invention in the 1850s of a method of making cheap steel—the Bessemer process. It was named after a derided British inventor, although an American had stumbled on it a few years earlier. William Kelly, a Ken-

 tucky manufacturer of iron kettles, discovered that cold air blown on red-hot iron caused the metal to become white-hot by igniting the carbon and thus eliminating impurities. He tried to apply the new “air boiling” technique to his own product, but his customers decried “Kelly’s fool steel,” and his business declined. Gradually the Bessemer-Kelly process won acceptance, and these two “crazy men” ultimately made possible the present steel civilization.

Carnegie and Other
Sultans of Steel
 Kingpin among steelmasters was Andrew Carnegie, an undersized, charming Scotsman. As a towheaded lad of thirteen, he was brought to America by his impoverished parents in 1848 and got a job as a bobbin boy at $1.20 a week. Mounting the ladder of success so fast that he was said to have scorched the rungs, he forged ahead by working hard, doing the extra chore, cheerfully assuming responsibility, and smoothly cultivating inﬂuential people. After accumulating some capital, Carnegie entered the steel business in the Pittsburgh area. A gifted organizer and administrator, he succeeded by picking high-class associates and by eliminating many middlemen. Although inclined to be tough-ﬁ sted in business, he was not a monopolist and disliked monopolistic trusts. His remarkable orga ni zation was a partnership

Captains of Industry




 Andrew Carnegie (1835–1919) wrote in 1889,

“


 The man who dies leaving behind him millions of available wealth, which was his to administer during life, will pass away ‘unwept, unhonored, and unsung,’ no matter to what uses he leaves the dross which he cannot take with him. Of such as these the public verdict will then be: ‘The man who dies thus rich dies disgraced.’

”


J. P.
Morgan (1837–1913) As the most inﬂuential banker of his day, Morgan symbolized to many people the power and arrogance of “ﬁnance capitalism.” The chronic skin disorder on his nose inspired the taunt “Johnny Morgan’s nasal organ has a purple hue.” 
 that involved, at its maximum, about forty “Pittsburgh millionaires.” By 1900 he was producing one-fourth of the nation’s Bessemer steel, and the partners in these pre–income tax days were dividing proﬁts of $40 million a year as their take-home pay, with the “Napoleon of the Smokestacks” himself receiving a cool $25 million. Into the picture now stepped the ﬁ nancial giant of the age, J. Pierpont Morgan. “Jupiter” Morgan had made a legendary reputation for himself and his Wall Street banking house by ﬁ nancing the reorga ni zation of railroads, insurance companies, and banks. An impressive ﬁgure of a man, with massive shoulders, shaggy brows, piercing eyes, and a bulbous, acne-cursed red nose, he had established an enviable reputation for integrity. He did not believe that “money power” was dangerous, except when in dangerous hands—and he did not regard his own hands as dangerous. The force of circumstances brought Morgan and Carnegie into collision. By 1900 the canny little Scotsman, weary of turning steel into gold, was eager to sell his holdings. Morgan had meanwhile plunged heavily into the manufacture of steel pipe tubing. Carnegie, cleverly threatening to invade the same business, was ready to ruin his rival if he did not receive his price. The

 steelmaster’s agents haggled with the imperious Morgan for eight agonizing hours, and the ﬁ nancier ﬁ nally agreed to buy out Carnegie for over $400 million. Fearing that he would die “disgraced” with so much wealth, Carnegie dedicated the remaining years of his life to giving away money for public libraries, pensions for professors, and other such philanthropic purposes—in all disposing of about $350 million. Morgan moved rapidly to expand his new industrial empire. He took the Carnegie holdings, added others, “watered” the stock liberally, and in 1901 launched the enlarged United States Steel Corporation. Capitalized at $1.4 billion, it was America’s ﬁ rst billion-dollar corporation—a larger sum than the total estimated wealth of the nation in 1800. The Industrial Revolution, with its hot Bessemer breath, had come into its own.

Rockefeller Grows an
American Beauty Rose
 The sudden emergence of the oil industry was one of the most striking developments of the years during and after the Civil War. Traces of oil found on streams had earlier been bottled for back-rub and other patent medicines, but not until 1859 did the ﬁ rst well in Pennsylvania—“Drake’s Folly”—pour out its liquid “black gold.” Almost overnight an industry was born that was to take more wealth from the earth than all of the gold extracted by the forty-niners and their western successors. Kerosene, derived from petroleum, was the ﬁ rst major product of the infant oil industry. Burned from a cotton wick in a glass chimney lamp, kerosene produced a much brighter ﬂame than whale oil. The oil business boomed; by the 1870s kerosene was America’s fourth most valuable export. Whaling, in contrast, the lifeblood of ocean-roaming New Eng landers since



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


Washington as Seen by the Trusts, 1900
 “What a funny little government,” John D. Rockefeller observes in this satirical cartoon. His own wealth and power are presumed to dwarf the resources of the federal government.

 before the days of Moby Dick, swiftly became a sick industry. But what technology gives, technology takes away. By 1885, 250,000 of Thomas Edison’s electric lightbulbs were in use; ﬁ fteen years later, perhaps 15 million. The new electric industry rendered kerosene obsolete just as kerosene had rendered whale oil obsolete. Only in rural America and overseas did a market continue for oil-ﬁ red lamps. Oil might thus have remained a modest, even a shrinking, industry but for yet another turn of the technological tide—the invention of the automobile. By 1900 the gasoline-burning internal combustion engine had clearly bested its rivals, steam and electricity, as the superior means of automobile propulsion. As the century of the automobile dawned, the oil business got a new, long-lasting, and hugely proﬁtable lease on life. John D. Rockefeller—lanky, shrewd, ambitious, abstemious (he neither drank, smoked, nor swore)—came to dominate the oil industry. Born to a family of precarious income, he became a successful businessman at age nineteen. One upward stride led to another, and in 1870 he orga nized the Standard Oil Company of Ohio, nucleus of the great trust formed in 1882. Locating his reﬁ neries in Cleveland, he sought to eliminate the middlemen and squeeze out competitors. Pious and parsimonious, Rockefeller ﬂourished in an era of completely free enterprise. So-called piratical practices were employed by “corsairs of ﬁ nance,” and business ethics were distressingly low. Rockefeller, op-

 erating “just to the windward of the law,” pursued a policy of rule or ruin. “Sell all the oil that is sold in your district” was the hard-boiled order that went out to his local agents. By 1877 Rockefeller controlled 95 percent of all the oil reﬁ neries in the country. Rockefeller—“Reckafellow,” as Carnegie had once called him—showed little mercy. A kind of primitive savagery prevailed in the jungle world of big business, where only the ﬁttest survived. Or so Rockefeller believed. His son later explained that the giant American Beauty rose could be produced “only by sacriﬁcing the early buds that grew up around it.” His father pinched off the small buds with complete ruthlessness. Employing spies and extorting secret rebates from the railroads, he even forced the lines to pay him rebates on the freight bills of his competitors! Rockefeller thought he was simply obeying a law of nature. “The time was ripe” for aggressive consolidation, he later reﬂected. “It had to come, though all we saw at the moment was the need to save ourselves from wasteful conditions. . . . The day of combination is here to stay. Individualism has gone, never to return.” On the other side of the ledger, Rockefeller’s oil monopoly did turn out a superior product at a relatively cheap price. It achieved important economies, both at home and abroad, by its large-scale methods of production and distribution. This, in truth, was the tale of the other trusts as well. The efﬁcient use of expensive machinery called for bigness, and consolidation proved more proﬁtable than ruinous price wars.

A
Philosophy for Plutocracy 



Robber Barons Cyrus Field,
Jay Gould, Cornelius
Vanderbilt, and Russell Sage
 Kept Aﬂoat on the Broken Backs of America’s Workingmen, 1883

 Other trusts blossomed along with the American Beauty of oil. These included the sugar trust, the tobacco trust, the leather trust, and the harvester trust, which amalgamated some two hundred competitors. The meat industry arose on the backs of bawling western herds, and meat kings like Gustavus F. Swift and Philip Armour took their place among the new royalty. Wealth was coming to dominate the commonwealth. These untrustworthy trusts, and the “pirates” who captained them, were disturbingly new. They eclipsed an older American aristocracy of modestly successful merchants and professionals. An arrogant class of “new rich” was now elbowing aside the patrician families in the mad scramble for power and prestige. Not surprisingly, the ranks of the antitrust crusaders were frequently spearheaded by the “best men”—genteel old-family do-gooders who were not radicals but conser vative defenders of their own vanishing inﬂuence.

The Gospel of Wealth
 Monarchs of yore invoked the divine right of kings, and America’s industrial plutocrats took a somewhat similar stance. Some candidly credited heavenly help. “Godliness is in league with riches,” preached the Episcopal bishop of Massachusetts, and hardﬁ sted

 John D. Rockefeller piously acknowledged that “the good Lord gave me my money.” Steel baron Andrew Carnegie agreed that the wealthy, entrusted with society’s riches, had to prove themselves morally responsible according to a “Gospel of Wealth.” But most defenders of wide-open capitalism relied more heavily on the survival-of-the-ﬁttest theories of Eng lish philosopher Herbert Spencer and Yale professor William Graham Sumner. Later mislabeled Social Darwinists, these theorists argued that individuals won their stations in life by competing on the basis of their natural talents. The wealthy and powerful had simply demonstrated greater abilities than the poor. Spencer and Sumner owed less to Eng lish evolutionary naturalist Charles Darwin, who stressed the adaptation of organisms, than to British laissez-faire economists David Ricardo and Thomas Malthus. In fact, Spencer, not Darwin, coined the phrase “survival of the ﬁttest.” “The millionaires are a product of natural selection,” Sumner declared. In 1883 he asked, “What do social classes owe each other?” then answered his own question: nothing. Some Social Darwinists later applied this theory to explain why some nations were more powerful than others or had the right to dominate “lesser peoples,” often deﬁ ned by race. Self-justiﬁcation by the wealthy inevitably involved contempt for the poor. Many of the rich, especially the



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 newly rich, had pulled themselves up by their own bootstraps; hence they concluded that those who stayed poor must be lazy and lacking in enterprise. The Reverend Russell Conwell of Philadelphia became rich by delivering his lecture “Acres of Diamonds” thousands of times. In it he charged, “There is not a poor person in the United States who was not made poor by his own shortcomings.” Such attitudes were a formidable roadblock to social reform. Plutocracy, like the earlier slavocracy, took its stand ﬁ rmly on the Constitution. The clause that gave Congress sole jurisdiction over interstate commerce was a godsend to the monopolists; their high-priced lawyers used it time and again to thwart controls by the state legislatures. Giant trusts likewise sought refuge behind the Fourteenth Amendment, which had been originally designed to protect the rights of the ex-slaves as persons. The courts ingeniously interpreted a corporation to be a legal “person” and decreed that, as such, it could not be deprived of its property by a state without “due process of law” (see Amendment XIV, para. 1 in the Appendix). There is some questionable evidence that slippery corporation lawyers deliberately inserted this loophole when the Fourteenth Amendment was being fashioned in 1866.

 Great industrialists likewise sought to incorporate in “easy states,” like New Jersey, where the restrictions on big business were mild or nonexistent. For example, the Southern Paciﬁc Railroad, with much of its trackage in Cal i fornia, was incorporated in Kentucky.

Government Tackles
 the Trust Evil At long last the masses of the people began to mobilize against monopoly. They ﬁ rst tried to control the trusts through state legislation, as they had earlier attempted to curb the railroads. Failing here, as before, they were forced to appeal to Congress. After prolonged pulling and hauling, the Sherman Anti-Trust Act of 1890 was ﬁ nally signed into law. The Sherman Act ﬂatly forbade combinations in restraint of trade, without any distinction between “good” trusts and “bad” trusts. Bigness, not badness, was the sin. The law proved ineffective, largely because it had only baby teeth or no teeth at all, and because it contained legal loopholes through which clever corporation lawyers could wriggle. But it was unexpectedly effective in one respect. Contrary to its original intent,

 The New Rich and the New Immigrants A well-to-do family plays chess at its parlor table (left), while a tenement family does “piecework” around its kitchen table—shelling nuts for commercial use (right). The young working girl seems to be “snitching” some nuts for herself. The apparently growing gulf between the rich and the poor deeply worried reformers in the late nineteenth century. They feared that democracy could not survive in the face of such gross inequality.

Industry in the South


 Industrial millionaires were condemned in the Populist platform of 1892:

“


 The fruits of the toil of millions are boldly stolen to build up colossal fortunes for a few . . . and the possessors of these, in turn despise the Republic and endanger liberty. From the same proliﬁc womb of governmental injustice we breed the two great classes— tramps and millionaires.

”


 it was used to curb labor unions or labor combinations that were deemed to be restraining trade. Early prosecutions of the trusts by the Justice Department under the Sherman Act of 1890, as it turned out, were neither vigorous nor successful. The decisions in seven of the ﬁ rst eight cases presented by the attorney general were adverse to the government. More new trusts were formed in the 1890s under President McKinley than during any other like period. Not until 1914 were the paper jaws of the Sherman Act ﬁtted with reasonably sharp teeth. Until then, there was some question whether the government would control the trusts or the trusts the government.



 But the iron grip of monopolistic corporations was being threatened. A revolutionary new principle had been written into the law books by the Sherman AntiTrust Act of 1890, as well as by the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887. Private greed should henceforth be subordinated to public need.

The South in the
Age of Industry
 The industrial tidal wave that washed over the North after the Civil War caused only feeble ripples in the backwater of the South. As late as 1900, the South still produced a smaller percentage of the nation’s manufactured goods than it had before the Civil War. The plantation system had degenerated into a pattern of absentee landownership. White and black sharecroppers now tilled the soil for a share of the crop, or they became tenants, in bondage to their landlords, who controlled needed credit and supplies. Southern agriculture received a welcome boost in the 1880s, when machine-made cigarettes replaced the roll-your-own variety and tobacco consumption shot up. James Buchanan Duke took full advantage of the new technology to mass-produce the dainty “cofﬁ n nails.” In 1890, in what was becoming a familiar pattern, he absorbed his main competitors into the American Tobacco Company. The cigarette czar later showed

A
Virginia Tobacco Factory, ca. 1880  The employment of women and children was a common practice in latenineteenth-century American industry, north as well as south.



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 Yet formidable obstacles lay in the path of southern industrialization. One was the paper barrier of regional rate-setting systems imposed by the northerndominated railroad interests. Railroads gave preferential rates to manufactured goods moving southward from the North, but in the opposite direction they discriminated in favor of southern raw materials. The net effect was to keep the South in a kind of servitude to the Northeast—as a supplier of raw materials to the manufacturing metropolis, unable to develop a substantial industrial base of its own. A bitter example of this economic discrimination against the South was the “Pittsburgh plus” pricing system in the steel industry. Rich deposits of coal and iron ore near Birmingham, Alabama, worked by lowwage southern labor, should have given steel manufacturers there a competitive edge, especially in southern markets. But the steel lords of Pittsburgh brought pressure to bear on the compliant railroads. As a result, Birmingham steel, no matter where it was delivered, was charged a ﬁctional fee, as if it had been shipped from Pittsburgh. This stunting of the South’s natural economic advantages throttled the growth of the Birmingham steel industry. In manufacturing cotton textiles, the South fared considerably better. Southerners had long resented shipping their ﬁber to New Eng land, and now their cry was “Bring the mills to the cotton.” Beginning about 1880, northern capitalists began to erect cotton mills in the South, largely in response to tax beneﬁts and the prospect of cheap and nonunionized labor (see Figure 24.2 and Figure 24.3).

 Henry W. Grady (1851–1889), editor of the Atlanta Constitution, urged the new South to industrialize. In a Boston speech in 1889, he described the burial in Georgia of a Confederate veteran:

“


 The South didn’t furnish a thing on earth for that funeral but the corpse and the hole in the ground. . . . They buried him in a New York coat and a Boston pair of shoes and a pair of breeches from Chicago and a shirt from Cincinnati, leaving him nothing to carry into the next world with him to remind him of the country in which he lived, and for which he fought for four years, but the chill of blood in his veins and the marrow in his bones.

”


 such generosity to Trinity College, near his birthplace in Durham, North Carolina, that the trustees gratefully changed its name to Duke University. Industrialists tried to coax the agricultural South out of the ﬁelds and into the factories, but with only modest success. The region remained overwhelmingly rural. Prominent among the boosters of a “new South” was silver-tongued Henry W. Grady, editor of the Atlanta Constitution. He tirelessly exhorted the exConfederates to become “Georgia Yankees” and outplay the North at the commercial and industrial game.

SPINDLES IN COTTON STATES
(by thousands) 
SPINDLES IN NEW ENGLAND
(by thousands) 
8,632


Figure 24.2 Cotton Manufacturing
Moves South, 1880–1980
 Textile manufacturing usually looms large in the early stages of industrial development. In the later stages, it gives way to higher-technology businesses. This trend can be seen here, both in the migration of textile manufacturing to the southern United States and in the decline in the number of spindles in the United States as a whole since the 1930s, as developing Third World countries became major textile producers.



10,934




13,171




15,735




18,287




11,351


5,279
3,739


1,570
4,368
10,494
15,231
18,586




17,641




17,673




16,795


Daily Life in Industrial America
 World cotton production, 1903 (Bales of approx. 500 lbs, in thousands) Other 5% (801)



The Impact of the
New Industrial Revolution
 on America

China 7% (1,200)
Russia 2% (342)
Egypt 7% (1,168)


India 19%
(3,367)


America 60%
(10,758)


Total: 17,636


Figure 24.3 World Cotton Production, 1903 Cotton
 manufacturing grew in the United States in the early twentieth century, and raw cotton production reached higher levels than anywhere else in the world. Source: John A. Todd, The World’s Cotton Crops (London: A. & C. Black, 1915), 395–396.

 The textile mills proved to be a mixed blessing to the economically blighted South. They slowly wove an industrial thread into the fabric of southern life, but at a considerable human cost. Cheap labor was the South’s major attraction for potential investors, and keeping labor cheap became almost a religion among southern industrialists. The mills took root in the chronically depressed Piedmont region of southern Appalachia and came to dominate utterly the communities in which they were located. Rural southerners—virtually all of them white, for blacks were excluded from all but the most menial jobs in the mills—poured out of the hills and hollows to seek employment in the hastily erected company mill towns. Entire families—often derided as “hillbillies” or “lintheads”—worked from dawn to dusk amid the whirring spindles. They were paid at half the rate of their northern counterparts and often received their compensation in the form of credit at a company store, to which they were habitually in debt. But despite their depressed working conditions and poor pay, many southerners saw employment in the mills as a salvation, the ﬁ rst steady jobs and wages they had ever known. With many mills anxious to tap the cheap labor of women and children, mill work often offered destitute farm-fugitive families their only chance to remain together.

 Economic miracles wrought during the decades after the Civil War enormously increased the wealth of the Republic. The standard of living rose sharply, and wellfed American workers enjoyed more physical com forts than their counterparts in any other industrial nation. Urban centers mushroomed as the insatiable factories demanded more American labor and as immigrants swarmed like honeybees to the new jobs (see Map 24.2 and “Makers of America: The Poles,” pp. 776–777). Early Jeffersonian ideals were withering before the smudgy blasts from the smokestacks. As agriculture declined in relation to manufacturing, America could no longer aspire to be a nation of small freehold farms. Jefferson’s concepts of free enterprise, with neither help nor hindrance from Washington, were being thrown out the factory window. Tariffs had already provided assistance, but the long arm of federal authority was now committed to decades of corporation curbing and “trust-busting.” Older ways of life also wilted in the heat of the factory furnaces. The very concept of time was revolutionized. Rural American migrants and peasant European immigrants, used to living by the languid clock of nature, now had to regiment their lives by the factory whistle. The seemingly arbitrary discipline of industrial labor did not come easily and sometimes had to be forcibly taught. One large corporation simultaneously instructed its Polish immigrant workers in the Eng lish language and in the obligations of factory work schedules: I hear the whistle. I must hurry. I hear the ﬁve-minute whistle. It is time to go into the shop. . . . I change my clothes and get ready to work. The starting whistle blows. I eat my lunch. It is forbidden to eat until then. . . . I work until the whistle blows to quit. I leave my place nice and clean. I put all my clothes in the locker. I must go home. Probably no single group was more profoundly affected by the new industrial age than women. Propelled into industry by recent inventions, chieﬂy the typewriter and the telephone switchboard, millions of

Ag Cu


MONTANA TERRITORY

Au


Au
 Ag NEVADA

C
Cu
Cu


Au
CALIFORNIA
Ag 
UTAH TERRITORY

C
COLORADO
Au Ag Cu 
O
O


PAC I F IC OCEAN

O


ARIZONA TERRITORY

Cu Cu Cu
Au
Ag


Cu


120°W


NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

30°N


O
O
O


110°W


 Products manufactured in 20 largest cities

O
TEXAS O

M EXICO

O


 MISS.

O
O


Fe
 ALABAMA

N.H.


Rochester
N.Y.
Buffalo


 CONN.

 OCEAN





400 Km.


 FLORIDA

O


100°W


 MASS.

O




400 Mi.


Gulf of Mexico
90°W


N


80°W


 Natural resources

 Iron and steel

Ag


Silver


O


 Oil (petroleum)

 Printing and publishing

Au


Gold


Pb


Lead


 Slaughtering and meatpacking

C


Coal


Textiles


Cu


Copper


 Mixed or other

Fe


Iron ore


Timber Timber


20°N


 States with 25% or more of employees in manufacturing

 Map 24.2 American Industry in 1900 By the end of the nineteenth century, once-rural America boasted the world’s largest industrial output—a development with enormous consequences for politics, diplomacy, and family life.

 stenographers and “hello girls” discovered new economic and social opportunities. The “Gibson Girl,” a magazine image of an independent and athletic “new woman” created in the 1890s by the artist Charles Dana Gibson, became the romantic ideal of the age. For middle-class women, careers often meant delayed marriages and smaller families. Most women workers, however, toiled neither for independence nor for glamour, but out of economic necessity. They faced the same long hours and dangerous working conditions as did their mates and brothers, and they earned less, as wages for “women’s jobs” were usually set below those for men’s.

 Women Canning Shrimp, 1893 Long hours, low pay, and wretched working conditions were the common fate of women who labored not for “pin money,” but to help support their families. The “family wage” for the workingman was more a hope than a reality.

 VT.

Ontario


 GEORGIA

LOUISIANA O

O


 Food, beverage, and tobacco processing

MICH.
Detroit 
C


O


O


 Flour milling Foundry and machine shop products

 WISCONSIN

O


Clothing
 XXX

L


Boston
Providence
R.I.
O
 e Milwaukee Eri C New York L. O IOWA Chicago PA. Cleveland Brooklyn N.J. C NEBRASKA O Pittsburgh Philadelphia IND. C C OHIO C C DEL. ILLINOIS Cincinnati C 70°W MD. C C C W. Baltimore VA. KANSAS VA. C C St. Louis C C Louisville C C O C MISSOURI KY. C N.C. O C TENNESSEE O INDIAN ARKANSAS AT L A N T I C S.C. TERRITORY Minneapolis

 XXX

WYOMING TERRITORY

 MAINE

L.
Newark 

 n uro

Au


40°N


San
Francisco


DAKOTA TERRITORY

IDAHO TERRITORY

Jersey City


 p L. Su erior Fe Cu Timber Timb Fe MINN. er

.H


Tim
 be r

 OREGON

 CANADA

L.
Michigan 

Tim
 be r

WASHINGTON TERRITORY
Ag Pb Cu 
Interactive Map


Examining the Evidence




The Photography of Lewis W. Hine
 he pell-mell onrush of industrialization after the Civil War spawned countless human abuses, few more objectionable than the employment of children, often in hazardous jobs. For decades reformers tried to arouse public outrage against child labor, and they made signiﬁcant headway at last with the help of photography—especially the photographs of Lewis W. Hine (1874–1940). A native of Wisconsin, Hine in 1908 became the staff photographer for the National Child Labor Committee, an orga ni zation committed to ending child labor. This 1909 photo of young “doffers,” whose job it was to remove fully wound bobbins from textile spinning machines, is typical of Hine’s work. He shows the boys climbing dangerously on the whirling mechanism, and his own caption for the photo names the mill—“Bibb Mill No. 1, Macon, Georgia”—but not the boys, as if to underline the impersonal, dehumanizing nature of their work and the speciﬁc responsibilities of their employer. His other subjects included child workers on Colorado beet farms, in Pennsylvania coal mines and Gulf Coast ﬁsh canneries, and in the glass, tobacco, and garment trades. Hine’s images contributed heavily to the eventual success of the campaign to end child labor in the New Deal era. He is also celebrated as one of the fathers of documentary photography. Why might Hine’s graphic im-

T


 The clattering machine age likewise accentuated class division. “Industrial buccaneers” ﬂaunted bloated fortunes, and their rags-to-riches spouses displayed glittering diamonds. Such extravagances evoked bitter criticism. Some of it was envious, but much of it rose from a small but increasingly vocal group of socialists and other radicals, many of whom were recent European immigrants. The existence of an oligarchy of money was amply demonstrated by the fact that in 1900 about one-tenth of the people owned nine-tenths of the nation’s wealth.

 ages have succeeded in stirring public opinion more powerfully than factual and statistical demonstrations of the evil of child labor? Given Hine’s own reform objectives, can his photographs—or any socalled documentary images—be taken at face value as literal, accurate information about the past?

 A nation of farmers and independent producers was becoming a nation of wage earners. In 1860 half of all workers were self-employed; by the century’s end, two of every three working Americans depended on wages. Real wages were rising, and times were good for workers who were working. But with dependence on wages came vulnerability to the swings of the economy and the whims of the employer. The fear of unemployment was never distant. A breadwinner’s illness could mean catastrophe for an entire family. Nothing more sharply deﬁned the growing difference between



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 can products radiated out all over the world—notably the ﬁve-gallon kerosene can of the Standard Oil Company. The ﬂag follows trade, and empire tends to follow the ﬂag—a harsh lesson that America was soon to learn.

In Unions There Is Strength


Gibson Girl, 1899 Illustrator Charles Dana Gibson
 created a sensation with his drawings of healthy, athletic, young women. The image of the “Gibson Girl” inspired new standards of female fashion as the twentieth century opened, and came to symbolize women’s growing independence and assertiveness.

 working-class and middle-class conditions of life than the precariousness of the laborer’s lot. Reformers struggled to introduce a mea sure of security—job and wage protection, and provision for temporary unemployment—into the lives of the working class. Finally, strong pressures for foreign trade developed as the tireless industrial machine threatened to saturate the domestic market. Aided by developments like the laying of a transatlantic telegraph in 1866 and the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869, international trade became ever faster, cheaper, and easier. Ameri-

 The sweat of the laborer lubricated the vast new industrial machine. Yet the wage workers did not share proportionately with their employers in the beneﬁts of the age of big business. The worker, suggestive of the Roman galley slave, was becoming a lever-puller in a giant mechanism. Individual originality and creativity were being stiﬂed, and less value than ever before was being placed on manual skills. Before the Civil War, the worker might have toiled in a small plant whose owner hailed the employee in the morning by ﬁ rst name and inquired after the family’s health. But now the factory hand was employed by a corporation—depersonalized, bodiless, soulless, and often conscienceless. The directors knew the worker not, and in fairness to their stockholders, they were not inclined to engage in large-scale private philanthropy. New machines displaced employees, and though in the long run more jobs were created than destroyed, in the short run the manual worker was often hard hit. A glutted labor market, moreover, severely handicapped wage earners. Employers could take advantage of the vast new railroad network and bring in unemployed workers, from the four corners of the country and beyond, to beat down high wage levels. During the 1880s and 1890s, several hundred thousand unskilled workers a year poured into the country from Europe, creating a labor market more favorable to the boss than the worker. Individual workers were powerless to battle singlehandedly against giant industry. Forced to organize and ﬁght for basic rights, they found the dice heavily loaded against them. The corporation could dispense with the individual worker much more easily than the worker could dispense with the corporation. Employers could pool vast wealth through thousands of stockholders, retain high-priced lawyers, buy up the local press, and put pressure on the politicians. They could import strikebreakers (“scabs”) and employ thugs to beat up labor organizers. In 1886 Jay Gould reputedly boasted, “I can hire one-half of the working class to kill the other half.”

Embattled Labor Unions




 of blackened coal miners were born in a company house, nurtured by a (high-priced) company store, and buried in a company graveyard—prematurely dead. The middle-class public, annoyed by recurrent strikes, grew deaf to the outcry of the worker. American wages were perhaps the highest in the world, although a dollar a day for pick-and-shovel labor does not now seem excessive. Carnegie and Rockefeller had battled their way to the top, and the view was common that the laborer could do likewise. Somehow the strike seemed like a foreign importation—socialistic and hence unpatriotic. Big business might combine into trusts to raise prices, but the worker must not combine into unions to raise wages. Unemployment seemed to be an act of God, who somehow would take care of the laborer.

Labor Limps Along


Breaker Boys at South Pittson, Pennsylvania, 1911
 Photographer Lewis Hine captured the grimness of these mine helpers’ lives. For hours they sat on benches above a moving belt, breathing coal dust deep into their lungs and kicking large pieces of coal with their feet, breaking the lumps to uniform size for shipment. Photographs like this one became icons of the reform crusade against child labor, a campaign that succeeded only with the passage of the Fair Labor Standards Act in 1938.

 Corporations had still other weapons in their arsenals. They could call upon the federal courts—presided over by well-fed and conser vative judges—to issue injunctions ordering the strikers to cease striking. If deﬁance and disorder ensued, the company could request the state and federal authorities to bring in troops. Employers could lock their doors against rebellious workers—a procedure called the “lockout”—and then starve them into submission. They could compel them to sign “ironclad oaths” or “yellow-dog contracts,” both of which were solemn agreements not to join a labor union. They could put the names of agitators on a “black list” and circulate it among fellow employers. A corporation might even own the “company town,” with its high-priced grocery stores and “easy” credit. Often the worker sank into perpetual debt—a status that strongly resembled serfdom. Countless thousands

 Labor unions, which had been few and disorga nized in 1861, were given a strong boost by the Civil War. This bloody conﬂ ict, with its drain on human resources, put more of a premium on labor; and the mounting cost of living provided an urgent incentive to unionization. By 1872 there were several hundred thousand orga nized workers and thirty-two national unions, representing such crafts as bricklayers, typesetters, and shoemakers. The National Labor Union, orga nized in 1866, represented a giant bootstride by workers. One of the earliest national-scale unions to organize in the Americas or Europe, it aimed to unify workers across locales and trades to challenge their ever more powerful bosses. The union lasted six years and attracted the impressive total of some 600,000 members, including the skilled, unskilled, and farmers, though in keeping with the times, it excluded the Chinese and made only nominal efforts to include women and blacks. Black workers orga nized their own Colored National Labor Union as an adjunct, but their support for the Republican party and the persistent racism of white unionists prevented the two national unions from working together. The National Labor Union agitated for the arbitration of industrial disputes and the eight-hour workday, winning the latter for government workers. But the devastating depression of the 1870s dealt it a knockout blow. Labor was generally rocked back on its heels during the tumultuous years of the depression, but it never completely toppled. Wage reductions in 1877 touched off such disruptive strikes on the railroads that nothing short of federal troops could restore order.



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 The Strike, by Robert Koehler, 1886 Scenes like this were becoming more typical of American life in the late nineteenth century as industrialism advanced spectacularly and sometimes ruthlessly. Here Koehler (1850–1917) shows an entire community of men, women, and children—many of them apparently immigrant newcomers— challenging the power of the “boss.” The scene is tense but orderly, though violence seems to be imminent as one striker reaches for a rock.

 A new organization—the Knights of Labor—seized the torch dropped by the defunct National Labor Union (see “Makers of America: The Knights of Labor,” pp. 590–591). Ofﬁcially known as the Noble and Holy Order of the Knights of Labor, it began inauspiciously in 1869 as a secret society, with a private ritual, passwords, and a special handshake. Secrecy, which continued until 1881, would forestall possible reprisals by employers. The Knights of Labor, like the National Labor Union, sought to include all workers in “one big union.” Their slogan was “An injury to one is the concern of all.” A welcome mat was rolled out for the skilled and unskilled, for men and women, for whites and blacks, some ninety thousand of whom joined. The Knights barred only “nonproducers”—liquor dealers, professional gamblers, lawyers, bankers, and stockbrokers. Setting up broad goals, the embattled Knights refused to thrust their lance into politics. Instead they

 campaigned for economic and social reform, including producers’ cooperatives and codes for safety and health. Voicing the war cry “Labor is the only creator of values and capital,” they frowned upon industrial warfare while fostering industrial arbitration. The ordinary workday was then ten hours or more, and the Knights waged a determined campaign for the eighthour stint. A favorite song of these years ran, Hurrah, hurrah, for labor, it is mustering all its powers, And shall march along to victory with the banner of eight hours. Under the eloquent but often erratic leadership of Terence V. Powderly, an Irish American of nimble wit and ﬂuent tongue, the Knights won a number of strikes for the eight-hour day. When the Knights staged a successful strike against Jay Gould’s Wabash Railroad in 1885, membership mushroomed to about three-quarters of a million workers.

The AF of L


Unhorsing the Knights
 of Labor Despite their outward success, the Knights were riding for a fall. They became involved in a number of May Day strikes in 1886, about half of which failed. A focal point was Chicago, home to about eighty thousand Knights. The city was also honeycombed with a few hundred anarchists, many of them foreign-born, who were advocating a violent overthrow of the American government. Tensions rapidly built up to the bloody Haymarket Square episode. Labor disorders had broken out, and on May 4, 1886, the Chicago police advanced on a meeting called to protest alleged brutalities by the authorities. Suddenly a dynamite bomb was thrown that killed or injured several dozen people, including police. Hysteria swept the Windy City. Eight anarchists were rounded up, although nobody proved that they had anything to do directly with the bomb. But the judge and jury held that since they had preached incendiary doctrines, they could be charged with conspiracy. Five were sentenced to death, one of whom committed suicide, and the other three were given stiff prison terms. Agitation for clemency mounted. In 1892, some six years later, John P. Altgeld, a German-born Democrat of strong liberal tendencies, was elected governor of Illinois. After studying the Haymarket case exhaustively, he pardoned the three survivors. Violent abuse was showered on him by conser vatives, unstinted praise by those who thought the men innocent. He was defeated for reelection and died a few years later in relative obscurity, “The Eagle Forgotten.” Whatever the merits of the case, Altgeld displayed courage in opposing what he regarded as a gross injustice. The Haymarket Square bomb helped blow the props from under the Knights of Labor. They were associated in the public mind, though mistakenly, with the anarchists. The eight-hour movement suffered correspondingly, and subsequent strikes by the Knights met with scant success. Another fatal handicap of the Knights was their inclusion of both skilled and unskilled workers. Unskilled labor could easily be replaced by strikebreaking “scabs.” High-class craft unionists, who enjoyed a semimonopoly of skills, could not readily be supplanted and hence enjoyed a superior bargaining position. They ﬁnally wearied of sacriﬁcing this advantage



 on the altar of solidarity with their unskilled coworkers and sought refuge in a federation of exclusively skilled craft unions—the American Federation of Labor. The desertion of the skilled craft unionists dealt the Knights a body blow. By the 1890s they had melted away to 100,000 members, and these gradually fused with other protest groups of that decade.

The AF of L to the Fore
 The elitist American Federation of Labor, born in 1886, was largely the brainchild of squat, square-jawed Samuel Gompers. This colorful Jewish cigar maker, born in a London tenement and removed from school at age ten, was brought to America when thirteen. Taking his turn at reading informative literature to fellow cigar makers in New York, he was pressed into overtime ser vice because of his strong voice. Rising spectacularly in the labor ranks, he was elected president of the American Federation of Labor every year except one from 1886 to 1924. Signiﬁcantly, the American Federation of Labor was just what it called itself—a federation. It consisted of an association of self-governing national unions, each of which kept its independence, with the AF of L unifying overall strategy. No individual laborer could join the central orga ni zation. Gompers adopted a down-to-earth approach, softpedaling attempts to engineer sweeping social reform. A bitter foe of socialism, he shunned politics for economic strategies and goals. Gompers had no quarrel with capitalism, but he demanded a fairer share for labor. All he wanted, he said, was “more.” Promoting what he called a “pure and simple” unionism, he sought better wages, hours, and working conditions. Unlike the somewhat utopian Knights of Labor, he was not concerned with the sweet by-and-by, but with the bitter here and now. A major goal of Gompers was the “trade agreement” authorizing the closed shop—or all-union labor. His chief weapons were the walkout and the boycott, enforced by “We don’t patronize” signs. The stronger craft unions of the federation, by pooling funds, were able to amass a war chest that would enable them to ride out prolonged strikes. The AF of L thus established itself on solid but narrow foundations. Although attempting to speak for all workers, it fell far short of being representative of them. Composed of skilled craftsmen, like the carpenters and the bricklayers, it was willing to let unskilled

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
The Knights The Great Africanof Labor American Migration 
I


 t was 1875. The young worker was guided into a room, where his blindfold was removed. Surrounding him were a dozen men, their faces covered by hoods. One of the masked ﬁgures solemnly asked three questions: “Do you believe in God?” “Do you gain your bread by the sweat of your brow?” “Are you willing to take a solemn vow, binding you to secrecy, obedience, and mutual assistance?” Yes, came the reply. The men doffed their hoods and joined hands in a circle. Their leader, the Master Workman, declared, “On behalf of the toiling millions of earth, I welcome you to this Sanctuary, dedicated to the ser vice of God, by serving humanity.” Then the entire group burst into song: Storm the fort, ye Knights of Labor, Battle for your cause; Equal rights for every neighbor, Down with tyrant laws! The carefully staged pageantry then drew to a close. The worker was now a full-ﬂedged member of the Knights of Labor. He had just joined a loose-knit orga ni zation of some 100,000 working people, soon to swell to nearly a million after the Knights led several successful strikes in the 1880s. The ﬁ rst women Knights joined in 1881, when an all-female local was established in the shoe trade in Philadelphia, and one in ten members was a woman by 1885. Women were organizers, too. Fiery Mary Harris (“Mother”) Jones got her start agitating for the Knights in the Illinois coalﬁelds. The ﬁ rst all-black local was founded among coal miners in Ottumwa, Iowa. The Knights preached tolerance and the solidarity of all working men and women, and they meant it, but even their inclusionary spirit had its limits. Chinese workers were barred from joining, and the Knights vigorously supported the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882. They also championed the Contract Labor Law of 1885, which aimed to restrain competition from low-wage immigrant workers—though immigrants, especially the Irish, were themselves disproportionately represented among the Knights’ membership. Terence V. Powderly, born to Irish immigrant parents in Carbondale, Pennsylvania, in 1849, became the Grand Master Workman of the Knights in 1879. Slightly



 built, with mild blue eyes behind glasses, he had dropped out of school at age thirteen to take a job guarding railroad track switches and rose to mayor of Scranton, Pennsylvania, in the 1870s. In 1894 he became a lawyer—despite the fact that the Knights excluded lawyers from membership. A complex, colorful, and sometimes cynical man, he denounced the “multimillionaires [for] laying the foundation for their colossal fortunes on the bodies and souls of living men.” In the eyes of Powderly and his Knights, only the economic and political independence of American workers could preserve republican traditions and institutions from corruption by monopolists and other “parasites.” Powderly denounced “wage-slavery” and dedicated the Knights to achieving the “cooperative commonwealth.” Shunning socialism, which advocated government ownership of the means of production, Powderly urged laborers to save enough from their wages to purchase mines, factories, railroads, and stores. They would thereby create a kind of toilers’ utopia; because labor would own and operate those enterprises, workers

“Mother Jones”


Machinist Frank J. Ferrell, Black Delegate of District
Assembly No. 49, Introducing General Master Workman
Terence Powderly to the Tenth Annual Convention of the
Knights of Labor, Held in Richmond, Virginia, 1886


 themselves would be owner-producers, and the conﬂ ict between labor and capital would evaporate. The Knights actually did operate a few businesses, including coal mines in Indiana, but all eventually failed.

 Powderly’s vision of the cooperative commonwealth reﬂected the persistent dream of many nineteenth-century American workers that they would all one day become producers. As expectant capitalists, they lacked “class consciousness”—that is, a sense of themselves as a permanent working class that must organize to coax what beneﬁts it could out of the capitalist system. Samuel Gompers, by contrast, accepted the framework of American capitalism, and his American Federation of Labor sought to work within that framework, not to overturn it. Gompers’s conser vative strategy, not Powderly’s utopian dream, eventually carried the day. The swift decline of the Knights in the 1890s underscored the obsolescence of their unrealistic, even naive, view that a bygone age of independent producers could be restored. Yet the Knights’ commitment to unifying all workers in one union—regardless of race, gender, ethnicity, or skill level—provided a blueprint for the eventual success of similarly committed unions like the Congress of Industrial Organizations in the 1930s.

Women Delegates to the 1886
Convention of the Knights of Labor






Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 Samuel Gompers (1850–1924) Gompers (second from the right in the ﬁrst row), shown here marching in a labor demonstration in Washington, D.C., in 1919, once declared, “Show me the country in which there are no strikes and I’ll show you that country in which there is no liberty.”

 laborers, including women and especially blacks, fend for themselves. Though hard-pressed by big industry, the federation was basically nonpolitical. But it did attempt to persuade members to reward friends and punish foes at the polls. The AF of L weathered the panic of 1893 reasonably well, and by 1900 it could boast a membership of 500,000. Critics referred to it, with questionable accuracy, as “the labor trust.” Labor disorders continued, peppering the years from 1881 to 1900 with a total of over 23,000 strikes. These disturbances involved 6,610,000 workers, with a total loss to both employers and employees of $450 million. The strikers lost about half their strikes and won or compromised the remainder. Perhaps the gravest weakness of orga nized labor was that it still embraced only a small minority of all working people—about 3 percent in 1900.

 But attitudes toward labor had begun to change perceptibly by 1900. The public was beginning to concede the right of workers to organize, to bargain collectively, and to strike. As a sign of the times, Labor Day was made a legal holiday by act of Congress in 1894. A few enlightened industrialists had come to perceive the wisdom of avoiding costly economic warfare by bargaining with the unions and signing agreements. But the vast majority of employers continued to ﬁght orga nized labor, which achieved its grudging gains only after recurrent strikes and frequent reverses. Nothing was handed to it on a silver platter. Management still held the whip hand, and several trouble-fraught decades were to pass before labor was to gain a position of relative equality with capital. If the age of big business had dawned, the age of big labor was still some distance over the horizon.

Varying Viewpoints




 CHRONOLOGY

 Congress authorizes transcontinental railroad



 Edison invents electric light



 National Labor Union orga nized First working transatlantic telegraph cable





 Haymarket Square bombing Wabash case American Federation of Labor formed

 Transcontinental railroad joined near Ogden, Utah Knights of Labor orga nized Suez Canal completed



Interstate Commerce Act




Sherman Anti-Trust Act




 United States Steel Corporation formed



 Standard Oil Company orga nized



 Bell invents telephone

KEY TERMS
Wabash, St. Louis & Paciﬁc Railroad Company v. Illinois (573) Interstate Commerce Act (573) vertical integration (575) horizontal integration (575) trust (575) interlocking directorates (575) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Standard Oil Company (578) Social Darwinists (579) Sherman Anti-Trust Act (580) National Labor Union (587) Knights of Labor (588) Haymarket Square (589) American Federation of Labor (589) closed shop (589) 
Cornelius Vanderbilt
Alexander Graham Bell
Thomas Alva Edison


Andrew Carnegie
John D. Rockefeller
Samuel Gompers


Industrialization: Boon or Blight?


T


 he capitalists who forged an industrial America in the late nineteenth century were once called captains of industry—a respectful title that bespoke the awe due their wondrous material accomplishments. But these economic innovators have never been universally admired. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, when the entire industrial order they had created seemed to have collapsed utterly, it was fashionable to speak of them as robber barons—a term

 implying scorn for their high-handed methods. This sneer often issued from the lips and pens of leftist critics like Matthew Josephson, who sympathized with the working classes that were allegedly brutalized by the factory system. Criticism has also come from writers nostalgic for a preindustrial past. These critics believe that industrialization stripped away the traditions, values, and pride of native farmers and immigrant craftspeople.



Chapter 24 Industry Comes of Age, 1865–1900


 Conceding that economic development elevated the material standard of living for working Americans, this interpretation contends that the Industrial Revolution diminished their spiritual “quality of life.” Accordingly, historians like Herbert Gutman and David Montgomery portray labor’s struggle for control of the workplace as the central drama of industrial expansion. Nevertheless, even these historians concede that class-based protest has never been as powerful a force in the United States as in certain European countries. Many historians believe that this is so because greater social mobility in America dampened class tensions. The French observer Alexis de Tocqueville noted in the 1830s that America had few huge inherited fortunes and that most of its wealthy men were self-made. For two centuries a majority of Americans have believed that greater opportunity distinguished the New World from the Old. In the 1960s historians led by Stephan Thernstrom began to test this long-standing belief. Look ing at such factors as occupation, wealth, and geographic mobility, they tried to gauge the nature and extent of social mobility in the United States. Most of these historians concluded that although relatively few Americans made rags-to-riches leaps like those heralded in the Horatio Alger stories, large numbers experienced small improvements in their economic and social status. Few sons of laborers became corporate tycoons, but many more became line bosses and

 white-collar clerks. These studies also have found that race and ethnicity often affected one’s chances for success. For instance, the children and grandchildren of Jewish immigrants tended to rise faster in the professions than Americans of Italian and Irish descent. Throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, blacks lagged far behind other groups in almost every category. In recent years such studies have been criticized by certain historians who point out the difﬁculties involved in deﬁ ning social status. For instance, some white-collar clerical workers received lower wages than manual laborers did. Were they higher or lower on the social scale? Furthermore, James Henretta has pointed out that different groups deﬁ ned success differently: whereas Jewish immigrants often struggled to give their sons professional educations, the Irish put more emphasis on acquiring land and the Italians on building small family-run businesses. Meanwhile, leftist historians such as Michael Katz have argued that the degree of social mobility in America has been overrated. These historians argue that industrial capitalism created two classes: a working class that sold its labor, and a business class that controlled resources and bought labor. Although most Americans took small steps upward, they generally remained within the class in which they began. Thus, these historians argue, the inequality of a capitalistic class system persisted in America’s seemingly ﬂuid society.

To Learn More
Edward L. Ayers, The Promise of the New South: Life After
Reconstruction (1992)
David H. Bain, Empire Express: Building the First
Transcontinental Railroad (1999)
Sven Beckert, The Monied Metropolis: New York City and
 the Consolidation of the American Bourgeoisie, 1850–1896 (2001) Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business (1978) James Green, Death in the Haymarket: A Story of Chicago, the First Labor Movement, and the Bombing That Divided Gilded Age America (2006) Richard Hofstadter, Social Darwinism in American Thought, 1860–1915 (rev. ed., 1955) Tera W. Hunter, To ’Joy My Freedom: Southern Black Women’s Lives and Labors After the Civil War (1997)

 Alice Kessler-Harris, Out to Work: A History of WageEarning Women in the United States (1982) David Montgomery, The Fall of the House of Labor: The Workplace, the State, and American Labor Activism, 1865–1925 (1987) Daniel T. Rodgers, The Work Ethic in Industrial America, 1850–1920 (1978)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

America Moves
 to the City




1865–1900
 What shall we do with our great cities? What will our great cities do with us . . . ? [T]he question . . . does not concern the city alone. The whole country is affected . . . by the condition of its great cities.

B


 orn in the country, America moved to the city in the decades following the Civil War. By the year 1900, the United States’ upsurging population nearly doubled from its level of some 40 million souls enumerated in the census of 1870. Yet in the very same period, the population of American cities tripled. By the end of the nineteenth century, four out of ten Americans were city dwellers, in striking contrast to the rustic population of stagecoach days. This cityward drift affected not only the United States but the entire industrializing world. European peasants, pushed off the land in part by competition from cheap American foodstuffs, were pulled into cities—in both Europe and America—by the new lure of industrial jobs. A revolution in American agriculture thus fed the industrial and urban revolutions in Europe, as well as in the United States.

The Urban Frontier
 The growth of American metropolises was spectacular. In 1860 no city in the United States could boast a million inhabitants; by 1890 New York, Chicago, and Philadelphia had vaulted past the million mark. By 1900 New York, with some 3.5 million people, was the secondlargest city in the world, outranked only by London. Throughout the world, cities were exploding. London, Paris, Berlin, Tokyo, Moscow, Mexico City, Calcutta, and Shanghai all doubled or tripled in size between 1850 and 1900. The population of Buenos Aires multiplied by more than ten (see Map 25.1). American cities grew both up and out. The cloudbrushing skyscraper allowed more people and workplaces to be packed onto a parcel of land. Appearing

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


St. Petersburg
502,000
1,439,000
Moscow
373,000
E U R OP E 1,120,000
Vienna
426,000
1,662,000


Arctic Circle
60°N


London
2,320,000
6,480,000


NORTH AMERICA
Chicago 29,963 1,717,000 Los Angeles 1,610 107,000 
30°N
Tropic of
Cancer


Berlin
446,000
2,424,000


Paris
1,314,000
3,330,000


New York
682,000
4,242,000


Mexico City
170,000
344,000


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

O C E AN


1,500


3,000 Mi.




500,000 to 1,000,000
 1 to 2 million

N


Buenos Aires
74,000
806,000


3,000 Km.


City
 population



Under 100,000
 São Paulo 205,000

30°S




 OCEAN

100,000 to 500,000


Tropic of Capricorn


1,500


120°E


90°E


 INDIAN

SOUTH AMERICA

Shanghai
250,000
837,000


Calcutta
413,000
1,085,000


Lagos
25,000
40,000


PAC I F IC

Tokyo
567,000
1,497,000


Beijing
1,648,000
1,100,000


Bombay
575,000
780,000


 AFRICA

0° Equator




ASI A

 2 to 3 million 3 to 5 million Over 6 million

150°W


120°W


90°W


60°W


30°W


0°


30°E


60°E


60°S


413,000


Population


1,085,000


Map 25.1 Size of World Cities Since 1850
Sources: United Nations, “World Urbanization Prospects: The 2005 Revision”; Tertius Chandler and Gerald Fox,
3000 Years of Urban Growth (New York: Academic Press, 1974); U.S. Census; Spencer H. Brown, “Public Health in
Lagos, 1850–1900: Perceptions, Patterns, and Perspectives,” International Journal of African Historical Studies
25, no. 2. (1992): 345; Josephine Olu Abiodun, “The Challenges of Growth and Development in Metropolitan
Lagos,” in The Urban Challenge in Africa: Growth and Management of Its Large Cities, ed. Carole Rakodi (New
York: United Nations University Press, 1997), 193–195; United Nations Demographic Yearbook.


 ﬁ rst as a ten-story building in Chicago in 1885, the skyscraper was made usable by the perfecting of the electric elevator. An opinionated Chicago architect, Louis Sullivan (1856–1924), contributed formidably to the further development of the skyscraper with his famous principle that “form follows function.” Nesting loftily above city streets in the new steel-skeleton high-rises that Sullivan helped to make popular, many Americans were becoming modern cliff dwellers. Americans were also becoming commuters, carted daily between home and job on the mass-transit lines that radiated out from central cities to surrounding suburbs. Electric trolleys, powered by wagging antennae from overhead wires, propelled city limits explosively outward. By the end of the century, the nation’s ﬁ rst subway opened in Boston; London had led the way

Interactive Map


 by building a subway as early as 1863. The compact and communal “walking city,” its boundaries ﬁ xed by the limits of leg-power, gave way to the immense and impersonal megalopolis, carved into distinctly different districts for business, industry, and residential neighborhoods—which were in turn segregated by race, ethnicity, and social class. Rural life could not compete with the siren song of the city (see Figure 25.1). Industrial jobs, above all, drew people off farms in America as well as abroad and into factory centers. But the urban lifestyle also held powerful attractions. The predawn milking of cows had little appeal when compared with the late-night glitter of city lights, particularly alluring to young adults yearning for independence. Electricity, indoor plumbing, and telephones—whose numbers leapt from

The Growth of Cities




 Lower Broadway, 1875 Horses still abounded in New York and other cities when this lithograph was made, but they would soon be displaced by street railways and automobiles.

 some 50,000 in 1880 to over 1 million in 1900—all made life in the big city more enticing. Engineering marvels like the skyscraper and New York’s awesome Brooklyn Bridge, a harplike suspension span dedicated in 1883, further added to the seductive glamour of the gleaming cities. Cavernous department stores such as Macy’s in New York and Marshall Field’s in Chicago attracted urban middle-class shoppers and provided urban workingclass jobs, many of them for women. The bustling emporiums also heralded a dawning era of consumerism and accentuated widening class divisions. When Carrie Meeber, novelist Theodore Dreiser’s ﬁctional heroine in Sister Carrie (1900), escapes from rural boredom to Chicago just before the turn of the century, it is the spectacle of the city’s dazzling department stores that awakens her fateful yearning for a richer, more elegant way of life—for entry into the privileged urban middle class, whose existence she had scarcely imagined in the rustic countryside.

 The move to the city introduced Americans to new ways of living. Country dwellers produced little household waste. Domestic animals or scavenging pigs ate food scraps on the farm. Rural women mended and darned worn clothing rather than discard it. Household products were sold in bulk at the local store, without wrapping. Mail-order houses such as Sears and Montgomery Ward, which increasingly displaced the rural “general store” in the late nineteenth century, at ﬁ rst did not list trash barrels or garbage cans in their catalogues. In the city, however, goods came in throwaway bottles, boxes, bags, and cans. Apartment houses had no adjoining barnyards where residents might toss garbage to the hogs. Cheap ready-to-wear clothing and swiftly changing fashions pushed old suits and dresses out of the closet and onto the trash heap. Waste disposal, in short, was an issue new to the urban age. And the mountains of waste that urbanites generated further testiﬁed to a cultural shift away from the virtues of thrift to the conveniences of consumerism.



Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


 Figure 25.1 The Shift to the American City This chart shows the percentage of total population living in locales with a population of twenty-ﬁve hundred or more. Note the slowing of the cityward trend from 1970 on.



 The jagged skyline of America’s perpendicular civilization could not fully conceal the canker sores of a feverish growth. Criminals ﬂourished like lice in the teeming asphalt jungles. Sanitary facilities could not keep pace with the mushrooming population explosion. Impure water, uncollected garbage, unwashed bodies, and droppings from draft animals enveloped many cities in a satanic stench. Baltimore was described as smelling like a billion polecats. The cities were monuments of contradiction. They represented “humanity compressed,” remarked one observer, “the best and the worst combined, in a strangely composite community.” They harbored merchant princes and miserable paupers, stately banks



5.1%
19.8%
39.7%
51.2%
54.0%
69.9%




73.6%




73.7%




75.2%




77%


 The Brooklyn Bridge The Brooklyn Bridge opened on May 24, 1883. It had taken thirteen years to build and was the largest suspension bridge in the world, as well as the ﬁrst made of steel wire. On opening day, an astonishing 1,800 vehicles and 150,300 people made the short but breathtaking trek between the New York City boroughs of Manhattan and Brooklyn. The ﬁrst person to cross was Emily Warren Roebling, the daughter-in-law of the original designer, John Augustus Roebling, and the wife of his son, Washington Roebling, who had taken over the job when his father died suddenly in 1869. When Washington fell ill himself, Emily learned civil engineering and oversaw much of the remaining work on the bridge.

Urban Problems


 and sooty factories, green-grassed suburbs and treeless ghettos, towering skyscrapers and stinking tenements. The glaring contrasts that assaulted the eye in New York reminded one visitor of “a lady in ball costume, with diamonds in her ears, and her toes out at the boots.” Worst of all were the human pigsties known as slums. They seemed to grow ever more crowded, more ﬁ lthy, and more rat-infested, especially after the perfection in 1879 of the “dumbbell” tenement (see Fig ure 25.2). So named because of the outline of its ﬂoor plan, the dumbbell was usually seven or eight stories high, with shallow, sunless, and ill-smelling air shafts providing minimal ventilation. Several families were sardined onto each ﬂoor of the barracks-like structures, and they shared a malodorous toilet in the hall. In these fetid warrens, conspicuously in New York’s “Lung Block,” hundreds of unfortunate urbanites coughed away their lives. “Flophouses” abounded where the half-starved and unemployed might sleep for a few cents on verminous mattresses. Small wonder that slum dwellers strove mightily to escape their wretched surroundings—as many of them did. The slums remained foul places, inhabited by successive waves of newcomers. To a remarkable degree, hardworking people moved up and out of them.



 Cities were dangerous for everyone. In 1871 twothirds of downtown Chicago burned in a raging ﬁ re that left ninety thousand people homeless and destroyed more than ﬁfteen thousand buildings. Closely packed wooden structures fed the insatiable ﬂames, prompting Chicago and other wary cities to require stone and iron buildings downtown. The wealthiest began to leave the risky cities behind and head for semirural suburbs. These leafy “bedroom communities” eventually ringed the brick-and-concrete cities with a greenbelt of afﬂuence.

The New Immigration
 The powerful pull of the American urban magnet was felt even in faraway Europe. A seemingly endless stream of immigrants continued to pour in from the old “mother continent.” In each of the three decades from the 1850s through the 1870s, more than 2 million migrants had stepped onto America’s shores. By the 1880s the stream had swelled to a rushing torrent, as more than 5 million cascaded into the country. A new high for a single year was reached in 1882, when 788,992 arrived—or more than 2,100 a day (see Figure 25.3).

Air Shaft


Living
Room


Bed
Room


Living
Room


Parlor


Bed
Room


P u b l i c H a l l
Bed
Bed
Room
Room
Air Shaft
50'0"


Living
Room


Parlor


Fire Escape


Parlor


Bed
Room


W.C.


Parlor


Bed
Room


W.C.


Fire Escape


10'
Living
Room


Figure 25.2 Dumbbell
 Tenement This was the standard architectural plan for the human warehouses on New York’s Lower East Side. Despite the innovation of an air shaft to bring light and ventilation to the middle of the building, only one room in each of the apartments was directly exposed to sunlight and open air. All families on a ﬂoor shared the toilet (“W.C.”) in the hallway.



Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900
IN THOUSANDS

1,900
1,800
1,700
1,600
1,500
1,400


 Amnesty granted to certain undocumented immigrants

1,300
1,200
Prosperity


1,100
Anti–Jewish
 pogroms in Europe

1,000


Postwar
 flood

Cuban and
Haitian
 refugees

Panic of




Panic of


Quota
 system revised

Quotas
 applied



World
War I














Indochina
 refugees

Displaced
 persons



















Year


 Figure 25.3 Annual Immigration, 1860–2006 After 1924 these numbers include only legal, documented immigrants. The 1989 total includes 478,814 people granted permanent residence status under the “amnesty” provisions of the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act. The 1990 total includes 880,372 people granted permanent residence under these provisions. The peak came in 1991, when 1,123,162 people were affected by amnesty. (Sources: Statistical Abstract of the United States, relevant years; Department of Homeland Security, Yearbook of Immigration Statistics, 2006.)

 Until the 1880s most immigrants had come from the British Isles and western Europe, chieﬂy Germany and Ireland. Also signiﬁcant were the more than 300,000 Chinese immigrants. Many of these earlier immigrants had faced virulent nativism, especially the Irish and the Chinese. In fact, the latter were legally excluded in 1882 (see p. 549). But by the last decades of the century, the “old” European immigrants had adjusted well to American life by building supportive ethnic orga ni zations and melding into established farm communities or urban craft unions. Although many still lived, worked, and worshiped among their own, they were largely accepted as “American” by the native-born. In the 1880s the character of the immigrant stream changed drastically (see Figure 25.4). The so-called New Immigrants came from southern and eastern Europe. Among them were Italians, Jews, Croats, Slovaks, Greeks, and Poles. They came from countries with

 little history of democratic government, where people had grown accustomed to cringing before despotism and where opportunities for advancement were few. These new peoples totaled only 19 percent of the inpouring immigrants in the 1880s, but by the ﬁ rst decade of the twentieth century, they constituted an astonishing 66 percent of the total inﬂow. They hived together in cities like New York and Chicago, where the “Little Italys” and “Little Polands” soon claimed more inhabitants than many of the largest cities of the same nationality in the Old World (see “Makers of America: The Italians,” pp. 602–603). Largely illiterate and impoverished, many immigrants at ﬁ rst were content to live within these tightly bound communities based on native language and religion. There they worshiped in Orthodox or Roman Catholic churches or synagogues and in some cases nourished radical political ideas. There, too, they felt sheltered from Americans who revived old nativist

The New Immigrants
Million
5,789,000






2,928,000


1,847,000


1,069,000


540,000




1,110,000




181,000




1,593,000




926,000


2,753,000






 Figure 25.4 Old and New Immigration (by decade) In the 1880s the sources of immigration to the United States shifted from the British Isles and western Europe to southern and eastern Europe. A century later the old “mother continent” of Europe would account for only 10 percent of immigrants to America (see Figure 42.4 on p. 1094).

 Leading nations of the Old Immigration: England, Ireland, Germany Leading nations of the New Immigration: Italy, Austria– Hungary, Russia

1871–1880 1881–1890 1891–1900 1901–1910 1911–1920


 fears that had plagued Old Immigrants in the 1840s and 1850s—fears that these New Immigrants would not, or could not, assimilate to life in their new land. The skeptics, who included some immigrants of the earlier wave, began asking whether the nation had become a melting pot or a dumping ground.

Southern Europe Uprooted
 Why were these bright-shawled and quaint-jacketed strangers hammering on the gates? In part they left their native countries because Europe seemed to have no room for them. The population of the Old World was

Mulberry Street on New York
 City’s Lower East Side, ca. 1900 Population densities in early-twentieth-century American cities were among the highest in the world. Mulberry Street, shown in this photo, was at the heart of New York’s “Little Italy” neighborhood.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Italians American Migration 
W


 ho were the “New Immigrants,” these southern and eastern European birds of passage that ﬂocked to the United States between 1880 and 1920? Prominent and typical among them were the Italians, some 4 million of whom sailed to the United States during the four decades of the New Immigration. They came from the southern provinces of their native land, the heel and toe of the Italian boot. These areas had lagged economically behind the prosperous, industrial region of northern Italy. The north had been the seat of earlier Italian glory, as well as the fountainhead of the successful movement to unify the country in 1860. There industry had been planted and agriculture modernized. Uniﬁcation raised hopes of similar progress in the downtrodden south, but it was slow in coming. Southern Italian peasants tilled their ﬁelds without fertilizer or machinery, using hand plows and rickety hoes that had been passed down for generations. Italian Immigrants Arriving at Ellis Island, ca. 1910

 From such disappointed and demeaned conditions, southern Italians set out for the New World. Most came to the United States, but signiﬁcant numbers headed for Argentina to work in agriculture. Almost all of them were young men who intended to spend only a few months, stuff their pockets with earnings, and return home. At least half of the Italian immigrants did indeed repatriate—as did comparable numbers of the other New Immigrants, with the conspicuous exception of the Jews, who had ﬂed their native lands to escape religious persecution. Most of the Italian immigrants to the United States sailed through New York harbor, sighting the Statue of Liberty as they debarked from crowded ships. Many soon moved on to other large cities, but so many remained that in the early years of the twentieth century, more Italians resided in New York than in the Italian cities of Florence, Venice, and Genoa combined. Since the immigrant Italians, with few exceptions, had been peasant farmers in the Old Country, the U.S. government encouraged them to practice their ances-

Pietro Learning to Write on Jersey Street
 “The sons shall teach the fathers,” the old saying goes. Many immigrants learned English from their children who attended American schools, like this youngster and parent in early-twentieth-century New Jersey.



Italian Immigrant Women Doing Piecework at Home in
New York, ca. 1910


Italian Construction Workers, ca. 1910


 tral livelihood here, believing they would more rapidly assimilate in the countryside than in the ethnic enclaves of the cities. But almost all such ventures failed. The farmers lacked capital, and they were in any case more interested in earning quick money than in permanently sinking roots. Although they huddled in the cities, Italian immigrants did not abandon their rural upbringing entirely. Much to their neighbors’ consternation, they often kept chickens in vacant lots and raised vegetables in small garden plots nestled between decaying tenement houses. Those who bade a permanent farewell to Italy clustered in tightly knit communities that boasted opera clubs, Italian-language newspapers, and courts for playing bocci—a version of lawn bowling imported from the Old Country. Pizza emerged from the hot wood-burning ovens of these Little Italys, its aroma and ﬂavor wafting into the hearts and stomachs of all Americans. The Italians typically earned their daily bread as industrial laborers—most famously as longshoremen

 and construction workers. They owed their prominence in the building trades to the “padrone system.” The padrone, or labor boss, met immigrants upon their arrival and secured jobs for them in New York, Chicago, the West, or wherever there was an immediate demand for labor. The padrone owed his power to his ability to meet the needs of both Italian newcomers and American bosses, and he often managed to manipulate both for his own gain. Lacking education, the Italians, as a group, remained in blue-collar jobs longer than some of their fellow New Immigrants. Many Italians, valuing vocation over schooling, sent their children off to work as early in their young lives as possible. Before World War I, less than 1 percent of Italian children enrolled in high school. Over the next ﬁ fty years, Italian Americans and their offspring gradually prospered, moving out of the cities into the more afﬂuent suburbs. Many served heroically in World War II and availed themselves of the GI Bill to ﬁ nance the college educations and professional training their immigrant forebears had lacked.





Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


 growing vigorously. It nearly doubled in the century after 1800, thanks in part to abundant supplies of ﬁsh and grain from America and to the widespread cultivation in Europe of that humble New World transplant, the potato. American food imports and the galloping pace of European industrialization shook the peasantry loose from its ancient habitats and customary occupations, creating a vast, footloose army of the unemployed. Europeans by the millions drained out of the countryside and into European cities. Most stayed there, but some kept moving and left Europe altogether. About 60 million Europeans abandoned the Old Continent in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. More than half of them moved to the United States, while their compatriots spread out across the globe to South America, Canada, Africa, and Australia. Masses of people were already in motion in Europe before they felt the tug of the American magnet. This European diaspora, dominated by immigration to the United States, was, in many ways, simply a by-product of the urbanization of Europe “America fever” proved highly contagious in Europe. The United States was often painted as a land of fabulous opportunity in the “America letters” sent by friends and relatives already transplanted—letters that were soiled by the hands of many readers. “We eat here every day,” wrote one jubilant Pole, “what we get only for Easter in our [native] country.” The land of the free was also blessed with freedom from military conscription and institutionalized religious persecution.

Jewish Women Working in
 a Sweatshop, ca. 1910 Countless immigrant women found their ﬁrst American employment in shops like this.

 Mary Antin (1881–1949), who came to America from Russian Poland in 1894 when thirteen years of age, later wrote in The Promised Land (1912),

“


 So at last I was going to America! Really, really going, at last! The boundaries burst. The arch of heaven soared. A million suns shone out for every star. The winds rushed in from outer space, roaring in my ears, ‘America! America!’

”


 Proﬁt-seeking Americans trumpeted throughout Europe the attractions of the new promised land. Industrialists wanted low-wage labor, railroads wanted buyers for their land grants, states wanted more population, and steamship lines wanted more human cargo for their holds. In fact, the ease and cheapness of steam-powered shipping greatly accelerated the transoceanic surge. As the century lengthened, savage persecutions of minorities in Europe drove many shattered souls to American shores. In the 1880s the Russians turned violently upon their own Jews, chieﬂy in the Polish areas. Tens of thousands of these battered refugees, survivors of centuries of harassment as hated outcasts, ﬂed their burning homes. They made their way to the sea-

Manuscript Census Data, 1900
 rticle I of the Constitution requires that a census of the American people be taken every ten years, in order to provide a reliable basis for congressional apportionment. Early censuses gathered little more than basic population numbers, but over the years the census takers have collected information on other matters as well—including occupational categories, educational levels, and citizenship status—yielding copious raw data for historical analysis. The census of 1890 was the ﬁ rst to use punch cards and electric tabulating machines, which greatly expanded the range of data that could be assembled and correlated—though the basic information was still hand-recorded by individual canvassers who

A


 went door-to-door to question household members and ﬁ ll out the census forms. Those handwritten forms, as much as the aggregate numbers printed in the ﬁ nal census tally, can furnish invaluable insights to the historian. Despite its apparent bureaucratic formality, the form shown here richly details the lives of the residents of a tenement house on New York’s Lower East Side in 1900. See in particular the entries for the Goldberg family. In what ways does this document reﬂect the great demographic changes that swept late-nineteenth-century America? What light does it shed on the character of immigrant “ghettos”? What further use might historians make of information like this?





Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


 board cities of the Atlantic Coast, notably New York. Jews had experienced city life in Europe—a circumstance that made them virtually unique among the New Immigrants. Many of them brought their urban skills of tailoring or shopkeeping to American cities. Destitute and devout, eastern European Jews were frequently given a frosty reception not only by old-stock Americans but also by those German Jews who had arrived decades earlier and prospered in the United States, some as garment manufacturers who now employed their coreligionists as cheap labor. Many of the immigrants never intended to become Americans in any case. A large number of them were single men who worked in the United States for several months or years and then returned home with their hard-earned roll of American dollars. Some 25 percent of the nearly 20 million people who arrived between 1820 and 1900 were “birds of passage” who eventually returned to their country of origin. For them the attraction of the American magnet was never strong. Even those who stayed in America struggled heroically to preserve their traditional culture. Catholics expanded their parochial-school systems, and Jews established Hebrew schools. Foreign-language newspapers abounded. Yiddish theaters, kosher-food stores, Polish parishes, Greek restaurants, and Italian social clubs all attested to the desire to keep old ways alive. Yet time took its toll on these efforts to conserve the customs of the Old World in the New. The children of the immigrants grew up speaking ﬂuent Eng lish, sometimes mocking the broken grammar of their parents. They often rejected the Old Country manners of their mothers and fathers in their desire to plunge headlong into the mainstream of American life.

Reactions to the
New Immigration
 America’s government system, nurtured in wide-open spaces, was ill-suited to the cement forests of the great cities. Beyond minimal checking to weed out criminals and the insane, the federal government did virtually nothing to ease the assimilation of immigrants into American society. State governments, usually dominated by rural representatives, did even less. City governments, overwhelmed by the sheer scale of rampant urban growth, proved woefully inadequate to the task. By default, the business of ministering to the immigrants’ needs fell to the unofﬁcial “governments” of the

 urban political machines, led by “bosses” like New York’s notorious Boss Tweed. Taking care of the immigrants was big business indeed. Trading jobs and ser vices for votes, a powerful boss might claim the loyalty of thousands of followers. In return for their support at the polls, the boss provided jobs on the city’s payroll, found housing for new arrivals, tided over the needy with gifts of food and clothing, patched up minor scrapes with the law, and helped get schools, parks, and hospitals built in immigrant neighborhoods. Reformers gagged at this cynical exploitation of the immigrant vote, but the political boss gave valuable assistance that was forthcoming from no other source. The nation’s social conscience, slumbering since the antislavery crusade, gradually awakened to the plight of the cities, and especially their immigrant masses. Prominent in this awakening were several Protestant clergymen, who sought to apply the lessons of Christianity to the slums and factories. Noteworthy among them was Walter Rauschenbusch, who in 1886 became pastor of a German Baptist church in New York City. Also conspicuous was Washington Gladden, who took over a Congregational church in Columbus, Ohio, in 1882. Preaching the “social gospel,” they both insisted that the churches tackle the burning social issues of the day. The Sermon on the Mount, they declared, was the science of society, and many social gospelers predicted that socialism would be the logical outcome of Christianity. These “Christian socialists” did much to prick callous middle-class consciences, thus preparing the path for the progressive reform movement after the turn of the century. One middle-class woman who was deeply dedicated to uplifting the urban masses was Jane Addams (1860–1935). Born into a prosperous Illinois family, Addams was one of the ﬁ rst generation of collegeeducated women. Upon her graduation she sought other outlets for her large talents than could be found in teaching or charitable volunteer work, then the only permissible occupations for a young woman of her social class. Inspired by a visit to Eng land, she acquired the decaying Hull mansion in Chicago in 1889. There she established Hull House, the most prominent (though not the ﬁ rst) American settlement house. Soft-spoken but tenacious, Addams became a kind of urban American saint in the eyes of many admirers. The philosopher William James told her, “You utter instinctively the truth we others vainly seek.” She was a broad-gauge reformer who courageously condemned

Women in the City




 Hull House These immigrant children playing games at the settlement house that Jane Addams founded in Chicago were having some fun while also getting instruction from a settlement house worker in how to be a proper American.

 war as well as poverty, and she eventually won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1931. But her paciﬁsm also earned her the enmity of some Americans, including the Daughters of the American Revolution, who choked on her antiwar views and expelled her from membership in their august orga ni zation. Located in a poor immigrant neighborhood of Greeks, Italians, Russians, and Germans, Hull House offered instruction in Eng lish, counseling to help newcomers cope with American big-city life, child-care services for working mothers, and cultural activities for neighborhood residents. Following Jane Addams’s lead, women founded settlement houses in other cities as well. Conspicuous among the houses was Lillian Wald’s Henry Street Settlement in New York, which opened its doors in 1893. The settlement houses became centers of women’s activism and of social reform. The women of Hull House successfully lobbied in 1893 for an Illinois antisweatshop law that protected women workers and prohibited child labor. They were led in this case by the black-clad Florence Kelley, a guerrilla warrior in the urban jungle. Armed with the insights of socialism and endowed with the voice of an actress, Kelley was a lifelong battler for the welfare of women, children, blacks, and consumers. She later moved to the Henry Street Settlement in New York and served for three decades as general secretary of the National Consumers League. The pioneering work of Addams, Wald, and Kelley helped blaze the trail that many women—and some men—later fol-

 lowed into careers in urban reform and the new profession of social work. For these female reformers, and for many other women, the city offered a new kind of frontier opportunity. More than a million women joined the work force in the single decade of the 1890s. Strict social codes prescribed which women might work and what jobs they might hold. Because employment for wives and mothers was considered taboo, the vast majority of working women were single. Their jobs depended on their race, ethnicity, and class. Black women had few opportunities beyond domestic ser vice. White-collar jobs as social workers, secretaries, department store clerks, and telephone operators were largely reserved for native-born women. Immigrant women tended to cluster in particular industries, as Jewish women did in the garment trades. Although hours were often long, pay low, and advancement limited, a job still bought workingwomen some economic and social independence. After contributing a large share of their earnings to their families, many women still had enough money in their pocketbooks to enter a new urban world of sociability—excursions to amusement parks with friends on days off, Saturday night dances with the “fellas.”

Narrowing the Welcome Mat
 Antiforeignism, or “nativism,” earlier touched off by the Irish and German arrivals in the 1840s and 1850s,



Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


 bared its ugly face in the 1880s with fresh ferocity. The New Immigrants had come for much the same reasons as the Old—to escape the poverty and squalor of Europe and to seek new opportunities in America. But “nativists” viewed the eastern and southern Europeans as culturally and religiously exotic hordes and often gave them a rude reception. The newest newcomers aroused widespread alarm. Their high birthrate, common among people with a low standard of living and sufﬁcient youth and vigor to pull up stakes, raised worries that the original Anglo-Saxon stock would soon be outbred and outvoted. Still more horrifying was the prospect that it would be mongrelized by a mixture of “inferior” southern European blood and that the fairer Anglo-Saxon types would disappear. One New Eng land writer cried out in anguish, O Liberty, white Goddess! is it well To leave the gates unguarded? Native-born Americans voiced additional fears. They blamed the immigrants for the degradation of urban government. Some trade unionists assailed the alien arrivals for their willingness to work for “starvation” wages that seemed to them like princely sums and for importing in their intellectual baggage such seemingly dangerous doctrines as socialism, communism, and anarchism. Many business leaders, who had welcomed the ﬂood of cheap manual labor, began to fear that they had embraced a Frankenstein’s monster.

Looking Backward
 Older immigrants, trying to keep their own humble arrival in America “in the shadows,” sought to close the bridge that had carried them and their ancestors across the Atlantic.

 In response to nativists who condemned the New Immigrants as despicable human specimens threatening to drag down the American race, the Jewish immigrant playwright Israel Zangwill (1864– 1926) celebrated the new superior American emerging out of what he called “the great melting pot” of European races:

“


 America is God’s crucible, the great melting pot, where all the races of Europe are melting and re-forming! . . . Germans and Frenchmen, Irishmen and Englishmen, Jews and Russians—into the Crucible with you all! God is making the American!

”


 Antiforeign orga ni zations, reminiscent of the “Know-Nothings” of antebellum days, were now revived in a different guise. Notorious among them was the American Protective Association (APA), which was created in 1887 and soon claimed a million members. In pursuing its nativist goals, the APA urged voting against Roman Catholic candidates for ofﬁce and sponsored the publication of lustful fantasies about runaway nuns. Organized labor was quick to throw its grow ing weight behind the move to choke off the rising tide of foreigners. Frequently used as strikebreakers, the

Restrictions on Immigration


 wage-depressing immigrants were hard to unionize because of the language barrier. Labor leaders argued, not illogically, that if American industry was entitled to protection from foreign goods, American workers were entitled to protection from foreign laborers. Congress ﬁ nally nailed up partial bars against the inpouring immigrants. The ﬁrst restrictive law, passed in 1882, banged the gate shut in the faces of paupers, criminals, and convicts, all of whom had to be returned at the expense of the greedy or careless shipper. Congress further responded to pained outcries from organized labor when in 1885 it prohibited the importation of foreign workers under contract—usually for substandard wages. In addition to the ﬁ rst federal restrictions on immigration, the year 1882 brought forth a law to bar completely one ethnic group—the Chinese. Hitherto America, at least ofﬁcially, had embraced the oppressed and underprivileged of all races and creeds. Hereafter



 President Grover Cleveland (1837–1908) declared in 1897,

“


 It is said . . . that the quality of recent immigration is undesirable. The time is quite within recent memory when the same thing was said of immigrants who, with their descendants, are now numbered among our best citizens.

”


 the gates would be padlocked against defective undesirables—plus the Chinese. In later years other federal laws lengthened the list of undesirables to include the insane, polygamists, prostitutes, alcoholics, anarchists, and people carrying contagious diseases. A proposed literacy test, long a favorite of nativists because it favored the Old Immigrants over the New, met vigorous opposition. It was not enacted until 1917, after three presidents had vetoed it on the grounds that literacy was more a mea sure of opportunity than of intelligence. In 1886 the Statue of Liberty arose in New York harbor, a gift from the people of France. On its base were inscribed the words of Emma Lazarus: Give me your tired, your poor Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. To many nativists, those noble words described only too accurately the “scum” washed up by the New Immigrant tides. Yet the uprooted immigrants, unlike “natives” lucky enough to have had parents who caught an earlier ship, became American citizens the hard way. They stepped off the boat, many of them fullgrown and well muscled, ready to put their shoulders to the nation’s industrial wheels. The Republic owes much to these latecomers—for their brawn, their brains, their courage, and the yeasty diversity they brought to American society.

Churches Confront the
Urban Challenge
 Lady Liberty Being Readied for Travel A centennial “birthday present” from the French people, the Statue of Liberty arrived from France in 1886.

 The swelling size and changing character of the urban population posed sharp challenges to American churches, which, like other national institutions, had grown up in the country. Protestant churches, in



Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


 Morning Service at Moody’s Church, 1908 Thousands of Chicagoans found the gospel and a helping hand at evangelist Dwight Lyman Moody’s church. Although Moody himself died in 1899, his successors continued to attract throngs of worshipers to his church, which could hold up to ten thousand people.

 particular, suffered heavily from the shift to the city, where many of their traditional doctrines and pastoral approaches seemed irrelevant. Some of the larger houses of worship, with their stained-glass windows and thundering pipe organs, were tending to become merely sacred diversions or amusements. Reﬂecting the wealth of their prosperous parishioners, many of the old-line churches were distressingly slow to raise their voices against social and economic vices. John D. Rockefeller was a pillar of the Baptist Church, J. Pierpont Morgan of the Episcopal Church. Trinity Episcopal Church in New York actually owned some of the city’s worst slum property. Cynics remarked that the Episcopal Church had become “the Republican party at prayer.” Some religious leaders began to worry that in the ageold struggle between God and the Devil, the Wicked One was registering dismaying gains. The mounting emphasis was on materialism; too many devotees worshiped at the altar of avarice. Money was the accepted mea sure of achievement, and the new gospel of wealth proclaimed that God caused the righteous to prosper. Into this spreading moral vacuum stepped a new generation of liberal Protestants. With roots in the Unitarian revolt against orthodox Calvinism, liberal ideas came into the mainstream of American Protes-

 tantism between 1875 and 1925, despite frequent and bitter controversies with fundamentalists. Entrenched in the leadership and seminaries of the dominant denominations, liberal Protestants adapted religious ideas to modern culture, attempting to reconcile Christianity with new scientiﬁc and economic doctrines. They rejected biblical literalism, urging Christians to view biblical stories as models for Christian behavior rather than as dogma. They stressed the ethical teachings of the Bible and allied themselves with the reform-oriented “social gospel” movement and urban revivalists like Dwight Lyman Moody, a former shoe salesman who captivated audiences with his message of forgiveness. Their optimistic trust in community fellowship and their focus on earthly salvation and personal growth attracted many followers. They helped Protestant Americans reconcile their religious faith with modern, cosmopolitan ways of thinking. Simultaneously, the Roman Catholic and Jewish faiths were gaining enormous strength from the New Immigration. By 1900 Roman Catholics had become the largest single denomination, numbering nearly 9 million communicants. Cardinal James Gibbons (1834–1921), an urban Catholic leader devoted to American unity, was immensely popular with Roman Cath-

 The Impact of Darwin's Ideas

 olics and Protestants alike. Acquainted with every president from Johnson to Harding, he employed his liberal sympathies to assist the American labor movement. By 1890 the variety-loving Americans could choose from 150 religious denominations, 2 of them brandnew. One was the band-playing Salvation Army, whose soldiers without swords invaded America from Eng land in 1879 and established a beachhead on the country’s street corners. Appealing frankly to the down-andouters, the boldly named Salvation Army did much practical good, especially with free soup. The other important new faith was the Church of Christ, Scientist (Christian Science), founded by Mary Baker Eddy in 1879 after she had suffered much ill health. Preaching that the true practice of Christianity heals sickness, she set forth her views in a book entitled Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures (1875), which sold an amazing 400,000 copies before her death. A fertile ﬁeld for converts was found in America’s hurried, nerve-racked, and urbanized civilization, to which Eddy held out the hope of relief from discords and diseases through prayer as taught by Christian Science. By the time she died in 1910, she had founded an inﬂuential church that embraced several hundred thousand devoted worshipers. Urbanites also participated in a new kind of religious-afﬁ liated orga ni zation, the Young Men’s and Women’s Christian Associations. The YMCA and the YWCA, established in the United States before the Civil War, grew by leaps and bounds. Combining physical and other kinds of education with religious instruction, the “Y’s” appeared in virtually every major American city by the end of the nineteenth century.

Darwin Disrupts the Churches
 The old-time religion received many blows from modern trends, including a booming sale of books on comparative religion and on historical criticism as applied to the Bible. Most unsettling of all were the writings of the Eng lish naturalist Charles Darwin. In lucid prose he set forth the sensational theory that higher forms of life had slowly evolved from lower forms, through a process of random biological mutation and adaptation. Though not the ﬁ rst scientist to propose an evolutionary hypothesis, Darwin broke new ground with his idea of “natural selection.” Nature, in his view,



 blindly selected organisms for survival or death based on random, inheritable variations that they happened to possess. Some traits conferred advantages in the struggle for life, and hence better odds of passing them along to offspring. By providing a material explanation for the evolutionary process, Darwin’s theory explicitly rejected the “dogma of special creations,” which ascribed the design of each ﬁ xed species to divine agency. Darwin’s radical ideas evoked the wrath of scientists and laymen alike. Many zoologists, like Harvard’s Louis Agassiz, held fast to the old doctrine of “special creations.” By 1875, however, the majority of scientists in America and elsewhere had embraced the theory of organic evolution, though not all endorsed natural selection as its agent. Many preferred an alternative mechanism proposed earlier by the French biologist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, who argued that traits acquired during the course of an individual’s life could shape the future genetic development of a species. Lamarckians brieﬂy tamed the unsettling Darwinian view of chance mutation and competitive inheritance, but Darwin’s version would become scientiﬁc orthodoxy by the 1920s. Clergymen and theologians responded to Darwin’s theory in several ways. At ﬁ rst most believers joined scientists in rejecting his ideas outright. After 1875, by which time most natural scientists had embraced evolution, the religious community split into two camps. A conser vative minority stood ﬁ rmly behind the Scripture as the infallible Word of God, and they condemned what they thought was the “bestial hypothesis” of the Darwinians. Their rejection of scientiﬁc consensus

 As a student at Harvard Medical School, William James (1842–1910) was inﬂuenced by Darwinian science. He reviewed Darwin’s theory in his ﬁrst published article in 1865:

“


 A doctrine like that of Transmutation of Species . . . cannot but be treated with some respect; and when we ﬁnd that such naturalists, . . . many of whom but a few days ago were publicly opposing it, are now coming round, one by one, to espouse it, we may well doubt whether it may not be destined eventually to prevail.

”




Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


 spawned a muscular view of biblical authority that eventually gave rise to fundamentalism in the twentieth century. Most religious thinkers parted company with the conser vatives and ﬂatly refused to accept the Bible in its entirety as either history or science. These “accommodationists” feared that hostility toward evolution would alienate educated believers. Over time an increasing number of liberal thinkers were able to reconcile Darwinism with Christianity. They heralded the revolutionary theory as a newer and grander revelation of the ways of the Almighty. As one commentator observed, Some call it Evolution, And others call it God. Darwinism undoubtedly did much to loosen religious moorings and to promote skepticism among the gospel-glutted. While the liberal efforts at compromise did succeed in keeping many Americans in the pews, those compromises also tended to relegate religious teaching to matters of personal faith, private conduct, and family life. As science began to explain more of the external world, commentators on nature and society increasingly refrained from adding religious perspectives to the discussion.

The Lust for Learning
 Public education continued its upward climb. The ideal of tax-supported elementary schools, adopted on a nationwide basis before the Civil War, was still gathering strength. Americans were accepting the truism that a free government cannot function successfully if the people are shackled by ignorance. Beginning about 1870, more and more states were making at least a gradeschool education compulsory, and this gain, incidentally, helped check the frightful abuses of child labor. Spectacular indeed was the spread of high schools, especially by the 1880s and 1890s. Before the Civil War, private academies at the secondary level were common, and tax-supported high schools were rare, numbering only a few hundred. But the concept that a high-school education, as well as a grade-school education, was the birthright of every citizen was now gaining impressive support. By 1900 there were some six thousand high schools. In addition, free textbooks were being provided in increasing quantities by the taxpayers of the states during the last two decades of the century.

 Other trends were noteworthy. Teacher-training schools, then called “normal schools,” experienced a striking expansion after the Civil War. In 1860 there were only twelve of them, in 1910 over three hundred. Kindergartens, earlier borrowed from Germany, also began to gain strong support. The New Immigration in the 1880s and 1890s brought vast new strength to private Catholic parochial schools, which were fast becoming a major pillar of the nation’s educational structure. Public schools, though showering beneﬁts on children, excluded millions of adults. This deﬁciency was partially remedied by the Chautauqua movement, a successor to the lyceums, which was launched in 1874 on the shores of Lake Chautauqua, in New York. The organizers achieved gratifying success through nationwide public lectures, often held in tents and featuring well-known speakers, including the witty Mark Twain. In addition, there were extensive Chautauqua courses of home study, for which 100,000 people enrolled in 1892 alone. Crowded cities, despite their cancers, generally provided better educational facilities than the old oneroom, one-teacher red schoolhouse. The success of the public schools is conﬁ rmed by the falling of the illiteracy rate from 20 percent in 1870 to 10.7 percent in 1900. Americans were developing a profound faith, often misplaced, in formal education as the sovereign remedy for their ills.

Booker T. Washington and
Education for Black People
 War-torn and impoverished, the South lagged far behind other regions in public education, and African Americans suffered most severely. A staggering 44 percent of nonwhites were illiterate in 1900. Some help came from northern philanthropists, but the foremost champion of black education was an ex-slave, Booker T. Washington, who had slept under a board sidewalk to save pennies for his schooling. Called in 1881 to head the black normal and industrial school at Tuskegee, Alabama, he began with forty students in a tumbledown shanty. Undaunted, he taught black students useful trades so that they could gain self-respect and economic security. Washington’s self-help approach to solving the nation’s racial problems was labeled “accommodationist” because it stopped short of directly challenging white supremacy. Recognizing the depths of southern white racism, Washington avoided

Booker T. Washington and W. E. B. Du Bois




 Booker T. Washington (1856–1915) In a famous speech in New Orleans in 1895, Washington grudgingly acquiesced in social separateness for blacks. On that occasion, he told his largely white audience, “In all things that are purely social, we can be as separate as the ﬁngers, yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress.”

W. E. B.
Du Bois (1868–1963) In 1961, at the end of a  long lifetime of struggle for racial justice in the United States, Du Bois renounced his American citizenship at the age of ninety-three and took up residence in the newly independent African state of Ghana.

 the issue of social equality. Instead he grudgingly acquiesced in segregation in return for the right to develop—however modestly and painstakingly—the economic and educational resources of the black community. Economic independence would ultimately be the ticket, Washington believed, to black political and civil rights. Washington’s commitment to training young blacks in agriculture and the trades guided the curriculum at Tuskegee Institute and made it an ideal place for slave-born George Washington Carver to teach and research. After Carver joined the faculty in 1896, he became an internationally famous agricultural chemist who provided a much-needed boost to the southern economy by discovering hundreds of new uses for the lowly peanut (shampoo, axle grease), sweet potato (vinegar), and soybean (paint). Other black leaders, notably Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois, assailed Booker T. Washington as an “Uncle Tom” who

 was condemning their race to manual labor and perpetual inferiority. Born in Massachusetts, Du Bois was a mixture of African, French, Dutch, and Indian blood (“Thank God, no Anglo-Saxon,” he would add). After a determined struggle, he earned a Ph.D. at Harvard, the ﬁ rst of his race to achieve that goal. (“The honor, I assure you, was Harvard’s,” he said.) He demanded complete equality for blacks, social as well as economic, and helped found the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in 1909. Rejecting Washington’s gradualism and separatism, he argued that the “talented tenth” of the black community should be given full and immediate access to the mainstream of American life. An exceptionally skilled historian, sociologist, and poet, he died as a self-exile in Africa in 1963, at the age of ninety-ﬁve. Many of Du Bois’s differences with Washington reﬂected the contrasting life experiences of southern and northern blacks.



Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


W. E. B.
Du Bois (1868–1963) wrote in his 1903 classic, The Souls of Black Folk, 
“


 It is a peculiar sensation, this double consciousness, this sense of always looking at one’s self through the eyes of others, of measuring one’s self through the eyes of others. . . . One ever feels his two-ness—an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.

”


The Hallowed Halls of Ivy
 Colleges and universities also shot up like lusty young saplings in the decades after the Civil War. A college education increasingly seemed indispensable in the scramble for the golden apple of success (see Table 25.1). Even women and African Americans were ﬁ nding new opportunities for higher education. Women’s col-

 leges such as Vassar were gaining ground, and universities open to both genders were blossoming, notably in the Midwest. By 1880 every third college graduate was a woman. By the turn of the century, the black institutes and academies planted during Reconstruction had blossomed into a crop of southern black colleges. Howard University in Washington, D.C., Hampton Institute in Virginia, Atlanta University, and numerous others nurtured higher education for blacks until the civil rights movement of the 1960s made widespread attendance at white institutions possible. The truly phenomenal growth of higher education owed much to the Morrill Act of 1862. This enlightened law provided a generous grant of public lands to the states for support of education. Land-grant colleges, most of which became state universities, in turn bound themselves to provide certain ser vices, such as military training. The Hatch Act of 1887, extending the Morrill Act, provided federal funds for the establishment of agricultural experiment stations in connection with the land-grant colleges. These two pieces of legislation spawned over a hundred colleges and universities, including such institutions as the University of Cal i fornia (1868), Ohio State University (1870), and Texas A&M (1876).

Table 25.1 Educational Levels, 1870– 2005


Year


Number
 Graduating from High School

Number
 Graduating from College



16,000
24,000
44,000
95,000
156,000
311,000
667,000
1,221,000
1,199,700
1,858,000
2,889,000
3,043,000
2,503,000
2,833,000
3,109,000


9,371
12,896
15,539
27,410
37,199
48,622
122,484
186,500
432,058
392,440
792,656
929,417
1,048,631
1,237,875
1,439,264


Median Number
 of School Years Completed*

High School Graduates
 as a Percentage of 17-Year-Old Population

8.1†
8.2†
8.4†
8.6
9.3
10.5
12.2
12.5
12.7
NA NA

2.0%
2.5%
3.5%
6.4%
8.8%
16.8%
29.0%
50.8%
59.0%
69.5%
76.9%
71.4%
74.2%
NA NA

 *People twenty-ﬁve years and over. †1910–1930 based on retrogressions of 1940 data; 1940 was the ﬁ rst year mea sured. (Source: Folger and Nam, Education of the American Population, a 1960 Census Monograph.) (Sources: Digest of Education Statistics, 1992, 2006, a publication of the National Center for Education Statistics; Statistical Abstract of the United States, relevant years.)

Intellectual Frontiers




Stanford University Under
Construction, Late Nineteenth
Century


 Private philanthropy richly supplemented government grants to higher education. Many of the new industrial millionaires, developing tender social consciences, donated immense fortunes to educational enterprises. A philanthropist was cynically described as “one who steals privately and gives publicly.” In the twenty years from 1878 to 1898, these money barons gave away about $150 million. Noteworthy among the new private universities of high quality were Cornell (1865) and Leland Stanford Junior (1891), the latter founded in memory of the deceased ﬁ fteen-year-old only child of a builder of the Central Paciﬁc Railroad. The University of Chicago, opened in 1892, speedily forged into a front-rank position, owing largely to the lubricant of John D. Rockefeller’s oil millions. Rockefeller died at ninety-seven, after having given some $550 million for philanthropic purposes. Signiﬁcant also was the sharp increase in professional and technical schools, where modern laboratories were replacing the solo experiments performed by instructors in front of their classes. Towering among the specialized institutions was Johns Hopkins University, opened in 1876, which maintained the nation’s ﬁ rst high-grade graduate school. Several generations of American scholars, repelled by snobbish Eng lish cousins and attracted by painstaking Continental methods, had attended German universities. Johns Hopkins ably carried on the Germanic tradition of profusely footnoted tomes. Reputable scholars no longer had to go abroad for a gilt-edged graduate degree. Dr. Woodrow

 Wilson, among others, received his Ph.D. from Johns Hopkins.

The March of the Mind
 Homegrown inﬂuences shaped the modern American university as much as German models. Antebellum colleges had stressed the “unity of truth,” or the idea that knowledge and morality existed in a single system. Religious instruction in moral philosophy and natural theology served as pillars of the old classical curriculum. In the wake of the Darwinian challenge, when religion and science seemed less compatible, university reformers struggled to reconcile scientiﬁc education and religion to preserve the unity of moral and intellectual purpose. When that effort faltered, university educators abandoned moral instruction and divorced “facts” from “values.” Other pressures also helped doom the traditional curriculum. The new industrialization brought insistent demands for “practical” courses and specialized vocational training in the sciences. The elective system, where students selected courses, was gaining popularity. Reformers also emphasized ﬁelds of concentration to prepare students for entry into a profession. Specialization, not synthesis, became the primary goal of a university education. The reform spirit received a powerful boost in the 1870s when Dr. Charles W. Eliot, a vigorous young chemist, became president



Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


 of Harvard College and embarked upon a lengthy career of educational statesmanship. As a sign of the secularizing times, Eliot changed Harvard’s motto from Christo et Ecclesiae (For Christ and Church) to Veritas (Truth). Medical schools and medical science after the Civil War were prospering. Despite the enormous sale of patent medicines and so-called Indian remedies—“good for man or beast”—the new scientiﬁc gains were reﬂected in improved public health. Revolutionary discoveries abroad, such as those of the French scientist Louis Pasteur and the Eng lish physician Joseph Lister, left their imprint on America.* The popularity of heavy whiskers waned as the century ended; such hairy adornments were now coming to be regarded as germ traps. As a result of new health-promoting precautions, including campaigns against public spitting, life expectancy at birth was measurably increased. One of America’s most brilliant intellectuals, the slight and sickly William James (1842–1910), served for thirty-ﬁve years on the Harvard faculty. Through his numerous writings, he made a deep mark on many ﬁelds. His Principles of Psychology (1890) helped to establish the modern discipline of behavioral psychology. In The Will to Believe (1897) and Varieties of Religious Experience (1902), he explored the philosophy and psychology of religion. In his most famous work, Pragmatism (1907), he pronounced America’s greatest contribution to the history of philosophy the concept of pragmatism—that the truth of an idea was to be tested, above all, by its practical consequences (see “Makers of America: Pioneering Pragmatists,” pp. 618–619).

The Appeal of the Press
 Books continued to be a major source of ediﬁcation and enjoyment, for both juveniles and adults. Best sellers of the 1880s were generally old favorites like David Copperﬁeld and Ivanhoe. Well-stocked public libraries—the poor person’s university—were making encouraging progress, especially in Boston and New York. The magniﬁcent Library of Congress building, which opened its doors in 1897, provided thirteen acres of ﬂoor space in the largest and costliest ediﬁce of its kind in the world. A new era was inaugurated by the generous gifts of Andrew Carnegie. This openhanded Scotsman, book-starved

 *From Pasteur came the word pasteurize; from Lister came Listerine.

The “Penny Press”
The Chicago Daily
News was but one of
 several cheap, masscirculation newspapers that ﬂourished in the new urban environment of Gilded Age America.

 in his youth, contributed $60 million for the construction of nearly 1700 public libraries all over the country, with an additional 750 scattered around the Eng lishspeaking world from Great Britain to New Zealand. By 1900 there were about nine thousand free circulating libraries in America, each with at least three hundred books. Roaring newspaper presses, spurred by the invention of the Linotype in 1885, more than kept pace with the demands of a word-hungry public. But the heavy investment in machinery and plant was accompanied by a growing fear of offending advertisers and subscribers. Bare-knuckle editorials were, to an increasing degree, being supplanted by feature articles and noncontroversial syndicated material. The day of slashing journalistic giants like Horace Greeley was passing. Sensationalism, at the same time, was capturing the public taste. The semiliterate immigrants, com-

Reformers and Writers


 bined with strap-hanging urban commuters, created a proﬁtable market for news that was simply and punchily written. Sex, scandal, and other human-interest stories burst into the headlines, as a vulgarization of the press accompanied the growth of circulation. Critics now complained in vain of these “presstitutes.” Two new journalistic tycoons emerged. Joseph Pulitzer, Hungarian-born and near-blind, was a leader in the techniques of sensationalism in St. Louis and especially with the New York World. His use of colored comic supplements featuring the “Yellow Kid” gave the name yellow journalism to his lurid sheets. A close and ruthless competitor was the youthful William Randolph Hearst, who had been expelled from Harvard College for a crude prank. Able to draw on his Cal i fornia father’s mining millions, he ultimately built a powerful chain of newspapers, beginning with the San Francisco Examiner in 1887. Unfortunately, the overall inﬂuence of Pulitzer and Hearst was not altogether wholesome. Although both championed many worthy causes, both prostituted the press in their struggle for increased circulation; both “stooped, snooped, and scooped to conquer.” Their ﬂair for scandal and sensational rumor was happily somewhat offset by the introduction of syndicated material and by the strengthening of the news-gathering Associated Press, which had been founded in the 1840s.

Apostles of Reform
 Magazines partially satisﬁed the public appetite for good reading, notably old standbys like Harper’s, the Atlantic Monthly, and Scribner’s Monthly. Possibly the most inﬂuential journal of all was the liberal and highly intellectual New York Nation, which was read largely by professors, preachers, and publicists as “the weekly Day of Judgment.” Launched in 1865 by the Irish-born Edwin L. Godkin, a merciless critic, it crusaded militantly for civil-ser vice reform, honesty in government, and a moderate tariff. The Nation attained only a modest circulation—about ten thousand in the nineteenth century—but Godkin believed that if he could reach the right ten thousand leaders, his ideas through them might reach tens of millions. Another journalist-author, Henry George, was an original thinker who left an enduring mark. Poor in formal schooling, he was rich in idealism and in the milk of human kindness. After seeing poverty at its worst in India and land-grabbing at its greediest in Cal i fornia, he took pen in hand. His classic treatise Progress and Poverty undertook to solve “the great enigma of our



 Henry George (1839–1897) wrote in Progress and Poverty (1879),

“


 Our boasted freedom necessarily involves slavery, so long as we recognize private property in land. Until that is abolished, Declarations of Independence and Acts of Emancipation are in vain. So long as one man can claim the exclusive ownership of the land from which other men must live, slavery will exist, and as material progresses on, must grow and deepen!

”


 times”—“the association of progress with poverty.” According to George, the pressure of a growing population on a ﬁ xed supply of land unjustiﬁably pushed up property values, showering unearned proﬁts on owners of land. A single 100 percent tax on those windfall proﬁts would eliminate unfair inequalities and stimulate economic growth. George soon became a most controversial ﬁgure. His single-tax idea was so horrifying to the propertied classes that his manuscript was rejected by numerous publishers. Finally brought out in 1879, the book gradually broke into the best-seller lists and ultimately sold some 3 million copies. George also lectured widely in America and Britain, where he left an indelible mark on Eng lish Fabian socialism. George’s proposals resounded for decades. As late as 1903, a young female follower applied for a patent for “The Landlord’s Game,” which bore a striking resemblance to Parker Brothers’ later Monopoly, released in 1935. In the earlier game, the point was not to amass property, but to expose the unfair advantage enjoyed by the landlord and to show “how the single tax would discourage speculation.” Edward Bellamy, a quiet Massachusetts Yankee, was another journalist-reformer of remarkable power. In 1888 he published a socialistic novel, Looking Backward, in which the hero, falling into a hypnotic sleep, awakens in the year 2000. He “looks backward” and ﬁ nds that the social and economic injustices of 1887 have melted away under an idyllic government, which has nationalized big business to serve the public interest. To a nation already alarmed by the trust evil, the book had a magnetic appeal and sold over a million copies. Scores of Bellamy Clubs sprang up to discuss this mild utopian socialism, and they heavily inﬂuenced American reform movements near the end of the century.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
ThePioneering Great AfricanPragmatists American Migration 
N


 ineteenth-century Americans, among them proper Bostonians of an intellectual bent, had a habit of joining clubs. Luminaries such as the philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson, the novelist Nathaniel Hawthorne, and the natural scientist Louis Agassiz regularly met for sumptuous food and social conversation at the Saturday Club. Younger members of Boston’s polite society mimicked their elders at a ju nior edition known simply as “The Club.” In a world without academic conferences or professional forums, serious intellectual conversations in the United States tended to occur at private philosophical and literary societies, or simply at regular gatherings in a scholar’s home study. One club, founded in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in January 1872, lasted only nine months, but its members left a lasting mark on American intellectual life. “It was in the earliest Seventies that a knot of us young men in Old Cambridge, calling ourselves, halfironically, half-deﬁantly, ‘The Metaphysical Club,’ . . . used to meet, sometimes in my study, sometimes in that of William James,” recalled Charles Sanders Peirce in 1907. Peirce’s Metaphysical Club was hardly a success by most conventional standards. It kept no records of its proceedings. Its members missed meetings and (except for Peirce) made no mention of its existence in their letters, diaries, or writings. Some of their relatives despised it. A young Henry James (novelist brother of

 William) griped, “It gives me a headache merely to know of it.” But it did boast an impressive roster of members, including three young men in their early thirties who eventually became foundational ﬁgures in their respective ﬁelds: the logician and scientist Peirce; the medical doctor, psychologist, and philosopher William James; and the jurist and legal scholar Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. With their Harvard friend and fellow philosopher Chauncey Wright, they assembled frequently in their homes and, usually over a bottle of rum, argued over the meaning of life and the nature of the universe. Joined later by the philosophers John Dewey and George Herbert Mead, these thinkers gave earliest expression to a distinctive American philosophy known as “pragmatism.” Pragmatism sprouted in the fertile intellectual soil of the late-nineteenth-century Atlantic world. The ground had already been tilled by the naturalist Charles Darwin, whose revolutionary contributions to evolutionary science greatly inﬂuenced the early pragmatists. In place of ﬁ xed species, Darwin had posited a natural world of chance, change, and contingency. Thinkers like Peirce and James applied Darwin’s insights from biology to ﬁelds such as philosophy, logic, and psychology. To them old ways of thinking that assumed absolute truths, sanctioned by religious teaching or idealist philosophy, no longer made sense in the

William James (1842–1910), Physician, Psychologist,
 and Philosopher

Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914), Mathematician
 and Logician



Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. (1841–1935), Supreme Court
Justice and Scholar


John Dewey (1859–1952), Educator and Philosopher


 Darwinian age. Instead they welcomed the provisional, fallible nature of experimental knowledge. As James put it, pragmatism “means the open air and possibilities of nature, as against dogma, artiﬁciality, and the pretence of ﬁ nality in truth.” In short, they embraced uncertainty and developed an entire philosophical system around it. The true value of an idea, said the pragmatists, lay in its ability to solve problems. While all the pragmatists were far-ranging in their intellectual pursuits, Dewey demonstrated his faith in the unity of theory and practice by becoming a public intellectual and social activist. He founded the Laboratory School at the University of Chicago in 1896 to experiment with an educational philosophy rooted in “learning by doing.” He promoted an ethical vision of American society by linking arms with progressive reformers in the 1910s, and he championed democratic ideals by promoting third-party politics in the 1930s and anti-Stalinist agitation in the 1940s. Throughout a proliﬁc career that spanned three generations, Dewey continually stressed the positive virtues of experience, cooperation, and democracy, and he urged philosophers to abandon futile debates about knowledge in favor of tackling the real “problems of men.” Holmes, as a justice on the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court for twenty years and on the U.S. Supreme Court for another three decades, similarly followed pragmatism’s injunction to evaluate the effects of ideas rather than simply adopt prescriptions from the past. From his personal experience ﬁghting in the Civil War

 (where he nearly died from his wounds), Holmes acquired a bleak skepticism toward jurisprudence. While on the bench, he became renowned for his masterfully crafted dissents, most famously asserting the principle of “judicial deference” to legislatures in Lochner v. New York (1905) and protecting freedom of speech, even freedom for the “opinions that we loathe,” in Abrams v. United States (1919). Many commentators on pragmatism have considered it the quintessential expression of American practicality. To its critics pragmatism symbolizes the vulgar, can-do attitude and narrow anti-intellectualism of the American middle class. To its celebrants pragmatism offers a needed correction to conventional philosophy by accepting the uncertain and provisional nature of knowledge, reconciling science and culture, and promoting an ethical ideal of democracy. Pragmatism went out of fashion during the Cold War era (ca. 1945– 1990), when Americans believed in moral certainties such as the superiority of the United States and the value-free empiricism of science. But it has enjoyed a striking renewal in recent years. As new kinds of uncertainty ranging from terrorist violence to scientiﬁc dilemmas raise fresh challenges in the twenty-ﬁ rst century, many modern American intellectuals are harking back to pragmatism. First formulated in the cozy conﬁ nes of Cambridge’s Metaphysical Club more than a century ago, pragmatism offers today’s thinkers a philosophy of life built on experimentation, ethical commitment, and open-ended democratic debate.





Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


Postwar Writing
 As literacy increased, so did book reading. Post–Civil War Americans devoured millions of “dime novels,” usually depicting the wilds of the woolly West. Paintbedaubed Indians and quick-triggered gunmen like “Deadwood Dick” shot off vast quantities of powder, and virtue invariably triumphed. These lurid “paperbacks” were frowned upon by parents, but goggle-eyed youths read them in haylofts or in schools behind the broad covers of geography books. The king of the dime novelists was Harlan F. Halsey, who made a fortune by dashing off about 650 novels, often one in a day. General Lewis Wallace—lawyer, soldier, and author—was a colorful ﬁgure. Having fought with distinction in the Civil War, he sought to combat the prevailing wave of Darwinian skepticism with his novel Ben Hur: A Tale of the Christ (1880). A phenomenal success, the book sold an estimated 2 million copies in many languages, including Arabic and Chinese, and later appeared on stage and screen. It was the Uncle Tom’s Cabin of the anti-Darwinists, who found in it support for the Holy Scriptures. An even more popular writer was Horatio Alger, a Puritan-reared New Eng lander, who in 1866 forsook the pulpit for the pen. “Holy Horatio” wrote more than a hundred volumes of juvenile ﬁction that sold over 100 million copies. His stock formula was that a poor boy, through a combination of virtue, honesty, hard work, and bravery, could achieve success, wealth, and honor—a kind of survival of the purest, especially nonsmokers, nondrinkers, nonswearers, and nonliars. Although accusations of sexual impropriety haunted Alger throughout his life, he implanted in his readers moral lessons and the conviction that there is always room at the top (especially if one is lucky enough to save the life of the boss’s daughter and marry her). In poetry Walt Whitman was one of the few luminaries of yesteryear who remained active. Although shattered in health by ser vice as a Civil War nurse, he brought out successive—and puriﬁed—revisions of his hardy perennial, Leaves of Grass. The assassination of Lincoln inspired him to write two of the most moving poems in American literature, “O Captain! My Captain!” and “When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom’d.” The curious ﬁgure of Emily Dickinson, one of America’s most gifted lyric poets, did not emerge until 1886, when she died and her poems were discovered. A Massachusetts recluse, she wrote over a thousand short lyrics on scraps of paper. Only two were published dur-

 Emily Dickinson (1830–1886) A great American poet, she pursued intense intellectual relationships with several literary and cultural ﬁgures, including the abolitionist Thomas Wentworth Higginson.

 ing her lifetime, and those without her consent. As she wrote, How dreary to be somebody! How public, like a frog To tell your name the livelong June To an admiring bog!

Literary Landmarks
 In novel writing the romantic sentimentality of a youthful era was giving way to a rugged realism that reﬂected more faithfully the materialism of an industrial society. American authors now turned increasingly to the coarse human comedy and drama of the world around them to ﬁ nd their subjects. Two Missouri-born authors with deep connections to the South brought altogether new voices to the latenineteenth-century literary scene. The daring feminist author Kate Chopin (1851–1904) wrote candidly about

Literary Realism


 adultery, suicide, and women’s ambitions in The Awakening (1899). Largely ignored in her own day, Chopin was rediscovered by later readers, who cited her work as suggestive of the feminist yearnings that stirred beneath the surface of “respectability” in the Gilded Age. Mustachioed Mark Twain (1835–1910) had leapt to fame with The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County (1867) and The Innocents Abroad (1869). He teamed up with Charles Dudley Warner in 1873 to write The Gilded Age. An acid satire on post–Civil War politicians and speculators, the book gave a name to an era. With his scanty formal schooling in frontier Missouri, Twain typiﬁed a new breed of American authors in revolt against the elegant reﬁ nements of the old New England school of writing. Christened Samuel Langhorne Clemens, he had served for a time as a Mississippi riverboat pilot and later took his pen name, Mark Twain, from the boatman’s cry that meant “two fathoms.” After a brief stint in the armed forces, Twain journeyed westward to Cal i fornia, a trip he described, with a mixture of truth and tall tales, in Roughing It (1872). Many other books ﬂowed from Twain’s busy pen. The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (1876) preceded The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (1884), an American masterpiece that deﬁed Twain’s own deﬁ nition of a classic as “a book which people praise and don’t read.” His later years were soured by bankruptcy growing out of unwise investments, and he was forced to take to the lecture platform and amuse what he called “the damned human race.” A great tribute was paid to his self-tutored genius—and to American letters—when Eng land’s Oxford University awarded him an honorary degree in 1907. Journalist, humorist, satirist, and foe of social injustice, he made his most enduring contribution in capturing frontier realism and humor in the authentic American dialect. Another author who wrote out of the West and achieved at least temporary fame and fortune was Bret Harte (1836–1902). A foppishly dressed New Yorker, Harte struck it rich in Cal i fornia with gold-rush stories,

 In 1935 Ernest Hemingway (1899–1961) wrote,

“


 All modern American literature comes from one book by Mark Twain called Huckleberry Finn. . . . All American writing comes from that. There was nothing before. There has been nothing as good since.

”




Mark Twain (1835–1910) Born Samuel Langhorne
 Clemens, he was not only America’s most popular author but also a renowned platform lecturer. This photograph was taken at his house at Quarry Farm, near Elmira, New York, where he wrote major portions of both The Adventures of Tom Sawyer and The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.

 especially “The Luck of Roaring Camp” and “The Outcasts of Poker Flat.” Catapulted suddenly into notoriety by those stories, he never again matched their excellence or their popularity. He lived out his ﬁ nal years in London as little more than a hack writer. William Dean Howells (1837–1920), a printer’s son from Ohio, could boast of little schoolhouse education, but his busy pen carried him high into the literary circles of the East. In 1871 he became the editor in chief of the prestigious Boston-based Atlantic Monthly and was subsequently presented with honorary degrees from six universities, including Oxford. He wrote about



Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


 ordinary people and about contemporary and sometimes controversial social themes. A Modern Instance (1882) deals with the once-taboo subject of divorce. The Rise of Silas Lapham (1885) describes the trials of a newly rich paint manufacturer caught up in the caste system of Brahmin Boston. A Hazard of New Fortunes (1890) portrays the reformers, strikers, and socialists in Gilded Age New York. Stephen Crane (1871–1900), the fourteenth son of a Methodist minister, also wrote about the seamy underside of life in urban, industrial America. His Maggie: A Girl of the Streets (1893), a brutal tale about a poor prostitute driven to suicide, was too grim to ﬁ nd a publisher. Crane had to have it printed privately. He rose quickly to prominence with The Red Badge of Courage (1895), the stirring story of a bloodied young Civil War recruit (“fresh ﬁsh”) under ﬁ re. Crane himself had never seen a battle and wrote entirely from printed Civil War records. He died of tuberculosis in 1900, when only twenty-nine. Not all authors came from humble stock. The gifted Henry Adams (1838–1918)—son of Charles Francis Adams, grandson of John Quincy Adams, and greatgrandson of John Adams—turned unrivaled family connections into a proliﬁc career as a historian, novelist, and critic. In his nine-volume History of the United States During the Administrations of Jefferson and Madison (1889–1891), Adams defended his patrician heritage from posthumous attack. Alarmed by modern trends, Adams penned a paean to the bygone beauty and spiritual unity of the High Middle Ages in MontSaint-Michel and Chartres (1905). Similar anxieties about modernity resurfaced in his best-known work, The Education of Henry Adams (1907), an autobiographical account of his own failure to come to grips with the chaotic forces of twentieth-century life. Henry James (1843–1916), brother of Harvard philosopher William James, was a New Yorker who turned from law to literature. Taking as his dominant theme the confrontation of innocent Americans with subtle Europeans, James penned a remarkable number of brilliant novels, including Daisy Miller (1879), The Portrait of a Lady (1881), and The Wings of the Dove (1902). His book The Bostonians (1886) was one of the ﬁ rst novels about the rising feminist movement. James frequently made women his central characters, exploring their inner reactions to complex situations with a deftness that marked him as a master of “psychological realism.” Long resident in Eng land, he became a British subject shortly before his death. Candid portrayals of contemporary life and social problems were the literary order of the day by the turn

 Jack London (1876–1916), the socialist who hated strikebreakers known as “scabs,” said,

“


 No man has a right to scab so long as there is a pool of water to drown his carcass in, or a rope long enough to hang his body with. Judas Iscariot was a gentleman compared with a scab. For betraying his master, he had character enough to hang himself. A scab has not.

”


 of the century. Jack London (1876–1916), famous as a nature writer in such books as The Call of the Wild (1903), turned to depicting a possible fascistic revolution in The Iron Heel (1907). Frank Norris (1870–1902), like London a Cal i fornian, wrote The Octopus (1901), an earthy saga of the stranglehold in which railroad and corrupt politicians held Cal i fornia wheat ranchers. A sequel, The Pit (1903), dealt with the making and breaking of speculators on the Chicago wheat exchange. Two black writers, Paul Laurence Dunbar (1872– 1906) and Charles W. Chesnutt (1858–1932), brought another kind of realism to late-nineteenth-century literature. Dunbar through poetry—particularly his acclaimed Lyrics of Lowly Life (1896)—and Chesnutt through ﬁction—short stories in the Atlantic Monthly and The Conjure Women (1899)—embraced the use of black dialect and folklore, previously shunned by black authors, to capture the spontaneity and richness of southern black culture. Conspicuous among the new “social novelists” rising in the literary ﬁ rmament was Theodore Dreiser (1871–1945), a homely, gangling writer from Indiana. He burst upon the literary scene in 1900 with Sister Carrie, a graphically realistic narrative of a poor working girl in Chicago and New York. She becomes one man’s mistress, then elopes with another, and ﬁ nally strikes out on her own to make a career on the stage. The ﬁctional Carrie’s disregard for prevailing moral standards so offended Dreiser’s publisher that the book was soon withdrawn from circulation, though it later reemerged as an acclaimed American classic.

The New Morality
 Victoria Woodhull, who was real ﬂesh and blood, also shook the pillars of conventional morality when she publicly proclaimed her belief in free love in 1871.

Changes in Moral Standards




Victoria Woodhull (1838–1927) Pleads
 for Woman Suffrage Before the House Judiciary Committee, 1871 A colorful and charismatic ﬁgure, Woodhull became the ﬁrst woman to run for the presidency, in 1872, as the candidate of the Equal Rights party. Elizabeth Cady Stanton is seated directly behind her; at the extreme left sits Susan B. Anthony.

 Woodhull was a beautiful and eloquent divorcée, sometime stockbroker, and tireless feminist propagandist. Together with her sister, Tennessee Claﬂ in, she published a far-out periodical, Woodhull and Claﬂin’s Weekly. The sisters again shocked “respectable” society in 1872 when their journal struck a blow for the new morality by charging that Henry Ward Beecher, the most famous preacher of his day, had for years been carrying on an adulterous affair. Pure-minded Americans sternly resisted these affronts to their moral principles. Their foremost champion was a portly crusader, Anthony Comstock, who made lifelong war on the “immoral.” Armed after 1873 with a federal statute—the notorious “Comstock Law”—this self-appointed defender of sexual purity boasted that he had conﬁscated no fewer than 202,679 “obscene pictures and photos”; 4,185 “boxes of pills, powders, etc., used by abortionists”; and 26 “obscene pictures, framed on walls of saloons.” His proud claim was that he had driven at least ﬁ fteen people to suicide. The antics of the Woodhull sisters and Comstock exposed to daylight the battle in late-nineteenthcentury America over sexual attitudes and the place of women. Switchboards and typewriters in the booming cities became increasingly the tools of women’s independence. Young workingwomen headed to dance halls and nightclubs when the day was done, enjoying a new sense of freedom in the cities. This “new morality” began to be reﬂected in soaring divorce rates, the spreading practice of birth control, and increasingly

 frank discussion of sexual topics. By 1913, said one popular magazine, the chimes had struck “sex o’clock in America.”

Families and Women
 in the City The new urban environment was hard on families. Paradoxically, the crowded cities were emotionally isolating places. Urban families had to go it alone, separated from clan, kin, and village. As families increasingly became the virtually exclusive arena for intimate companionship and for emotional and psychological satisfaction, they were subjected to unprecedented stress. Many families cracked under the strain. The urban era launched the era of divorce. From the late nineteenth century dates the beginning of the “divorce revolution” that transformed the United States’ social landscape in the twentieth century (see Table 25.2). Urban life also dictated changes in work habits and even in family size. Not only fathers but mothers and even children as young as ten years old often worked, and usually in widely scattered locations. On the farm having many children meant having more hands to help with hoeing and harvesting; but in the city more children meant more mouths to feed, more crowding in sardine-tin tenements, and more human baggage to carry in the uphill struggle for social mobility. Not surprisingly, birthrates were still dropping and family size continued to shrink as the nineteenth century



Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


Table 25.2 Marriages and Divorces, 1890–2006*
Year


Marriages


Divorces


Ratio of Divorces
 to Marriages



570,000
709,000
948,166
1,274,476
1,126,856
1,595,879
1,667,231
1,523,381
2,159,000
2,390,000
2,443,000
2,160,000


33,461
55,751
83,045
170,505
195,961
264,000
385,144
393,000
708,000
1,189,000
1,182,000
 NA

1:17
1:12
1:11
1:7
1:5
1:6
1:4.3
1:3.8
1:3
1:2
1:2
 NA

 *Divorce data have not been collected by the federal government since 1998. (Sources: Statistical Abstract of the United States, relevant years; National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics Report, relevant years.)

 lengthened. Marriages were being delayed, and more couples learned the techniques of birth control. The decline in family size in fact affected rural Americans as well as urban dwellers, and old-stock “natives” as well as New Immigrants. Women were growing more independent in the urban environment, and in 1898 they heard the voice of a major feminist prophet, Charlotte Perkins Gilman. In that year the freethinking and original-minded Gilman published Women and Economics, a classic of feminist literature. A distant relative of Harriet Beecher Stowe and Catharine Beecher, Gilman displayed the restless temperament and reforming zeal characteristic of the remarkable Beecher clan. Strikingly handsome, she shunned traditional feminine frills and instead devoted herself to a vigorous regimen of physical exercise and philosophical meditation. In her masterwork of 1898, Gilman called on women to abandon their dependent status and contribute to the larger life of the community through productive involvement in the economy. Rejecting all claims that biology gave women a fundamentally different character from men, she argued that “our highly specialized motherhood is not so advantageous as believed.” She advocated centralized nurseries and cooperative kitchens to facilitate women’s participation in the work force—anticipating by more than half a century the day-care centers and convenience-food ser vices of a later day.

 Fiery feminists also continued to insist on the ballot. They had been demanding the vote since before the Civil War, but many high-minded female reformers had temporarily shelved the cause of women to battle for the rights of blacks. In 1890 militant suffragists formed the National American Woman Suffrage Asso-

 In 1906 progressive reformer Jane Addams (1860– 1935) argued that granting women the vote would improve the social and political condition of American cities:

“


 City housekeeping has failed partly because women, the traditional housekeepers, have not been consulted as to its multiform activities. The men have been carelessly indifferent to much of the civic housekeeping, as they have been indifferent to the details of the household. . . . City government demands the help of minds accustomed to detail and a variety of work, to a sense of obligation to the health and welfare of young children, and to a responsibility for the cleanliness and comfort of other people.

”




Feminist Stirrings


WA MT

 OR

 ID

NV CA

 ME

ND SD

 WY

 AZ

 MI

IA IL

 CO

KS OK

 NM

 NY

 WI

NE UT

 VT

 MN

RI PA OH WV

 KY

NJ CT DE

 VA

 MD

 NC

TN SC

AR MS

 TX

 IN

 MO

NH MA

 AL

 GA

LA FL

AK HI

 Full voting rights for women with effective date

 Women voting in presidential elections

 Women voting in primaries

 No voting by women

Map 25.2 Woman Suffrage Before the Nineteenth
 Amendment Dates show when a state or territory adopted woman suffrage. Note the concentration of woman-suffrage states in the West. Interactive Map

Woman Suffrage, by Evelyn Rumsey Cary
 After a century of struggle, women ﬁnally won a constitutionally guaranteed right to vote in 1920.

 ciation (NAWSA). Its founders included aging pioneers like Elizabeth Cady Stanton, who had helped organize the ﬁ rst women’s rights convention in 1848, and her long-time comrade Susan B. Anthony, the radical Quaker spitﬁ re who had courted jail by trying to cast a ballot in the 1872 presidential election. By 1900 a new generation of women had taken command of the suffrage battle. Their most effective leader was Carrie Chapman Catt, a pragmatic and businesslike reformer of relentless dedication. Signiﬁcantly, under Catt the suffragists de-emphasized the argument that women deserved the vote as a matter of right, because they were in all respects the equals of men. Instead Catt stressed the desirability of giving women the vote if they were to continue to discharge their traditional duties as homemakers and mothers in the in-

 creasingly public world of the city. Women had special responsibility for the health of the family and the education of children, the argument ran. On the farm, women could discharge these responsibilities in the separate sphere of the isolated homestead. But in the city, they needed a voice on boards of public health, police commissions, and school boards. By thus linking the ballot to a traditional deﬁ nition of women’s role, suffragists registered encouraging gains as the new century opened, despite continuing showers of rotten eggs and the jeers of male critics who insisted that women were made for loving, not for voting. Women were increasingly permitted to vote in local elections, particularly on issues related to the schools. Wyoming Territory—later called “the Equality State”—granted the ﬁ rst unrestricted suffrage to women in 1869. With this important breach in the dike made, many states followed Wyoming’s example (see Map 25.2). Paralleling these triumphs, most of the states by 1890 had passed laws to permit wives to own or control their property after marriage. City life also fostered the growth of a spate of women’s orga ni zations, including the General Federation of Women’s Clubs, which counted some 200,000 members in 1900. Meanwhile, in 1893 New Zealand became the ﬁ rst



Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


Prohibiting Alcohol and
Promoting Reform
 Alarming gains by Demon Rum spurred the temperance reformers to redoubled zeal. Especially obnoxious to them was the shutter-doored corner saloon, appropriately called “the poor man’s club.” The barroom helped keep both him and his family poor. Liquor consumption had increased during the nerve-racking days of the Civil War, and immigrant groups, accustomed to alcohol in the Old Country, were hostile to restraints. Whiskey-loving foreigners in Boston would rudely hiss temperance lecturers. Many tipplers charged, with some accuracy, that temperance reform amounted to a middle-class assault on working-class lifestyles. The National Prohibition party, orga nized in 1869, polled a sprinkling of votes in some of the ensuing presidential elections. Among the favorite songs of these sober souls were “I’ll Marry No Man If He Drinks,” “Vote Down the Vile Trafﬁc,” and “The Drunkard’s Doom.” Typical was this: Now, all young men, a warning take, And shun the poisoned bowl; ’Twill lead you down to hell’s dark gate, And ruin your own soul. Ida B. Wells (1862–1931) In 1892 Wells spearheaded a protest against the heinous lynching of three respected black businessmen in Memphis. Faced with threats on her life, Wells ﬂed from the South, persevering with her tenacious antilynching campaign from the North and from England (see below, or p. 626).

 nation to grant women equal suffrage rights, further inspiring American reformers. The reborn suffrage movement and other women’s orga ni zations largely excluded black women from their ranks. Fearful that an integrated campaign would compromise its efforts to get the vote, the National American Woman Suffrage Association limited membership to whites. Black women, however, created their own associations. Journalist and teacher Ida B. Wells inspired black women to mount a nationwide antilynching crusade. She also helped launch the black women’s club movement, which culminated in the establishment of the National Association of Colored Women in 1896.

 Militant women entered the alcoholic arena, notably when the Woman’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) was orga nized in 1874. The white ribbon was its symbol of purity; the saintly Frances E. Willard— also a champion of planned parenthood—was its leading spirit. Less saintly was the muscular and mentally deranged “Kansas Cyclone,” Carrie A. Nation, whose ﬁ rst husband had died of alcoholism. With her hatchet she boldly smashed saloon bottles and bars, and her “hatchetations” brought considerable disrepute to the prohibition movement because of the violence of her one-woman crusade. But rum was now on the run. The potent Anti-Saloon League was formed in 1893, with its members singing “The Saloon Must Go” and “Vote for Cold Water, Boys.” Female supporters sang “The Lips That Touch Liquor Must Never Touch Mine.” Statewide prohibition, which had made surprising gains in Maine and elsewhere before the Civil War, was sweeping new states into the “dry” column. The great triumph—but only a temporary one—came in 1919, when the national prohibition amendment (Eighteenth) was attached to the Constitution.

The Prohibition Crusade




 Doused for the Cause, Minnesota, 1878 These umbrella-toting temperance crusaders stood their ground, despite the water poured on them by the indignant wife of the billiard-hall owner.

Artistic Triumphs


Carrie Nation Advertised as a Lecturer
 Nation took her antidrink crusade to several universities, including Harvard and Yale, which she denounced as “hellholes.” Predictably, the students greeted her with wild burlesque. “All Nations Welcome but Carrie” became a standard saying in saloons throughout the land.

 Banners of other social crusaders were aloft. The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) was created in 1866 after its founder had witnessed brutality to horses in Russia. The American Red Cross was launched in 1881, with the dynamic and diminutive ﬁve-foot-tall Clara Barton, the “angel” of Civil War battleﬁelds, at the helm.

 John Adams had anticipated that his generation’s preoccupation with nation building would allow art to ﬂourish in the future, but the results long proved unspectacular. Portrait painting continued to appeal, as it had since the colonial era, but many of America’s ﬁ nest painters made their living abroad. James Whistler (1834–1903) did much of his work, including the celebrated portrait of his mother, in Eng land. This eccentric and quarrelsome Massachusetts Yankee had earlier been dropped from West Point after failing chemistry. “Had silicon been a gas,” he later jested, “I would have been a major general.” Another gifted portrait painter, likewise self-exiled in Eng land, was John Singer Sargent (1856–1925). His ﬂattering but somewhat superﬁcial likenesses of the British nobility were highly prized. Mary Cassatt, an American in exile in Paris, painted sensitive portrayals of women and children that earned her a place in the pantheon of the French impressionist painters whose work revolutionized the European art world after their 1874 debut. Other brush wielders, no less talented, brightened the artistic horizon. Self-taught George Inness (1825–



Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


 1894), who looked like a fanatic with his long hair and piercing gaze, became America’s leading landscapist. Thomas Eakins (1844–1916) attained a high degree of realism in his paintings, a quality not appreciated by portrait sitters who wanted their moles overlooked. Boston-born Winslow Homer (1836–1910), who as a youth had secretly drawn sketches in school, was perhaps the greatest painter of the group. Earthily American and largely resistant to foreign inﬂuences, he revealed rugged realism and boldness of conception. His canvases of the sea and of ﬁsherfolk were masterly, and probably no American artist has excelled him in portraying the awesome power of the ocean. Probably the most gifted sculptor yet produced by America was Augustus Saint-Gaudens (1848–1907). Born in Ireland of an Irish mother and a French father, he became an adopted American. Among his most moving works is the Robert Gould Shaw memorial, erected in Boston in 1897. It depicts Colonel Shaw, a young white “Boston Brahmin” ofﬁcer, leading his black troops into battle in the Civil War. Music, too, was gaining popularity. America of the 1880s and 1890s was assembling high-quality symphony orchestras, notably in Boston and Chicago. The famed Metropolitan Opera House of New York was erected in 1883. In its fabled “Diamond Horseshoe,” the newly rich, often un-

 World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893 Lagoons helped make the exposition’s main buildings, dubbed the “White City,” shimmer as the “City Beautiful,” in stark contrast to the blocks of dull gray buildings that dominated the real Chicago.

 der the pretense of enjoying the imported singers, would ﬂaunt their jewels, gowns, and furs. While symphonies and operas were devoted to bringing European music to elite American audiences, new strains of homegrown American music were sprouting in the South. Black folk traditions like spirituals and “ragged music” were evolving into the blues, ragtime, and jazz, which would transform American popular music in the twentieth century. A marvelous discovery was the reproduction of music by mechanical means. The phonograph, though a squeakily imperfect instrument when invented by the deaf Edison, had by 1900 reached over 150,000 homes. Americans were rapidly being dosed with “canned music,” as the “sitting room” piano increasingly gathered dust. A new generation of architects and planners looked to Europe to reshape American urban space with the “City Beautiful” movement. They wanted the new American city not just to look beautiful but also to convey a conﬁdent sense of harmony, order, and monumentality. To achieve these effects, they copied European styles of beaux arts classicism and planning ideas from the master builder of Paris, Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann, who in the 1860s had recast the City of Light with grand boulevards, parks, and public build-

Arts and Entertainment


 Hamlin Garland (1860–1940), the well known novelist and writer of short stories, was immensely impressed by the cultural value of Chicago’s Columbian Exposition. He wrote to his aged parents on their Dakota farm,

“


 Sell the cook stove if necessary and come. You must see this fair.

”


 ings. Aiming to assert America’s prominence among the greatest urban cultures of the Western world, architects constructed grandiose urban landmarks such as New York’s Grand Central Terminal. City planners such as Daniel Burnham redesigned Chicago and Washington, D.C., in the belief they could make them perfect progressive cities, inspiring civic virtue in their inhabitants. Burnham’s ﬁ rst major project, which came to symbolize the City Beautiful movement, was his design for



 the great World’s Columbian Exposition, held in Chicago in 1893. His imposing landscape of pavilions and fountains honored the four hundredth anniversary of Columbus’s ﬁ rst voyage. This so-called dream of loveliness, which was visited by 27 million people, did much to raise American artistic standards and promote city planning, although many fairgoers proved more interested in the contortions of a hootchy-kootchy dancer named “Little Egypt.”

The Business of
Amusement
 Fun and frolic were not neglected by the workaday American. The pursuit of happiness, heralded in the Declaration of Independence, had by century’s end become a frenzied scramble. People sought their pleasures ﬁercely, as they had overrun their continent and built their cities ﬁercely. And now they had more time to play.

 Buffalo Bill’s Wild West Show, ca. 1907 By the late 1800s, the “Wild West” was already passing into the realm of myth—and popular entertainment. Famed frontiersman William F. (“Buffalo Bill”) Cody (1846–1917) made his fortune showing off his tame cowboys and Indians to enthusiastic urban audiences in Europe as well as the United States. Buffalo Bill’s “Wild West”—an extravaganza featuring skilled horsemen from around the globe, including Turks, South American gauchos, Arabs, and Cossacks—was even more motley than the real one.



Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


 Varied diversions beckoned. The legitimate stage still ﬂourished, as appreciative audiences responded to the lure of the footlights. Vaudeville, with its coarse jokes and graceful acrobats, continued to be immensely popular during the 1880s and 1890s, as were minstrel shows in the South, now performed by black singers and dancers rather than by whites wearing blackface as in the North before the Civil War. The circus—high-tented and multiringed—ﬁ nally emerged full-blown. Phineas T. Barnum, the master showman who had early discovered that “the public likes to be humbugged,” joined hands with James A. Bailey in 1881 to stage the “Greatest Show on Earth.”* Colorful “Wild West” shows, ﬁ rst performed in 1883, were even more distinctively American. Headed by the knightly, goateed, and free-drinking William F. (“Buffalo Bill”) Cody, the troupe included warwhooping Indians, live buffalo, and deadeye marksmen. Among them was the girlish Annie Oakley. Riﬂe in hand, she could at thirty paces perforate a tossedup card half a dozen times before it ﬂuttered to the ground (hence the term Annie Oakley for a punched ticket and later for a free pass).

*Now Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus.


 Baseball, already widely played before the Civil War, was clearly emerging as the national pastime, if not a national mania. A league of professional players was formed in the 1870s, and in 1888 an all-star baseball team toured the world, using the pyramids as a backstop while in Egypt. Basketball was invented in 1891 by James Naismith, a YMCA instructor in Springﬁeld, Massachusetts. Designed as an active indoor sport that could be played during the winter months, it spread rapidly and enjoyed enormous popularity in the next century. A gladiatorial trend toward spectator sports, rather than participative sports, was exempliﬁed by football. This rugged game, with its dangerous ﬂying wedge, had become popular well before 1889, when Yale man Walter C. Camp chose his ﬁ rst “All American” team. The Yale-Princeton game of 1893 drew ﬁ fty thousand cheering fans, while foreigners jeered that the nation was getting sports “on the brain.” Even pugilism, with its long background of bareknuckle brutality, gained a new and gloved respectability in 1892. Agile “Gentleman Jim” Corbett, a scientiﬁc boxer, wrestled the world championship from the aging and alcoholic John L. Sullivan, the fabulous “Boston Strong Boy.” Two crazes swept the country in the closing decades of the century. First, croquet became all the rage,

 Cyclists on the Monterey Peninsula, California, 1888 Men and women alike took to the roads on the newfangled “two-wheelers.” Bicycling especially appealed to young women eager to escape nineteenth-century strictures against female exercise and bodily exposure.

Chronology


 though condemned by moralists of the “naughty nineties” because it exposed feminine ankles and promoted ﬂirtation. Second, the low-framed “safety” bicycle came to replace the high-seated model. By 1893 a million bicycles were in use, and thousands of young women, jokesters remarked, were turning to this new “spinning wheel,” one that offered freedom, not tedium The land of the skyscraper was plainly becoming



 more standardized, owing largely to the new industrialization. Although race and ethnicity assigned urban Americans to distinctive neighborhoods and workplaces, to an increasing degree they shared a common popular culture—playing, reading, shopping, and talking alike. As the century drew to a close, the explosion of cities paradoxically made Americans more diverse and more similar at the same time.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Charles Darwin publishes On the Origin of Species



 Mark Twain publishes The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn



 Morrill Act provides public land for higher education



 Louis Sullivan builds ﬁ rst skyscraper, in Chicago Linotype invented



 World’s ﬁ rst subway system opens in London



 Statue of Liberty erected in New York harbor



American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
 to Animals (ASPCA) created



 American Protective Association (APA) formed Hatch Act supplements Morrill Act



 Wyoming Territory grants women right to vote





 Edward Bellamy publishes Looking Backward American all-star baseball team tours world

 Woodhull and Claﬂin’s Weekly published





 Jane Addams founds Hull House in Chicago

 Metaphysical Club meets in Cambridge, Massachusetts



National American Woman Suffrage Association
 (NAWSA) formed



 Basketball invented



 Lillian Wald opens Henry Street Settlement in New York Anti-Saloon League formed World’s Columbian Exposition held in Chicago New Zealand grants women right to vote



 Library of Congress opens



 Charlotte Perkins Gilman publishes Women and Economics



 Kate Chopin publishes The Awakening



 Theodore Dreiser publishes Sister Carrie



 Henry Adams privately publishes The Education of Henry Adams



National Association for the Advancement of
 Colored People (NAACP) founded



Comstock Law




 Woman’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) orga nized Chautauqua education movement launched Impressionist artists debut in Paris



 Johns Hopkins University graduate school established



 Henry George publishes Progress and Poverty Dumbbell tenement introduced Mary Baker Eddy establishes Christian Science Salvation Army begins work in America



 Booker T. Washington becomes head of Tuskegee Institute American Red Cross founded Barnum and Bailey ﬁ rst join to stage “Greatest Show on Earth”



 First immigration-restriction laws passed



 Brooklyn Bridge completed Metropolitan Opera House built in New York



Chapter 25 America Moves to the City, 1865–1900


KEY TERMS
New Immigrants (600) settlement houses (607) liberal Protestants (610) Tuskegee Institute (613) land-grant colleges (614) pragmatism (616) yellow journalism (617) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) (624) Woman’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) (626) World’s Columbian Exposition (629) 
Jane Addams
Charles Darwin
Booker T. Washington
W. E. B.
Du Bois Joseph Pulitzer
William Randolph
Hearst


John Dewey
Horatio Alger
Mark Twain
Carrie Chapman Catt


To Learn More
John Bodnar, The Transplanted: A History of Immigrants in
Urban America (1985)
Irving Howe, World of Our Fathers (1976)
Kenneth T. Jackson, Crabgrass Frontier: The
Suburbanization of America (1985)
David Levering Lewis, W. E. B. Du Bois: Biography of a
Race, 1868–1919 (1993)
W. E. B.
Du Bois: The Fight for Equality and the American Century, 1919–1963 (2000)
Kathy Peiss, Cheap Amusements: Working Women and
 Leisure in Turn-of-the-Century New York (1986) Jacob Riis, How the Other Half Lives (1890) Daniel Rodgers, Atlantic Crossings: Social Politics in a Progressive Age (1998)

Roy Rosenzweig and Elizabeth Blackmar, The Park and the
People: A History of Central Park (1992)
Carroll Smith-Rosenberg, Disorderly Conduct: Visions of
Gender in Victorian America (1985)
 Ronald Takaki, Strangers from a Different Shore: A History of Asian Americans (1989)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Great West and
 the Agricultural Revolution




1865–1896
 Up to our own day American history has been in a large degree the history of the colonization of the Great West. The existence of an area of free land, its continuous recession, and the advance of American settlement westward, explain American development.

 The White Man, who possesses this whole vast country from sea to sea, who roams over it at pleasure, and lives where he likes, cannot know the cramp we feel in this little spot, with the undying remembrance of the fact, which you know as well as we, that every foot of what you proudly call America, not very long ago belonged to the red man.

W


 hen the Civil War crashed to a close, the frontier line was still wavering westward. A long fringe of settlement, bulging outward here and there, ran roughly north through central Texas and on to the Canadian border. Between this jagged line and the settled areas on the Paciﬁc slope, there were virtually no white

 people. The few exceptions were the islands of Mormons in Utah, occasional trading posts and gold camps, and several scattered Spanish Mexican settlements throughout the Southwest. Sprawling in expanse, the Great West was a rough square that mea sured about a thousand miles on each

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


 side. Embracing mountains, plateaus, deserts, and plains, it was the habitat of the Indian, the buffalo, the wild horse, the prairie dog, and the coyote. Twenty-ﬁve years later—that is, by 1890—the entire domain had been carved into states and the four territories of Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, and “Indian Territory,” or Oklahoma. Pioneers ﬂung themselves greedily on this enormous prize, as if to ravish it. Probably never before in human experience had so huge an area been transformed so rapidly.

The Clash of Cultures
 on the Plains Native Americans numbered about 360,000 in 1860, many of them scattered about the vast grasslands of the trans-Missouri West. But to their eternal misfortune, the Indians stood in the path of the advancing white pioneers. An inevitable clash loomed between an acquisitive, industrializing nation and the Indians’ lifeways, highly evolved over centuries to adapt to the demanding environment of the sparsely watered western plains. Migration and conﬂ ict—and sometimes dramatic cultural change—were no strangers in the arid West, even before the whites began to arrive. The Comanches had driven the Apaches off the central plains into the upper Rio Grande valley in the eighteenth century.

The Buffalo Hunt, by Frederic
Remington, 1890 A New Yorker who
 ﬁrst went west at the age of nineteen as a cowboy and ranch cook, Remington (1861–1909) became the foremost artist of the vanishing way of life of the old Far West. Once a common sight on the high plains, the kind of buffalo kill that Remington records here was a great rarity by the time he painted this scene in 1890. The once-vast herds of bison had long since been reduced to a pitiful few by the white man’s riﬂes and the increasingly concentrated use of the land by ever more constricted Indians.

Harried by the Mandans and Chippewas, the Cheyenne
 had abandoned their villages along the upper reaches of the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers in the century before the Civil War. The Sioux, displaced from the Great Lakes woodlands in the late eighteenth century, emerged onto the plains to prey upon the Crows, Kiowas, and Pawnees. Mounted on Spanish-introduced horses, peoples like the Cheyenne and the Sioux transformed themselves within just a few generations from foot-traveling, crop-growing villagers to wide-ranging nomadic traders and deadly efﬁcient buffalo hunters— so deadly that they threatened to extinguish the vast bison herds that had lured them onto the plains in the ﬁ rst place. When white soldiers and settlers edged onto the plains in the decades just before the Civil War, they accelerated a fateful cycle that exacerbated already ﬁerce enmities among the Indians and ultimately undermined the foundations of Native American culture. White intruders unwittingly spread cholera, typhoid, and smallpox among the native peoples of the plains, with devastating results. Equally harmful, whites put further pressure on the steadily shrinking bison population by hunting and by grazing their own livestock on the prairie grasses. As the once-mammoth buffalo herds dwindled, warfare intensiﬁed among the Plains tribes for ever-scarcer hunting grounds. “I am traveling all over this country, and am cutting the trees of my brothers,” an Arikara Indian told a U.S. Army ofﬁcer

Indians in the West




Pawnee Indians in Front of Their
Lodge, ca. 1868 The Pawnees of
 central Nebraska never made war on the United States, which they regarded as an ally in their own struggles against the marauding Sioux.

 along the Platte River in 1835. “I am kill ing their buffalo before my friends arrive so that when they come up, they can ﬁ nd no buffalo.” The federal government tried to pacify the Plains Indians by signing treaties with the “chiefs” of various

 As early as the Coronado expedition in 1541, Spanish explorers marveled at the Plains Indians’ reliance on the buffalo:

“


 With the skins [the Indians] build their houses; with the skins they clothe and shoe themselves; from the skins they make ropes and also obtain wool. From the sinews they make thread, with which they sew their clothing and likewise their tents. From the bones they shape awls, and the dung they use for ﬁrewood, since there is no fuel in all that land. The bladders serve as jugs and drinking vessels. They sustain themselves on the ﬂesh of the animals, eating it slightly roasted and sometimes uncooked. Taking it in their teeth, they pull with one hand; with the other they hold a large ﬂint knife and cut off mouthfuls, swallowing it half chewed, like birds. They eat raw fat, without warming it.

”


 “tribes” at Fort Laramie in 1851 and at Fort Atkinson in 1853. The treaties marked the beginnings of the reservation system in the West. They established boundaries for the territory of each tribe and attempted to separate the Indians into two great “colonies” to the north and south of a corridor of intended white settlement. But the white treaty makers misunderstood both Indian government and Indian society. “Tribes” and “chiefs” were often ﬁctions of the white imagination, which could not grasp the fact that many Native Americans, living in scattered bands, recognized only the authority of their immediate families or perhaps a band elder. And the nomadic culture of the Plains Indians was utterly alien to the concept of living out one’s life in the conﬁ nement of a deﬁ ned territory.

 One disheartened Indian complained to the white Sioux Commission created by Congress,

“


 Tell your people that since the Great Father promised that we should never be removed we have been moved ﬁve times. . . . I think you had better put the Indians on wheels and you can run them about wherever you wish.

”




Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


 In the 1860s the federal government intensiﬁed this policy and herded the Indians into still-smaller conﬁnes, principally the “Great Sioux reservation” in Dakota Territory and Indian Territory in present-day Oklahoma, into which dozens of southern Plains tribes were forced. The Indians surrendered their ancestral lands only when they had received solemn promises from Washington that they would be left alone and provided with food, clothing, and other supplies. Regrettably, the federal Indian agents were often corrupt. They palmed off moth-eaten blankets, spoiled beef, and other defective provisions on the friendless Indians. One of these cheating ofﬁcials, on an annual salary of $1,500, re-

 turned home after four years with an estimated “savings” of $50,000. For more than a decade after the Civil War, ﬁerce warfare between Indians and the U.S. Army raged in various parts of the West (see Map 26.1). Army troops, many of them recent immigrants who had, ironically, ﬂed Europe to avoid military ser vice, met formidable adversaries in the Plains Indians, whose superb horsemanship gave them bafﬂ ing mobility. Fully one-ﬁ fth of all U.S. Army personnel on the frontier were African American—dubbed “Buffalo Soldiers” by the Indians, supposedly because of the resemblance of their hair to the bison’s furry coat.

Map 26.1 Indian Wars, 1860–1890 Surrendering in 1877, Chief Joseph of the
 Nez Perce declared, “Our chiefs are killed. . . . The old men are all dead. . . . The little children are freezing to death. . . . I want to have time to look for my children. . . . Hear me, my chiefs. My heart is sick and sad. From where the sun now stands I will ﬁght no more forever.”

C A N A DA


Ft. Colville


Ft. Townsend


Battle of Bear Paw
Mountain 1877


Seattle


Portland


Ft.
Harney


 ak eR

Ft. Reno
.


Ft. Hall


Santa Fe


 ra d

Ft. Craig


Camp Grant
Massacre 1871


R.


Ft. Sumner


120ºW


Canyon de los
Embudos 1886
 Geronimo escapes.

 Major Indian battle 110ºW

Ft. Reno


 ARKANSAS

Red R.


 MISS.

Fort Worth


TEXAS
Ri o 
 TENN.

Jacksboro


Skeleton Canyon 1886
 Geronimo surrenders.

N


 KY.

Arkansas R.


Red River War
1874–1875


M E X ICO


LA. 30°N

Austin
90ºW


San Antonio
100ºW


 ALA.

Waco


Ft. Quitman
 de

Fort


Bisbee


INDIAN TERR.

 an Gr

 Chief Joseph’s route

 KIOWA

 COMANCHE

Ft. Crittenden


 MISSOURI

R.


 ARAPAHO

 pi

Ft. Garland


 IND.

 ILL.

SOUTHERN CHEYENNE

ARIZONA TERR. NEW MEXICO TERR.
Amarillo Gila 
M
 is

Ft. Riley
 Massacre KANSAS Topeka Ft. Larned Dodge City Wichita Ft. Lyon

Ft. Crawford


Canyon de Chelly


Salt River
Canyon 1872
Phoenix


40°N


Lincoln


 sip

San Diego


 NAVAJO

 IOWA

 sis

Los
Angeles


 lo Co

R.


 r i R. s ou Mis

 CALIFORNIA

Las
Vegas


 o

.
Platte R


Ft. Kearney


Colorado
City


 MICH.

Ft. Randall


S


Cedar City


Cheyenne


 WISCONSIN

COLORADO
Denver Sand Creek 
Ft. Cameron


 NEVADA

San Jose


Ft. Ridgely


Wounded
Ft. Niobrara
Knee
 1890 NEBRASKA

 IN

UTAH TERR.

 ARAPAHO

 TA

Salt Lake
City


Ft. Churchill
Sonoma
Austin
Sacramento
PAIUTE
San Francisco Esmeralda 
Ft. Laramie


 UN

Ft. Halleck


Carson
City


 CHEYENNE

Ft.
Bridger


 McDermit

 MINN.

Ft. Sully


B LAC K H I LLS


 WYOMING

BANNOCK SHOSHONE
Ft. 
Ft.
Bidwell


Ft. Abercrombie


S. DAK.

Ft. Meade


 MO

 COAST

 MODOC

Little Bighorn


 IDAHO

Sn


Ft.
Klamath


Bismarck


 SIOUX

Ft. Yates


Y


NEZ PERCE

 OREGON

N. DAK.

 MONTANA

 CK

 RAN

Ft. Berthold


Ft.
Lapwaj


Columbia R.


 RO

 GES

 WASHINGTON

PACIFIC OCEAN

Interactive Map


G ulf of
Mexico






300 Km.


300 Mi.


The Indian Wars


Receding Native Population


 A young lieutenant told Colonel Chivington that to attack the Indians would be a violation of pledges:

 The Indian wars in the West were often savage clashes. Aggressive whites sometimes shot peaceful Indians on sight, just to make sure they would give no trouble. At Sand Creek, Colorado, in 1864, Colonel J. M. Chivington’s militia massacred in cold blood some four hundred Indians who apparently thought they had been promised immunity. Women were shot praying for mercy, children had their brains dashed out, and braves were tortured, scalped, and unspeakably mutilated. Cruelty begot cruelty. In 1866 a Sioux war party attempting to block construction of the Bozeman Trail to the Montana goldﬁelds ambushed Captain William J. Fetterman’s command of eighty-one soldiers and civilians in Wyoming’s Bighorn Mountains. The Indians left not a single survivor and grotesquely mutilated the corpses. One trooper’s face was spitted with 105 arrows. George Armstrong Custer, the buckskin-clad “boy general” of Civil War fame, now demoted to colonel and turned Indian ﬁghter, wrote that Fetterman’s annihilation “awakened a bitter feeling toward the savage perpetrators.” The cycle of ferocious warfare intensiﬁed.

 His reply was, bringing his ﬁst down close to my face, ‘Damn any man who sympathizes with Indians.’ I told him what pledges were given the Indians. He replied that he ‘had come to kill Indians, and believed it to be honorable to kill Indians under any and all circumstances.’



“


”


 The Fetterman massacre led to one of the few— though short-lived—Indian triumphs in the plains wars, the Battle of the Little Bighorn. In another Treaty of Fort Laramie, signed in 1868, the government abandoned the Bozeman Trail. The sprawling “Great Sioux reservation” was guaranteed to the Sioux tribes. But in 1874 a new round of warfare with the Plains Indians began when Custer led a “scientiﬁc” expedition into the Black Hills of South Dakota (part of the Sioux reservation) and announced that he had discovered gold. Hordes of greedy gold-seekers swarmed into the Sioux

 Battle of the Little Big Horn, by Amos Bad Heart Bull This depiction of the battle by an Oglala Sioux tribal historian and artist shows Crazy Horse (in spotted war paint, center) ﬁring on a trooper of Custer’s 7th Cavalry. The ground is littered with the bodies of dead soldiers.



Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


 lands. The aggrieved Sioux, aided by the Cheyenne and Arapaho Indians, took to the warpath, inspired by the inﬂuential and wily Sitting Bull. Colonel Custer’s 7th Cavalry, nearly half of them immigrants, set out to suppress the Indians and to return them to the reservation. Attacking what turned out to be a superior force of some 2,500 well-armed warriors camped along the Little Bighorn River in presentday Montana, the “White Chief with Yellow Hair” and

 Geronimo (ca. 1823–1909), Also Known by His Apache Name, Goyahkla (One Who Yawns) In 1851 Mexican troops killed Geronimo’s mother and wife and three of his children, initiating his lifelong hatred of Mexicans. Ironically, in later life, when he repeatedly ﬂed the intolerable conﬁnement of reservations in the United States, he sought refuge—and freedom—in Mexico. Persuaded at last to surrender to American authorities in 1886, he spent the remainder of his life on reservations in Florida, Alabama, and Oklahoma.

 about 250 ofﬁcers and men were completely wiped out in 1876 when two supporting columns failed to come to their rescue. The Indians’ victory was short-lived. In a series of battles across the northern plains in the ensuing months, the U.S. Army relentlessly hunted down the Indians who had humiliated Custer. One band of Nez Perce Indians in northeastern Oregon were goaded into daring ﬂ ight in 1877 when U.S. authorities tried to herd them onto a reservation. Chief Joseph ﬁnally surrendered his breakaway band of some seven hundred Indians after a tortuous, seventeenhundred-mile, three-month trek across the Continental Divide toward Canada. There Joseph hoped to rendezvous with Sitting Bull, who had taken refuge north of the border after the Battle of the Little Bighorn. Betrayed into believing they would be returned to their ancestral lands in Idaho, the Nez Perces instead were sent to a dusty reservation in Kansas, where 40 percent of them perished from disease. The survivors were eventually allowed to return to Idaho. Fierce Apache tribes of Arizona and New Mexico were the most difﬁcult to subdue. Led by Geronimo, whose eyes blazed hatred of the whites, they were pursued into Mexico by federal troops using the sunﬂashing heliograph, a communication device that impressed the Indians as “big medicine.” Scattered remnants of the warriors were ﬁnally persuaded to surrender after the Apache women had been exiled to Florida. The Apaches ultimately became successful farmers in Oklahoma. This relentless ﬁ re-and-sword policy of the whites at last shattered the spirit of the Indians. The vanquished Native Americans were ﬁ nally ghettoized on reservations, where they could theoretically preserve their cultural autonomy but were in fact compelled to eke out a sullen existence as wards of the government. Their white masters had at last discovered that the Indians were much cheaper to feed than to ﬁght. Even so, for many decades they were almost ignored to death. The “taming” of the Indians was engineered by a number of factors. Of cardinal importance was the federal government’s willingness to back its land claims with military force. Almost as critical was the railroad, which shot an iron arrow through the heart of the West. Locomotives could bring out unlimited numbers of troops, farmers, cattlemen, sheepherders, and settlers. The Indians were also ravaged by the white people’s diseases, to which they showed little resistance, and by their ﬁ rewater, which they could resist even less. Above all, the virtual extermination of the buffalo doomed the Plains Indians’ nomadic way of life.

Federal Indian Policy


Bellowing Herds of Bison
 Tens of millions of buffalo—described by early Spaniards as “hunchback cows”—blackened the western prairies when white Americans ﬁ rst arrived. These shaggy, lumbering animals were the staff of life for Native Americans (see “Makers of America: The Plains Indians,” pp. 640–641). Their ﬂesh provided food; their dried dung provided fuel (“buffalo chips”); their hides provided clothing, lariats, and harnesses. When the Civil War closed, some 15 million of these meaty beasts were still grazing on the western plains. In 1868 a Kansas Paciﬁc locomotive had to wait eight hours for a herd to amble across the tracks. Much of the food supply of the railroad construction gangs came from leathery buffalo steaks. William “Buffalo Bill” Cody—sinewy, telescope-eyed, and a crack shot—killed over 4,000 animals in eighteen months while employed by the Kansas Paciﬁc. With the building of the railroad, the massacre of the herds began in deadly earnest. The creatures were slain for their hides, for their tongues or a few other choice cuts, or for sheer amusement. “Sportsmen” on lurching railroad trains would lean out the windows and blaze away at the animals to satisfy their lust for slaughter or excitement. Such wholesale butchery left fewer than a thousand buffalo alive by 1885, and the once-numerous beasts were in danger of complete extinction. The whole story is a shocking example of the greed and waste that accompanied the conquest of the continent.

The End of the Trail
 By the 1880s the national conscience began to stir uneasily over the plight of the Indians. Helen Hunt Jackson, a Massachusetts writer of children’s literature, pricked the moral sense of Americans in 1881 when she published A Century of Dishonor. The book chronicled the sorry record of government ruthlessness and chicanery in dealing with the Indians. Her later novel Ramona (1884), a love story about discrimination against Cal i fornia Indians, sold some 600,000 copies and further inspired sympathy for the Indians. Debate seesawed. Humanitarians wanted to treat the Indians kindly and persuade them thereby to “walk the white man’s road.” Yet hard-liners insisted on the current policy of forced containment and brutal punishment. Neither side showed much respect for



 Civil War veteran and long-time Indian ﬁghter General Philip Sheridan (1831–1888) reﬂected on the wars against the Indians:

“


 We took away their country and their means of support, broke up their mode of living, their habits of life, introduced disease and decay among them, and it was for this and against this they made war. Could anyone expect less?

”


 Native American culture. Christian reformers, who often administered educational facilities on the reservations, sometimes withheld food to force the Indians to give up their tribal religions and assimilate to white society. In 1884 these zealous white souls joined with military men in successfully persuading the federal govern ment to outlaw the sacred Sun Dance. When the “Ghost Dance” cult later spread to the Dakota Sioux, the army bloodily stamped it out in 1890 at the so-called Battle of Wounded Knee. In the ﬁghting thus provoked, an estimated two hundred Indian men, women, and children were killed, as well as twenty-nine invading soldiers. The misbegotten offspring of the movement to reform Indian policy was the Dawes Severalty Act of 1887. Reﬂecting the forced-civilization views of the reformers, the act dissolved many tribes as legal entities, wiped out tribal ownership of land, and set up individual Indian family heads with 160 free acres. If the Indians behaved themselves like “good white settlers,” they would get full title to their holdings, as well as citizenship, in twenty-ﬁve years. The probationary period was later extended, but full citizenship was granted to all Indians in 1924. Former reservation land not allotted to the Indians under the Dawes Act was to be sold to railroads and white settlers, with the proceeds used by the federal government to educate and “civilize” the native peoples. In 1879 the government had already funded the Carlisle Indian School in Pennsylvania, where Native American children, separated from their tribes, were taught Eng lish and inculcated with white values and customs. “Kill the Indian and save the man” was the school founder’s motto. In the 1890s the government expanded its network of Indian boarding schools and sent “ﬁeld matrons” to the reservations to teach

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
Plains TheThe Great AfricanIndians American Migration 
T


 he last of the native peoples of North America to bow before the military might of the whites, the Indians of the northern Great Plains long defended their lands and their ways of life against the American cavalry. After the end of the Indian wars, toward the close of the nineteenth century, the Plains tribes struggled on, jealously guarding their communities against white encroachment. Crowded onto reservations, subject to ever-changing federal Indian policies, assailed by corrupt settlers and Indian agents, the Plains Indians have nonetheless preserved much of their ancestral culture to this day. Before Europeans ﬁ rst appeared in North America in the sixteenth century, the vast plains from northern Texas to Saskatchewan were home to some thirty different tribes. There was no typical Plains Indian; each tribe spoke a distinct language, practiced its own religion, and formed its own government. When members of different bands met on the prairies, communication depended on a special sign language. Indians had ﬁ rst trod the arid plains to pursue sprawling herds of antelope, elk, and especially buf-

A
Comanche Village, by George Catlin, 1834 



 falo—all important sources of protein. But these early peoples of the plains were not exclusively hunters: the women were expert farmers, coaxing lush gardens of pumpkins, squash, corn, and beans from the dry but fertile soil. Still, the shaggy pelt and heavy ﬂesh of the buffalo constituted the staff of life on the plains. Hunted by men, the great bison were butchered by women, who used every part of the beast. They fashioned horns and hooves into spoons, and intestines into containers. They stretched sinews into strong bowstrings and wove buffalo hair into ropes. Meat not immediately eaten was pounded into pemmican— thin strips of smoked or sun-dried buffalo ﬂesh mixed with berries and stuffed into rawhide bags. The nomadic Plains Indians sought what shelter they could in small bands throughout the winter, gathering together in summer for religious ceremonies, socializing, and communal buffalo hunts. At ﬁ rst these seasonal migrations required arduous loading and carting. The Indians carried all their possessions or heaped them on wheelless carts called travois, which were dragged by dogs—their only beasts of burden.

A
Sioux Carving Horses were essential to the culture of the Plains Indians, and they often carved likenesses of horses killed in battle. Note the red-stained holes depicting this horse’s wounds. (right) A Cheyenne Cradleboard for Carrying a Baby 
 Then in the sixteenth century, the mounted Spanish conquistadores ventured into the New World. Their steeds—some of them escaping to become mustangs, the wild horses of the American West, and others acquired by the Indians in trade—quickly spread over the plains. The horse revolutionized Indian societies, for a time turning the Plains tribes into efﬁcient hunting machines that promised to banish hunger from the prairies. But horse-mounted hunters turned out to be too efﬁcient: overhunting made buffalo ever harder to ﬁ nd. The plains pony also ignited a furious competition for grazing lands, for trade goods, and for ever more horses, so that wars of aggression and of revenge became increasingly bitter and frequent. The European invasion soon eclipsed the shortlived era of the horse. After many battles the Plains Indians found themselves crammed together on tiny

 Chan-Chä-Uiá-Teüin, Teton Sioux Woman, by Karl Bodmer, ca. 1830s Bodmer, a German artist, painted this woman’s portrait during an expedition to the Great Plains. Her name means “Woman of the Crow Nation,” which seems to suggest that she was taken captive from the Sioux’s mortal enemies, the Crows.

 reservations, clinging with tired but determined ﬁngers to their traditions. Although much of Plains Indian culture persists to this day, the Indians’ free-ranging way of life has passed into memory. As Black Elk, an Oglala Sioux, put it, “Once we were happy in our own country and we were seldom hungry, for then the twoleggeds and the four-leggeds lived together like relatives, and there was plenty for them and for us. But then the Wasichus [white people] came, and they made little islands for us . . . and always these islands are becoming smaller, for around them surges the gnawing ﬂood of Wasichus.”





Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


Lakotas Receiving Rations at Standing Rock Reservation, ca. 1881
 Once the scourge of the plains, the Lakota (part of the Sioux tribes) were reduced by the 1890s to the humiliation of living on government handouts.

 Native American women the art of sewing and to preach the virtues of chastity and hygiene. The Dawes Act struck directly at tribal orga ni zation and tried to make rugged individualists out of the Indians. This legislation ignored the inherent reliance of traditional Indian culture on tribally held land, liter-



 ally pulling the land out from under them. By 1900 Indians had lost 50 percent of the 156 million acres they had held just two decades earlier (see Map 26.2). The forced-assimilation doctrine of the Dawes Act remained the cornerstone of the government’s ofﬁcial Indian policy for nearly half a century, until the Indian





The Indian
Removal Act
 of 1830 eliminated all Indian land rights east of the Mississippi River.



 The Dawes Act in 1887 changed common tribal lands into individual allotments. Nearly 90 million acres of tribal land were lost before the act was repealed in 1932. Since then, through court battles and federal recognition of old claims, some Indian lands have been restored to the tribes.

 Indian lands

 Present-day boundaries

 White settlement

 Map 26.2 Vanishing Lands Once masters of the continent, Native Americans have been squeezed into just 2 percent of U.S. territory. (Source: Copyright © 2000 by The New York Times. Reprinted by permission.)

Interactive Map


The Mining and Cattle Frontiers


 The Indian spokesman Plenty Coups (1848–1932) said in 1909,

“


 I see no longer the curling smoke rising from our lodge poles. I hear no longer the songs of the women as they prepare the meal. The antelope have gone; the buffalo wallows are empty. Only the wail of the coyote is heard. The white man’s medicine is stronger than ours. . . . We are like birds with a broken wing.

”


 Reorga ni zation Act (the “Indian New Deal”) of 1934 partially reversed the individualistic approach and belatedly tried to restore the tribal basis of Indian life (see p. 838). Under these new federal policies, defective though they were, the Indian population started to mount slowly. The total number had been reduced by 1887 to about 243,000—the result of bullets, bottles, and bacteria—but the census of 2000 counted more than 1.5 million Native Americans, urban and rural.



Mining: From Dishpan
 to Ore Breaker The conquest of the Indians and the coming of the railroad were life-giving boons to the mining frontier. The golden gravel of Cal i fornia continued to yield “pay dirt,” and in 1858 an electrifying discovery convulsed Colorado. Avid “ﬁ fty-niners” or “Pikes Peakers” rushed west to rip at the ramparts of the Rockies. But there were more miners than minerals, and many goldgrubbers, with “Pikes Peak or Bust” inscribed on the canvas of their covered wagons, creaked wearily back with the added inscription, “Busted, by Gosh.” Yet countless bearded fortune-seekers stayed on, some to strip away the silver deposits, others to extract nonmetallic wealth from the earth in the form of golden grain. “Fifty-niners” also poured feverishly into Nevada in 1859, after the fabulous Comstock Lode had been uncovered. A fantastic amount of gold and silver, worth more than $340 million, was mined by the “Kings of the Comstock” from 1860 to 1890. The scantily populated state of Nevada, “child of the Comstock Lode,” was prematurely railroaded into the Union in 1864, partly to provide three electoral votes for President Lincoln.

Hydraulic Mining, Nevada,
 1866 Once miners had panned and dredged the most accessible gold from streambeds, they ripped open the earth itself in search of other deposits. Highpressure streams of water, delivered through huge nozzles called “monitors,” washed away entire hillsides and created the nightmarish, debris-strewn landscapes that still scar western mountains and foothills.



Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


 Smaller “lucky strikes” drew frantic gold-and silverseekers into Montana, Idaho, and other western states. Boomtowns, known as “Helldorados,” sprouted from the desert sands like magic. Every third cabin was a saloon, where sweat-stained miners drank adulterated liquor (“rotgut”) in the company of accommodating women. Lynch law and hempen vigilante justice, as in early Cal i fornia, preserved a crude semblance of order in the towns. And when the “diggings” petered out, the gold-seekers decamped, leaving eerily picturesque “ghost towns,” such as Virginia City, Nevada, silhouetted in the desert. Begun with a boom, these towns ended with a whimper. Once the loose surface gold was gobbled up, orebreaking machinery was imported to smash the goldbearing quartz. This operation was so expensive that it could ordinarily be undertaken only by corporations pooling the wealth of stockholders. Gradually the age of big business came to the mining industry. Dusty, bewhiskered miners, dishpans in hand, were replaced by impersonal corporations, with their costly machinery and trained engineers. The once-independent goldwasher became just another day laborer. Yet the mining frontier had played a vital role in conquering the continent. Magnetlike, it attracted population and wealth, while advertising the wonders of the Wild West. Women as well as men found opportunity, running boardinghouses or working as prostitutes. They won a kind of equality on the rough frontier that earned them the vote in Wyoming (1869), Utah (1870), Colorado (1893), and Idaho (1896) long before their sisters in the East could cast a ballot. The amassing of precious metals helped ﬁ nance the Civil War, facilitated the building of railroads, and intensiﬁed the already bitter conﬂ ict between whites and Indians. The outpouring of silver and gold enabled the Treasury to resume specie payments in 1879 and injected the silver issue into American politics. “Silver Senators,” representing the thinly peopled “acreage states” of the West, used their disproportionate inﬂuence to promote the interests of the silver miners. Finally, the mining frontier added to American folklore and literature, as the writings of Bret Harte and Mark Twain so colorfully attest.

Beef Bonanzas and
 the Long Drive When the Civil War ended, the grassy plains of Texas supported several million tough, long-horned cattle.

 Dressed to Kill Cowboys came in all varieties and sizes in the wild and woolly frontier West—and in all kinds of garb as well.

 These scrawny beasts, whose horn spreads sometimes reached eight feet, were killed primarily for their hides. There was no way of getting their meat proﬁtably to market. The problem of marketing was neatly solved when the transcontinental railroads thrust their iron ﬁ ngers into the West. Cattle could now be shipped alive to the stockyards, and under “beef barons” like the Swifts and Armours, the highly industrialized meatpacking business sprang into existence as a main pillar of the economy. Drawing upon the gigantic stockyards at Kansas City and Chicago, the meatpackers could ship their fresh products to the East Coast in the newly perfected refrigerator cars. A spectacular feeder of the new slaughterhouses was the “Long Drive” (see Map 26.3). Texas cowboys— black, white, and Mexican—drove herds numbering from one thousand to ten thousand head slowly over the unfenced and unpeopled plains until they reached a railroad terminal. The bawling beasts grazed en route on the free government grass. Favorite terminal points were ﬂyspecked “cow towns” like Dodge City—“the Bibulous Babylon of the Frontier”—and Abilene (Kansas), Ogallala (Nebraska), and Cheyenne (Wyoming). At Abilene order was maintained by Marshal James B. (“Wild Bill”) Hickok, a fabulous gunman who reputedly

Landmark Land Laws


N.


 te

Missou
 ri

 NEBRASKA

R.


Kansas City 40°N
 an

K


&


Ri
 oG

 ran de

.


R.R
.


 sa s

 KANSAS

Ellsworth Abilene


Pacific R.R.


Arkansas R.


 rand e

Atchison Top
 eka &

Dodge
City


R.R
.
Goodnig
 ht– Loving Trail

Atchison T
 opeka

Trail


Fe


NEW MEXICO TERR.

Chisholm Trail


 rn Weste

Rio
G


OKLA. TERR.

 ta & San

Pe
 co

So u
 the r

 sR .

San
Angelo


 n

Pa
 c

 ific

R.R.


Bandera
San Antonio
 o Ri

 ARK.

300 Km.
300 Mi.


30°N


G ul f of
Mexi co


 e



N


 d an Gr





INDIAN TERR.
Red R. 
 TEXAS



Sedalia


Newton Baxter
Wichita Springs MO.


.


Santa Fe


Se
 da lia and Baxter Sprin gs Tra il

 ver

 MTS

Denver


 COLORADO

R


De n


R.


 ROCKY

Omaha


Union Pacific R.R.


Cheyenne


 IOWA

R.


 WYOMING

Pla
 t

 Cattle trail Railroad

M EX I CO


 Eastern boundary of open range



 brought out the homesteader and the sheepherder. Both of these intruders, sometimes amid ﬂying bullets, built barbed-wire fences that were too numerous to be cut down by the cowboys. Furthermore, the terrible winter of 1886–1887, with blinding blizzards reaching 68 degrees below zero, left thousands of dazed cattle starving and freezing. Overexpansion and overgrazing likewise took their toll, as the cowboys slowly gave way to plowboys. The only escape for the stockmen was to make cattle-raising a big business and avoid the perils of overproduction. Breeders learned to fence their ranches, lay in winter feed, import blooded bulls, and produce fewer and meatier animals. They also learned to organize. The Wyoming Stock-Growers’ Association, especially in the 1880s, virtually controlled the state and its legislature. This was the heyday of the cowboy. The equipment of the cowhand—from “shooting irons” and tengallon hat to chaps and spurs—served a useful, not an ornamental, function. A “genuwine” gun-toting cowpuncher, riding where men were men and smelled like horses, could justiﬁably boast of his toughness. These bowlegged Knights of the Saddle, with their colorful trappings and cattle-lulling songs, became part of American folklore. Many of them, perhaps ﬁve thousand, were blacks, who especially enjoyed the newfound freedom of the open range.

100°W


The Farmers’ Frontier
Map 26.3 Cattle Trails


Interactive Map


 killed only in self-defense or in the line of duty and who was fatally shot in the back in 1876 while playing poker. The steer was king in a Cattle Kingdom richly carpeted with grass. As long as lush grass was available, the Long Drive proved proﬁtable—that is, to the luckier cattlemen who escaped Indians, stampedes, cattle fever, and other hazards. From 1866 to 1888, bellowing herds, totaling over 4 million steers, were driven northward from the beef bowl of Texas. The steer was king in a Cattle Kingdom richly carpeted with grass. What the Lord giveth, the Lord also can taketh away. The railroad made the Long Drive, and the railroad unmade the Long Drive, primarily because the locomotives ran both ways. The same rails that bore the cattle from the open range to the kitchen range

 Miners and cattlemen created the romantic legend of the West, but it was the sober sodbuster who wrote the ﬁ nal chapter of frontier history. A fresh day dawned for western farmers with the Homestead Act of 1862. The new law allowed a settler to acquire as much as 160 acres of land (a quarter-section) by living on it for ﬁve years, improving it, and paying a nominal fee of about $30. The Homestead Act marked a drastic departure from previous policy. Before the act, public land had been sold primarily for revenue; now it was to be given away to encourage a rapid ﬁ lling of empty spaces and to provide a stimulus to the family farm—“the backbone of democracy.” The new law was a godsend to a host of farmers who could not afford to buy large holdings. During the forty years after its passage, about half a million families took advantage of the Homestead Act to carve out new homes in the vast open stretches. Yet ﬁve times that many families purchased



Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896
Acres
11,000,000
10,000,000
9,000,000
8,000,000
7,000,000
6,000,000
FRONTIER LINE ENDS

5,000,000
4,000,000
3,000,000
2,000,000


 Figure 26.1 Homesteads from the Public Lands (acreage legally transferred to private ownership) See related Map 26.5 on p. 658.

1,000,000


 their land from the railroads, the land companies, or the states (see Figure 26.1). The Homestead Act often turned out to be a cruel hoax. The standard 160 acres, quite adequate in the well-watered Mississippi basin, frequently proved pitifully inadequate on the rain-scarce Great Plains. Thousands of homesteaders, perhaps two out of three, were forced to give up the one-sided struggle against drought. Uncle Sam, it was said, bet 160 acres against ten dollars that the settlers could not live on their homesteads for ﬁve years. One of these unsuccessful gambles in Greer County, western Oklahoma, inspired a folk song: Hurrah for Greer County! The land of the free, The land of the bedbug, grasshopper, and ﬂea; I’ll sing of its praises, I’ll tell of its fame, While starving to death on my government claim. Naked fraud was spawned by the Homestead Act and similar laws. Perhaps ten times more of the public domain wound up in the clutches of land-grabbing promoters than in the hands of bona ﬁde farmers. Unscrupulous corporations would use “dummy” homesteaders—often their employees or aliens bribed with cash or a bottle of beer—to grab the best properties containing timber, minerals, and oil. Settlers would later swear that they had “improved” the property by erecting a “twelve by fourteen” dwelling, which turned out to mea sure twelve by fourteen inches. The railways also played a major role in developing the agricultural West, largely through the proﬁtable marketing of crops. Some railroad companies induced Americans and European immigrants to buy the cheap land earlier granted to the railroads by the government. The Northern Paciﬁc Railroad at one time had nearly a

















 thousand paid agents in Europe distributing roseate leaﬂets in various languages. Shattering the myth of the Great American Desert opened the gateways to the agricultural West even wider. The windswept prairies were for the most part treeless, and the tough sod had been pounded solid by millions of buffalo hooves. Pioneer explorers and trappers had assumed that the soil must be sterile, simply because it was not heavily watered and did not support immense forests. But once the prairie sod was broken with heavy iron plows pulled by four yokes of oxen— the “plow that broke the plains”—the earth proved astonishingly fruitful. “Sodbusters” poured onto the prairies. Lacking trees for lumber and fuel, they built homes from the very sod they dug from the ground and burned corncobs for warmth. In making the arduous journey across the western prairies, many women settlers discovered new conﬁdence in their abilities. Early on in her trek, Mary Richardson Walker (1811–1897) conﬁded in her diary that

“


 my circumstances are rather trying. So much danger attends me on every hand. A long journey before me, going I know not whither, without mother or sister to attend me, can I expect to survive it all?

”


 Only a month later, she recorded that

“


 in the afternoon we rode thirty-ﬁve miles without stopping. Pretty well tired out, all of us. Stood it pretty well myself.

”




Landmark Land Laws
120°W


110°W


100°W


90°W


80°W


50°N


C A N A D A


R
G R EAT BASI N

Wine


Wheat


Beef
 cattle

Beef
 cattle Fruit Wheat

Wine


PAC I F IC

Beef
 cattle

Beef
 cattle

Wheat


Wheat


Beef
 cattle

60–80


Under 10


40–60


 20 inch rainfall line

20–40


 Corn Major agricultural product

Corn


Wheat
Corn


Corn


Wheat


Tobacco


Tobacco
Beef
 cattle

N


Wheat


Hogs
Corn
Wheat


Corn
Wheat


Hay
Corn


Wheat


Tobacco


Tobacco
Wheat
Rice


Corn
Cotton
Beef
 cattle

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

Cotton
Corn
Beef
 cattle

Beef
 cattle

 Mean annual rainfall (inches) 10–20

N


40°


Wheat


Hogs
Corn


Sheep


Cotton


Cotton


Corn
Cotton


Over 80


Hay


Dairy


Beef
 cattle

 OCEAN

Wheat
Dairy


N S
P L A I


Wheat


N S
T A I
U N
M O


 COA

S TA


L


K Y


Sheep


Wheat


Dairy


C


Wheat


A T
G R E


 RAN

O


 GE

70°W


30°N


Sugar
 cane Rice

Rice


 Gu lf o f M exic o

M E X I C O
100°W






400 Km.


400 Mi.


 Map 26.4 Average Annual Precipitation, with Major Agricultural Products, 1900 Northern Hemisphere storms typically circle the globe in a west-to-east direction. Much of the life-nourishing water in these storms is dumped as rainfall on the western slopes of the Paciﬁc coastal ranges and the Rocky Mountains, creating huge “rain shadows” in the Great Basin and in the western Great Plains. Westward-faring pioneers had to learn new agricultural techniques when they pushed settlement into the drought-prone regions west of the 100th meridian, as reﬂected in the patterns of crop distribution by 1900. Interactive Map

 The Homesteader’s Wife, by Harvey Dunn Women as well as men toiled without shade or respite on the sunscorched and wind-parched Great Plains.



Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


 WA

 NH

30.8%


 MT

 ND

31.3%


 OR

 VT 14.4% ME 7.6% 0.8%

3.0%


 MN

49.7%


 ID

6.9%


 SD

65.0%


 WY

50.6%


 CA

47.0%


 UT

66.5%


 IL

1.9%


 KS

1.1%


 AZ

50.1%


 PA

 IA

 CO

34.9%


 MI

0.9%


3.0%


 OK

 NM

3.0%


34.2%


11.1%


7.3%


 MS

1.9%


 VA

10.0%


 NC

 TN

 AR

 AL

3.7%


 NJ 0.5%

3.9%
2.9%


 WV

3.0%


6.6%


12.0%


 RI

0.8%


 CT

 DE

1.7%


2.3%


 KY

6.6%


 TX

2.5%


 OH

 IN

 MO

5.1%


2.1%


 NY

1.1%


10.0%


 NE

 NV

91.7%


 MA

 WI

5.7%


4.8%


 MD

3.3%


 DC

29.5%


 SC

 GA

6.4%


6.2%


 LA

5.2%


 FL

13.3%


 Percentage of public lands within each state, 2002 Over 40%

5–10%


20–40%


Under 5%


10–20%


 Map 26.5 Myth and Reality in the West American folklore pictures the western United States as a land of rugged individualists who tamed the wild region with grit and brawn. The reality is that the federal government is by far the West’s largest landowner—and that federal projects, especially dam building, have done more to shape the region than all the cowboys and farmers put together. (Sources: Center of the American West; Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2003.) Interactive Map

 Lured by higher wheat prices resulting from crop failures elsewhere in the world, settlers in the 1870s rashly pushed still farther west, onto the poor, marginal lands beyond the 100th meridian. That imaginary line, running north to south from the Dakotas through west Texas, separated two climatological regions—a well-watered area to the east, and a semiarid area to the west (see Map 26.4). Bewhiskered and one-armed geologist John Wesley Powell, explorer of the Colorado River’s Grand Canyon and director of the U.S. Geological Survey, warned in 1874 that beyond the 100th meridian so little rain fell that agriculture was impossible without massive irrigation. Ignoring Powell’s advice, farmers heedlessly chewed up the crusty earth in western Kansas, eastern Colorado, and Montana. They quickly went broke as a six-year drought in the 1880s further desiccated the al ready dusty region. Western Kansas lost half its population between 1888 and 1892. “There is no God west of Salina,” one hapless homesteader declared. In the wake of the devastating drought, the new technique of “dry farming” took root on the plains. Its methods of frequent shallow cultivation supposedly were adapted to the arid western environment, but

 over time “dry farming” created a ﬁ nely pulverized surface soil that contributed to the notorious “Dust Bowl” several decades later (see p. 837). Other adaptations to the western environment were more successful. Tough strains of wheat, resistant to cold and drought, were imported from Russia and blossomed into billowing yellow carpets. Wise farmers abandoned corn in favor of sorghum and other droughtresistant grains. Barbed wire, perfected by Joseph F. Glidden in 1874, solved the problem of how to build fences on the treeless prairies. Eventually federally ﬁ nanced irrigation projects— on a colossal scale, beyond even what John Wesley Powell had dreamed—caused the Great American Desert to bloom. A century after Powell’s predictions, arching dams had tamed the Missouri and Columbia Rivers and had so penned up and diverted the canyon-gnawing Colorado that its mouth in the Gulf of Cal i fornia was dry. More than 45 million acres were irrigated in seventeen western states. In the long run, the hydrau lic engineers had more to do with shaping the modern West than all the trappers, miners, cavalrymen, and cowboys ever did (see Map 26.5). As one engineer boasted, “We enjoy pushing rivers around.”

 Robert Louis Stevenson’s Transcontinental Journey, 1879 he celebrated Scottish writer Robert Louis Stevenson, author of such enduring classics as Treasure Island, Kidnapped, and The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, journeyed from Scotland to Cal i fornia in 1879 to rendezvous with his American ﬁancée, Frances Osbourne. Between New York and San Francisco, Stevenson traveled on the transcontinental railroad line completed just ten years earlier, and he dutifully recorded his impressions of America, the West in particular, as he made his way toward Cal i fornia. Stevenson’s account of his trip provides an unusually gifted writer’s vivid portrait of the trans-Mississippi West at the close of the era of the Indian wars. Like all travelogues, Steven-

T


 son’s colorful tale may reveal as much about the traveler as it does about the things he saw. Yet historians frequently make use of such documents to reconstruct the original appearance and texture of places that were once the exotic destinations of adventurous travelers, before they were transformed by the onrush of modernity. In the passages reproduced here, inspired by the view as Stevenson’s train passed through Nebraska and Wyoming, what features of the landscape does the author ﬁ nd most remarkable? How does he portray the railroad? Source: Robert Louis Stevenson, Across the Plains (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1897).

THE PLAINS OF NEBRASKA . . .
We were at sea—there is no other adequate expression—on the plains of Nebraska. . . . It was a world almost without a feature; an empty sky, an empty earth; front and back, the line of railway stretched from horizon to horizon, like a cue across a billiard-board; on either hand, the green plain ran till it touched the skirts of heaven. . . . [G]razing beasts were seen upon the prairie at all degrees of distance and diminution; and now and again we might perceive a few dots beside the railroad which grew more and more distinct as we drew nearer till they turned into wooden cabins, and then dwindled and dwindled in our wake until they melted into their surroundings, and we were once more alone upon the billiard-board. The train toiled over this inﬁnity like a snail; and being the one thing moving, it was wonderful what huge proportions it began to assume in our regard. . . . [That] evening we left Laramie [Wyoming]. . . . And yet when day came, it was to shine upon the same broken and unsightly quarter of the world. Mile upon mile, and not a tree, a bird, or a river. Only down the long, sterile cañons, the train shot hooting and awoke the resting echo. That train was the one piece of life in all the deadly land; it was the one actor, the one spectacle ﬁt to be observed in this paralysis of man and nature. And when I think how the railroad has been pushed through this unwatered wilderness and haunt of savage tribes, and now will bear an emigrant for some £12 from the Atlantic to the Golden Gates; how at each stage of the construction, roaring, impromptu cities, full of gold and lust and death, sprang up and then died away again, and are now but wayside stations in the desert; how in these uncouth places pig-tailed Chinese pirates worked side by side with border rufﬁans and broken men from Europe, talking together in a mixed dialect, mostly oaths, gambling, drinking, quarrelling and murdering like wolves; how the plumed hereditary lord of all America heard, in this last fastness, the scream of the ‘bad medicine waggon’ charioting his foes; and then when I go on to remember that all this epical turmoil was conducted by gentlemen in frock coats, and with a view to nothing more extraordinary than a fortune and a subsequent visit to Paris, it seems to me, I own, as if this railway were the one typical achievement of the age in which we live, as if it brought together into one plot all the ends of the world and all the degrees of social rank, and offered to some great writer the busiest, the most extended, and the most varied subject for an enduring literary work. . . . 




Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


The Far West Comes of Age
 The Great West experienced a fantastic surge in migration from the 1870s to the 1890s. A parade of new western states proudly joined the Union. Boomtown Colorado, offspring of the Pikes Peak gold rush, was greeted in 1876 as “the Centennial State.” In 1889–1890 a Republican Congress, eagerly seeking more Republican electoral and congressional votes, admitted in a wholesale lot six new states: North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Washington, Idaho, and Wyoming. The Mormon Church formally—and belatedly, in many Americans’ eyes—banned polygamy in 1890, but not until 1896 was Utah deemed worthy of admission. Only Oklahoma, New Mexico, and Arizona remained to be lifted into statehood from contiguous territory on the mainland of North America. In a last gaudy ﬂ ing, the federal government made available to settlers vast stretches of fertile plains formerly occupied by the Indians in the district of Oklahoma (“the Beautiful Land”). Scores of overeager and well-armed “sooners,” illegally jumping the gun, had entered Oklahoma Territory. They had to be evicted repeatedly by federal troops, who on occasion would shoot the intruders’ horses. On April 22, 1889, all was in readiness for the legal opening, and some 50,000 “boomers” were poised expectantly on the boundary line. At high noon the bugle shrilled, and a horde of “eighty-niners” poured in on lathered horses or careening vehicles. That night a lonely spot on the prairie had mushroomed into the tent city of Guthrie, with over 10,000 people. By the end of the year, Oklahoma boasted 60,000 inhabitants, and Congress made it a territory. In 1907 it became the “Sooner State.”

The Fading Frontier
 In 1890—a watershed date—the superintendent of the census announced that for the ﬁ rst time in America’s experience, a frontier line was no longer discernible. All the unsettled areas were now broken into by isolated bodies of American settlement. The “closing” of the frontier inspired one of the most inﬂuential essays ever written about American history—Frederick Jackson Turner’s “The Signiﬁcance of the Frontier in American History” in 1893 (see “Thinking Globally: The Great Frontier,” pp. 652–653). As the nineteenth century neared its sunset, the westward-tramping American people were disturbed

 to ﬁ nd that their fabled free land was going or had gone. The secretary of war had prophesied in 1827 that ﬁve hundred years would be needed to ﬁ ll the West. But as the nation ﬁ nally recognized that its land was not inexhaustible, seeds were planted to preserve the vanishing resource. The government set aside land for national parks—ﬁ rst Yellowstone in 1872, followed by Yosemite and Sequoia in 1890. But the frontier was more than a place; it was also a state of mind and a symbol of opportunity. Its passing ended a romantic phase of the nation’s internal development and created new economic and psychological problems. Traditionally footloose, Americans have been notorious for their mobility. The nation’s farmers, unlike the peasants of Europe, have seldom remained rooted to their soil. The land, sold for a proﬁt as settlement closed in, was often the settler’s most proﬁtable crop. Much has been said about the frontier as a “safety valve.” The theory is that when hard times came, the unemployed who cluttered the city pavements merely moved west, took up farming, and prospered. In truth, relatively few city dwellers, at least in the populous eastern centers, migrated to the frontier during depressions. Most of them did not know how to farm; few of them could raise enough money to transport themselves west and then pay for livestock and expensive machinery. But the safety-valve theory does have some validity. Free acreage did lure to the West a host of immigrant farmers who otherwise might have remained in the eastern cities to clog the job markets and to crowd the festering and already overpopulated slums. And the very possibility of westward migration may have induced urban employers to maintain wage rates high enough to discourage workers from leaving. But the real safety valve by the late nineteenth century was in western cities like Chicago, Denver, and San Francisco, where failed farmers, busted miners, and displaced easterners found ways to seek their fortunes. Indeed, after about 1880 the area from the Rocky Mountains to the Paciﬁc Coast was the most urbanized region in America, mea sured by the percentage of people living in cities. U.S. history cannot be properly understood unless it is viewed in light of the westward-moving experience. As Frederick Jackson Turner wrote, “American history has been in a large degree the history of the colonization of the Great West.” The story of settling and taming the trans-Mississippi West in the late nineteenth century was but the last chapter in the saga of colonizing

The Vanishing Frontier


 various American “wests” since Columbus’s day—from the West Indies to the Chesapeake shore, from the valleys of the Hudson and Connecticut Rivers to the valleys of the Tennessee and Ohio Rivers. And yet the trans-Mississippi West formed a distinct chapter in that saga and retains even to this day much of its uniqueness. There the Native American peoples waged their last and most desperate struggle against colonization, and there most Native Americans live today. There “Anglo” culture collided most directly with Hispanic culture—the historic rival of the Anglo-Americans for dominance in the New World— and the Southwest remains the most Hispanicized region in America. There America faced across the Paciﬁc to Asia, and there most Asian Americans dwell today. There the scale and severity of the environment posed their largest challenges to human ambitions, and there the environment, with its aridity and stillmagical emptiness, continues to mold social and political life, and the American imagination, as in no other part of the nation. And in no other region has the federal government, with its vast landholdings, its subsidies to the railroads, and its massive irrigation projects, played so conspicuous a role in economic and social development. The westward-moving pioneers and the country they confronted have assumed mythic proportions in the American mind. They have been immortalized by such writers as Bret Harte, Mark Twain, Helen Hunt Jackson, and Francis Parkman, and by such painters as George Catlin, Frederic Remington, and Albert Bier-

Harvesting in Washington State
 this turn-of-the-century scene.



 stadt. For better or worse, those pioneers planted the seeds of American civilization in the immense western wilderness. The life we live, they dreamed of; the life they lived, we can only dream.

The Farm Becomes a Factory
 The situation of American farmers, once jacks-andjills-of-all-trades, was rapidly changing. They had raised their own food, fashioned their own clothing, and bartered for other necessities with neighbors. Now high prices persuaded farmers to concentrate on growing single “cash” crops, such as wheat or corn, and use their proﬁts to buy foodstuffs at the general store and manufactured goods in town or by mail order. The Chicago ﬁ rm of Aaron Montgomery Ward sent out its ﬁ rst catalogue—a single sheet—in 1872. Farmers were becoming both consumers and producers in the world economy, as their crops journeyed by rail and ship to distant parts of the globe. Large-scale farmers, especially in the immense grain-producing areas of the Mississippi Valley, were now both specialists and businesspeople. As cogs in the vast industrial machine, these farmers were intimately tied to banking, railroading, and manufacturing. They had to buy expensive machinery in order to plant and harvest their crops. A powerful steam engine could drag behind it simultaneously the plow, seeder, and harrow. The speed of harvesting wheat was dramatically increased in the 1870s by the invention of the

 Humans, horses, and machines join forces in

THINKING GLOBALLY

The Great Frontier


T


 he American pioneers who surged westward in the nineteenth century were part of a great global land grab that changed lives and landscapes on several continents. From the Australian Outback to the Canadian prairies, from the Argentine pampas to the Russian steppes and the African savannas, millions of mostly white settlers poured into vast new territories and claimed them as their own. Everywhere, the settlers encountered indigenous peoples who had lived on those lands since time immemorial. With their superiority in weaponry, transportation, and political organization, every where the newcomers prevailed. By the century’s close, they had displaced or destroyed countless native peoples and extended their dominion over parts of the planet once considered too remote or rugged to be habitable. The American frontier soon became the stuff of legend, and even the subject of a scholarly explanation of American uniqueness—Frederick Jackson Turner’s fabled “frontier thesis,” which hailed the grit and gumption of the pioneers and commended them as the agents of civilization and democracy. Yet far from being unique, those westering Americans had much in common with settlers in sister societies abroad. Argentina had its cowboys (gauchos), and

 Australia had its colorful backcountry outlaws, such as Ned Kelly, whose exploits rivaled those of Billy the Kid. The Russians and South Africans had their own versions of “Manifest Destiny,” and like the Americans they often cloaked them in the language of racial superiority. The world’s various frontiers also reﬂected the particularities of geography and history. Australians soon conceded that much of their continent—the world’s driest—was too arid for traditional farming. Most of the Outback proved suitable only for enormous “sheep stations,” sometimes measuring tens of thousands of acres. Consequently, small-farm homesteading of the American and Canadian type never took root, nor did cities of any consequence emerge in the parched Australian interior. Canada’s westward movement came later than that in the United States and proceeded more peaceably. Only after the Ottawa government promised in 1871 to build a transcontinental railroad connecting eastern Canada to its western provinces did settlement begin in earnest. And unlike in America, where restless pioneers typically struck out on their own and made much mischief among themselves and with the Indians they encountered, in Canada settlers were generally preceded by government authori-

North-West Mounted Police, ca. 1890 Empowered by an act of Parliament in 1873
 to establish Canadian authority and order in the Northwest Territories, this force made frontier settlement somewhat more peaceful in Canada than in the United States. In 1920 the North-West Mounted Police absorbed the Dominion Police and became the famed Royal Canadian Mounted Police, or “Mounties.”

Russian Peasants in Siberia, 1910


 ties—usually the red-jacketed North-West Mounted Police, or “Mounties”—who established at least a semblance of order before large numbers of pioneers appeared on the scene. As a result, Canada’s frontier was markedly less violent than America’s. Canada, then and now a more lawabiding society than the United States, never had a “Wild West” like that of its southern neighbor. In Argentina and Russia, inherited patterns of landholding and politics shaped their nineteenth-century frontiers. When Argentina’s General Julio Roca vanquished the native Araucanians in 1879, he ﬂung open the horizonless pampas to white settlement. But he also retained the venerable custom, handed down from Spanish colonial times, of apportioning the land in gigantic estancias (ranches) to a few favored fellow soldiers and friends. These lordly landowners then employed wage workers, mostly Italian immigrants, who turned the fertile Argentine interior into a beef bowl and breadbasket to the world. The immigrants themselves, however, had little hope of ever possessing land of their own. Russia’s frontier lay to the east and long felt the heavy hand of the tsar. For centuries autocratic rulers had strongarmed landowning nobles to move their serfs onto the “virgin lands” beyond the settled edge of European Russia. By the nineteenth century, imperial Russia had pushed its frontier onto the rolling steppes of central Asia, home to

 Tartars, Kalmyks, Kazakhs, and myriad other indigenous peoples. Only military conquest and a strengthened state bureaucracy made possible European settlement in those regions. Between 1867 and 1897, more than a million of the tsar’s subjects left for the hinterland. As elsewhere, the railroad proved essential to the growth of the tsarist empire, especially after the government began construction of the Trans-Siberian line in 1891. The Dutch-descended Afrikaners, or Boers, in southern Africa found their frontier to the north, and unlike their American counterparts, they made scant claim to be spreading democracy. Rather, they sought to escape British rule in the Cape Colony—in particular, to escape from the threat of racial equality for blacks after Britain abolished slavery in the 1830s. The Afrikaners’ “Great Trek” took them into the land of the Zulus, who ferociously resisted the oncoming Boers but eventually, like indigenous peoples every where, were forced to submit to white rule. In the Americas, Australia, Asia, and Africa, the great frontier of the nineteenth century was the companion of conquest. The frontier brought opportunity to some and oppression to others. In many places it nurtured democracy; elsewhere it invigorated autocracy. And every where it expanded the domains of European civilization—for better or worse.





Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


 twine binder and then in the 1880s by the “combine”— the combined reaper-thresher, which was drawn by twenty to forty horses and which both reaped and bagged the grain. Widespread use of such costly equipment naturally called for ﬁ rst-class management. But the farmers, often unskilled as businesspeople, were inclined to blame the banks and railroads or the volatility of the global marketplace, rather than their own shortcomings, for their losses. This amazing mechanization of agriculture in the postwar years was almost as striking as the mechanization of industry. In fact, agricultural modernization drove many marginal farmers off the land, thus swelling the ranks of the new industrial work force. As the rural population steadily decreased, those farmers who remained achieved miracles of production, making America the world’s breadbasket and butcher shop. The farm was attaining the status of a factory— an outdoor grain factory. Bonanza wheat farms of the Minnesota–North Dakota area, for example, were enormous. By 1890 at least a half-dozen of them were larger than ﬁ fteen thousand acres, with communication by telephone from one part to another. These bonanza farms foreshadowed the gigantic agribusinesses of the next century. Agriculture was a big business from its earliest days in Cal i fornia’s phenomenally productive (and phenomenally irrigated) Central Valley. Cal i fornia farms, carved out of giant Spanish Mexican land grants and the railroads’ huge holdings, were from the outset more than three times larger than the national average. The reformer Henry George in 1871 described the Golden State as “not a country of farms but a country of plantations and estates.” With the advent of the railroad refrigerator car in the 1880s, Cal i fornia fruit and vegetable crops, raised on sprawling tracts by ill-paid migrant Mexican and Chinese farmhands, sold at a handsome proﬁt in the rich urban markets of the East.

 Deﬂation Dooms the Debtor Once the farmers became chained to a one-crop economy—wheat or corn—they were in the same leaky boat with the southern cotton growers. As long as prices stayed high, all went well. But when they skidded in the 1880s, bankruptcy fell like a blight on the farm belts. The grain farmers were no longer the masters of their own destinies. They were engaged in one of the most ﬁercely competitive of businesses, for the price of their product was determined in a world market by the

 world output. If the wheat ﬁelds of Argentina, Russia, and other foreign countries ﬂourished, the price of the farmers’ grain would fall and American sodbusters would face ruin, as they did in the 1880s and 1890s. Low prices and a deﬂated currency were the chief worries of the frustrated farmers—North, South, and West. If a family had borrowed $1,000 in 1855, when wheat was worth about a dollar a bushel, they expected to pay back the equivalent of one thousand bushels, plus interest, when the mortgage fell due. But if they let their debt run to 1890, when wheat had fallen to about ﬁ fty cents a bushel, they would have to pay back the price of two thousand bushels for the $1,000 they had borrowed, plus interest. This unexpected burden struck them as unjust, though their steely-eyed creditors often branded the complaining farmers as slippery and dishonest rascals. The deﬂationary pinch on the debtor ﬂowed partly from the static money supply. There were simply not enough dollars to go around, and as a result, prices were forced down. In 1870 the currency in circulation for each person was $19.42; in 1890 it was only $22.67. Yet during these twenty years, business and industrial activity, increasing manyfold, had intensiﬁed the scramble for available currency. The forgotten farmers were caught on a treadmill. Despite unremitting toil, they operated year after year at a loss and lived off their fat as best they could. In a vicious circle, their farm machinery increased their output of grain, lowered the price, and drove them even deeper into debt. Mortgages engulfed homesteads at an alarming rate; by 1890 Nebraska alone reported more than 100,000 farms blanketed with mortgages. The repeated crash of the sheriff-auctioneer’s hammer kept announcing to the world that another sturdy American farmer had become landless in a landed nation. Ruinous rates of interest, running from 8 to 40 percent, were charged on mortgages, largely by agents of eastern loan companies. The windburned sons and

 A contemporary farm protest song, “The Kansas Fool,” ran,

 The bankers followed us out west; And did in mortgages invest; They looked ahead and shrewdly planned, And soon they’ll have our Kansas land.

Struggling Farmers


 daughters of the sod, who felt that they deserved praise for developing the country, cried out in despair against the loan sharks and the Wall Street octopus. Farm tenancy rather than farm ownership was spreading like stinkweed. The trend was especially marked in the sharecropping South, where cotton prices also sank dismayingly. By 1880 one-fourth of all American farms were operated by tenants. The United States was ready to feed the world, but under the new industrial feudalism, the farmers were about to sink into a status suggesting Old World serfdom.

Unhappy Farmers
 Even Mother Nature ceased smiling, as her powerful forces conspired against agriculture. Mile-wide clouds of grasshoppers, leaving “nothing but the mortgage,” periodically ravaged prairie farms. The terrible cottonboll weevil was also wreaking havoc in the South by the early 1890s. The good earth was going sour. Floods added to the waste of erosion, which had already washed the topsoil off millions of once-lush southern acres. Expensive fertilizers were urgently needed. A long succession of droughts seared the trans-Mississippi West, beginning in the summer of 1887. Whole towns were abandoned. “Going home to the wife’s folks” and “In God we trusted, in Kansas we busted” were typical la-



 ments of many impoverished farmers, as they ﬂed their weather-beaten shacks and sun-baked sod houses. One irate “poet” snarled, Fifty miles to water, A hundred miles to wood, To hell with this damned country, I’m going home for good. To add to their miseries, the soil-tillers were gouged by their government—local, state, and national. Their land was overassessed, and they paid painful local taxes, whereas wealthy easterners could conceal their stocks and bonds in safe-deposit boxes. High protective tariffs in these years poured proﬁts into the pockets of manufacturers. Farmers, on the other hand, had no choice but to sell their low-priced products in a ﬁercely competitive, unprotected world market, while buying high-priced manufactured goods in a protected home market. The farmers were also “farmed” by the corporations and processors. They were at the mercy of the harvester trust, the barbed-wire trust, and the fertilizer trust, all of which could control output and raise prices to extortionate levels. Middlemen took a juicy “cut” from the selling price of the goods that the farmers bought, while operators pushed storage rates to the ceiling at grain warehouses and elevators. In addition, the railroad octopus had the grain growers in its grip. Freight rates could be so high that

Nebraska Homesteaders in Front of
Their Sod House, 1887 These two
 brothers and their families had escaped to Canada from the slave South during the Civil War. Returning to the United States in the 1880s, they took advantage of the Homestead Act to stake out farms in Custer County, Nebraska.



Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


 the farmers sometimes lost less if they burned their corn for fuel than if they shipped it. If they raised their voices in protest, the ruthless railroad operators might let their grain spoil in damp places or refuse to provide them with cars when needed. Farmers still made up nearly one-half the population in 1890, but they were hopelessly disorga nized. The manufacturers and the railroad barons knew how to combine to promote their interests, and so, increasingly, did industrial workers. But the farmers were by nature independent and individualistic—dead set against consolidation or regimentation. No really effective Carnegie or Gompers arose among them to preach the gospel of economic integration and concentration. They never did organize successfully to restrict production until forced to by the federal government nearly half a century later, in Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal days. What they did manage to organize was a monumental political uprising.

The Farmers Take
Their Stand
 Agrarian unrest had ﬂared forth earlier, in the Greenback movement shortly after the Civil War. Prices sagged in 1868, and a host of farmers unsuccessfully

The Farmers’ Grievances
 This poster from 1875 expresses one of the agrarian radicals’ fundamental premises: that all other walks of life were dependent—or even parasitic—on the indispensable work of farmers. In his famous “Cross of Gold” speech in 1896 (see p. 661), Populist presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan put it this way: “Burn down your cities and leave our farms, and your cities will spring up again as if by magic; but destroy our farms and the grass will grow in the streets of every city in the country.”

 sought relief from low prices and high indebtedness by demanding an inﬂation of the currency with paper money. The National Grange of the Patrons of Husbandry— better known as the Grange—was orga nized in 1867. Its leading spirit was Oliver H. Kelley, a shrewd and energetic Minnesota farmer then working as a clerk in Washington. Kelley’s ﬁ rst objective was to enhance the lives of isolated farmers through social, educational, and fraternal activities. Farm men and women, cursed with loneliness in widely separated farmhouses, found the Grange’s picnics, concerts, and lectures a godsend. Kelley, a Mason, even found farmers receptive to his mumbo-jumbo of passwords and secret rituals, as well as his four-ply hierarchy, ranging (for men) from Laborer to Husbandman and (for women) from Maid to Matron. The Grange spread like an old-time prairie ﬁ re and by 1875 claimed 800,000 members, chieﬂy in the Midwest and South. Buzzing with gossip, these calicoed and callous folk often met in red schoolhouses around potbellied stoves. The Grangers gradually raised their goals from individual self-improvement to improvement of the farmers’ collective plight. In a determined effort to escape the clutches of the trusts, they established cooperatively owned stores for consumers and cooperatively owned grain elevators and warehouses for producers.

Persuasive Populists


 Their most ambitious experiment was an attempt to manufacture harvesting machinery, but this venture, partly as a result of mismanagement, ended in ﬁnancial disaster. Embattled Grangers also went into politics, enjoying their most gratifying success in the grain-growing regions of the upper Mississippi Valley, chieﬂy in Illinois, Wisconsin, Iowa, and Minnesota. There, through state legislation, they strove to regulate railway rates and the storage fees charged by railroads and by the operators of warehouses and grain elevators. Many of the state courts, notably in Illinois, were disposed to recognize the principle of public control of private business for the general welfare. A number of the socalled Granger Laws, however, were badly drawn, and they were bitterly fought through the high courts by the well-paid lawyers of the “interests.” Following judicial reverses, most severely at the hands of the Supreme Court in the famous Wabash decision of 1886 (see p. 573), the Grangers’ inﬂuence faded. But their orga ni zation has lived on as a vocal champion of farm interests, while brightening rural life with social activities. Farmers’ grievances likewise found a vent in the Greenback Labor party, which combined the inﬂationary appeal of the earlier Greenbackers with a program for improving the lot of labor. In 1878, the high-water mark of the movement, the Greenback Laborites polled over a million votes and elected fourteen members of Congress. In the presidential election of 1880, the Greenbackers ran General James B. Weaver, an old Granger who was a favorite of Civil War veterans and who possessed a remarkable voice and bearing. He spoke to perhaps half a million citizens in a hundred or so speeches but polled only 3 percent of the total popular vote.

Prelude to Populism
 A striking manifestation of rural discontent came through the Farmers’ Alliance, founded in Texas in the late 1870s (see p. 557). Farmers came together in the Alliance to socialize, but more importantly to break the strangling grip of the railroads and manufacturers through cooperative buying and selling. Local chapters spread throughout the South and the Great Plains during the 1880s, until by 1890 members numbered more than a million hard-bitten souls. Unfortunately, the Alliance weakened itself by ignoring the plight of landless tenant farmers, sharecroppers, and farmworkers. Even more debilitating was



 the Alliance’s exclusion of blacks, who counted for nearly half the agricultural population of the South. In the 1880s a separate Colored Farmers’ National Alliance emerged to attract black farmers, and by 1890 membership numbered more than 250,000. The long history of racial division in the South, however, made it difﬁcult for white and black farmers to work together in the same orga ni zation. Out of the Farmers’ Alliances a new political party emerged in the early 1890s—the People’s party. Better known as the Populists, these frustrated farmers attacked Wall Street and the “money trust.” They called for nationalizing the railroads, telephone, and telegraph; instituting a graduated income tax; and creating a new federal “subtreasury”—a scheme to provide farmers with loans for crops stored in governmentowned warehouses, where they could be held until market prices rose. They also wanted the free and unlimited coinage of silver—yet another of the debtors’ demands for inﬂation that echoed continuously throughout the Gilded Age. Numerous ﬁery prophets leapt forward to trumpet the Populist cause. The free coinage of silver struck many Populists as a cure-all, especially after the circulation of an enormously popular pamphlet titled Coin’s Financial School (1894). Written by William Hope Harvey, it was illustrated by clever woodcuts, one of which depicted the gold ogre beheading the beautiful silver maiden. In ﬁction parading as fact, the booklet showed how the “little professor”—“Coin” Harvey— overwhelmed the bankers and professors of economics with his brilliant arguments on behalf of free silver. Another notorious spellbinder was red-haired Ignatius Donnelly of Minnesota, three times elected to Congress. The queen of the Populist “calamity howlers” was Mary Elizabeth (“Mary Yellin’”) Lease, a tall, athletic woman known as the “Kansas Pythoness.” She reportedly demanded that Kansans should raise “less corn and more hell.” The big-city New York Evening Post snarled, “We don’t want any more states until we can civilize Kansas.” To many easterners, complaint, not corn, was rural America’s staple crop. Yet the Populists, despite their oddities, were not to be laughed away. They were leading a deadly earnest and impassioned campaign to relieve the farmers’ many miseries. Smiles faded from Republican and Democratic faces alike as countless thousands of Populists began to sing “Good-bye, My Party, Goodbye.” In 1892 the Populists had jolted the traditional parties by winning several congressional seats and polling more than 1 million votes for their presidential



Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


 a swarm of newspaper reporters. His platform included a demand that the government relieve unemployment by an inﬂationary public works program, supported by some $500 million in legal tender notes to be issued by the Treasury. Coxey himself rode in a carriage with his wife and infant son, appropriately named Legal Tender Coxey, while his tiny “army” tramped along behind, singing, We’re coming, Grover Cleveland, 500,000 strong, We’re marching on to Washington to right the nation’s wrong.

 Mary E. Lease (1853–1933) She was so eloquent as to be called the “Patrick Henry in Petticoats.”

 candidate, James B. Weaver. Racial divisions continued to hobble the Populists in the South, but in the West their ranks were swelling. Could the People’s party now reach beyond its regional bases in agrarian America, join hands with urban workers, and mount a successful attack on the northeastern citadels of power?

 Coxey’s Army and the Pullman Strike The panic of 1893 and the severe ensuing depression strengthened the Populists’ argument that farmers and laborers alike were being victimized by an oppressive economic and political system. Ragged armies of the unemployed began marching to protest their plight. In the growing hordes of displaced industrial toilers, the Populists saw potential political allies. The most famous marcher was “General” Jacob S. Coxey, a wealthy Ohio quarry owner. He set out for Washington in 1894 with a few score of supporters and

 The “Commonweal Army” of Coxeyites ﬁ nally straggled into the nation’s capital, but the invasion took on the aspects of a comic opera when “General” Coxey and his “lieutenants” were arrested for walking on the grass. Elsewhere, violent ﬂare-ups accompanied labor protests, notably in Chicago. Most dramatic was the crippling Pullman strike of 1894. Eugene V. Debs, a charismatic labor leader, had helped organize the American Railway Union of about 150,000 members. The Pullman Palace Car Company, which maintained a model town near Chicago for its employees, was hit hard by the depression and cut wages by about onethird, while holding the line on rent for the company houses. The workers ﬁ nally struck—in some places overturning Pullman cars—and paralyzed railway trafﬁc from Chicago to the Paciﬁc coast. The American Federation of Labor conspicuously declined to support the Pullman strikers, thus enhancing the AF of L’s reputation for “respectability” even while weakening labor’s cause by driv ing a large wedge into the workers’ ranks. The turmoil in Chicago was serious but not yet completely out of hand. At least this was the judgment of Governor John Peter Altgeld of Illinois, a friend of

 After the Pullman strike collapsed, Eugene Debs (1855–1926) said,

“
“


 No strike has ever been lost.

 In 1897 he declared,

”


 The issue is Socialism versus Capitalism. I am for Socialism because I am for humanity.

”


Pullman Strikers




 Coxey’s Army Enters the District of Columbia, 1894 Coxey’s followers are shown here clearing a lock on the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal. Jacob Sechler Coxey arrived in the capital with only about 500 men, far short of the 100,000 he had predicted would come to make a “living petition” of the unemployed.

 the downtrodden, who had pardoned the Haymarket Square anarchists the year before (see p. 589). But U.S. attorney general Richard Olney, an archconser vative and an ex–railroad attorney, urged the dispatch of federal troops. His legal grounds were that the strikers were interfering with the transit of the U.S. mail. President Cleveland supported Olney with the ringing declaration, “If it takes the entire army and navy to

 deliver a postal card in Chicago, that card will be delivered.” To the delight of conser vatives, federal troops, bayonets ﬁ xed, crushed the Pullman strike. Debs was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment for contempt of court because he had deﬁed a federal court injunction to cease striking. Ironically, the lean labor agitator spent much of his enforced leisure reading radical

The Pullman Strike, 1894
Illinois National Guardsmen
 ﬁre on Pullman Company strikers on July 7, 1894. Police clubs and U.S. Army riﬂes and bayonets ﬁnally broke the back of the strike, which halted railroads throughout the country.



Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


 literature, which led to his later leadership of the socialist movement in America. Embittered cries of “government by injunction” now burst from orga nized labor. This was the ﬁ rst time that such a legal weapon had been used conspicuously by Washington to break a strike, and it was all the more distasteful because deﬁant workers who were held in contempt could be imprisoned without a jury trial. Signs multiplied that employers were striving to smash labor unions by court action. Nonlabor elements of the country, including the Populists and other debtors, were likewise incensed. They saw in the brutal Pullman episode further proof of an unholy alliance between business and the courts.

 Golden McKinley and Silver Bryan The smoldering grievances of the long-suffering farmers and the depression-plagued laborers gave ominous signiﬁcance to the election of 1896. Conservatives of all stripes feared an impending upheaval, while downand-out husbandmen and discontented workers cast about desperately for political salvation. Increasingly, monetary policy—whether to maintain the gold standard or inﬂate the currency by monetizing silver— loomed as the issue on which the election would turn. The leading candidate for the Republican presidential nomination in 1896 was former congressman William McKinley of Ohio, sponsor of the ill-starred tariff bill of 1890 (see p. 672). He had established a creditable Civil War record, having risen to the rank of major; he hailed from the electorally potent state of Ohio; and he could point to long years of honorable ser vice in Congress, where he had made many friends with his kindly and conciliatory manner. As a presidential candidate, McKinley was largely the creature of a fellow Ohioan, Marcus Alonzo Hanna, who had made his fortune in the iron business and now coveted the role of president maker. “I love McKinley,” he once said. As a wholehearted Hamiltonian, Hanna believed that a prime function of government was to aid business. Honest, earnest, tough, and direct, he became the personiﬁcation of big industry in politics. He was often caricatured in cartoons, quite unfairly, as a bloated bully in a loud checkered suit with a dollar sign in each square. He believed that in some mea sure prosperity “trickled down” to the laborer, whose dinner pail was full when business ﬂourished. Critics assailed this idea as equivalent to feeding the horses in order to feed the sparrows.

 McKinley Campaign Headquarters, Chicago, 1896 Those few black Americans who could exercise their right to vote in the 1890s still remained faithful to “the party of Lincoln.”

 The hardheaded Hanna, although something of a novice in politics, orga nized his preconvention campaign for McKinley with consummate skill and with a liberal outpouring of his own money. The convention steamroller, well lubricated with Hanna’s dollars, nominated McKinley on the ﬁ rst ballot in St. Louis in June 1896. The Republican platform cleverly straddled the money question but leaned toward hard-money policies. It declared for the gold standard, even though McKinley’s voting record in Congress had been embarrassingly friendly to silver. The platform also condemned hard times and Democratic incapacity, while pouring praise on the protective tariff. Dissension riddled the Democratic camp. Cleveland no longer led his party. The depression had driven the last nail into his political cofﬁ n. Dubbed “the Stuffed Prophet,” he was undeniably the most unpopular man in the country. Labor-debtor groups remembered too vividly his intervention in the Pullman strike,

 McKinley Versus Bryan



 The convention-hall setting was made to order for a magniﬁcent oratorical effort. A hush fell over the delegates as Bryan stood before them. With an organlike voice that rolled into the outer corners of the huge hall, he delivered a fervent plea for silver. Rising to supreme heights of eloquence, he thundered, “We will answer their demands for a gold standard by saying to them: ‘You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns, you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.’” The Cross of Gold speech was a sensation. Swept off its feet in a tumultuous scene, the Democratic convention nominated Bryan the next day on the ﬁfth ballot. The platform demanded inﬂation through the unlimited coinage of silver at the ratio of 16 ounces of silver to 1 of gold, though the market ratio was about 32 to 1. This meant that the silver in a dollar would be worth about ﬁ fty cents. Democratic “Gold Bugs,” unable to swallow Bryan, bolted their party over the silver issue. A conser vative senator from New York, when asked if he was a Democrat still, reportedly replied, “Yes, I am a Democrat

 Crying for Protection, 1896 Uncle Sam is called on in this cartoon to nurse so-called infant industries—some of which had in fact long since grown into vigorous adulthood.

 the backstairs Morgan bond deal, and especially his stubborn hard-money policies. Ultraconser vative in ﬁnance, Cleveland now looked more like a Republican than a Democrat on the money issue. Rudderless, the Democratic convention met in Chicago in July 1896, with the silverites lusting for victory. Shouting insults at the absent Cleveland, the delegates refused, by a suicidal vote of 564 to 357, to endorse their own administration. They had the enthusiasm and the numbers; all they lacked was a leader. A new Moses suddenly appeared in the person of William Jennings Bryan of Nebraska. Then only thirtysix years of age and known as “the Boy Orator of the Platte,”* he stepped conﬁdently onto the platform before ﬁ fteen thousand people. His masterful presence was set off by a peninsular jaw and raven-black hair. He radiated honesty, sincerity, and energy.

 *One contemporary sneered that Bryan, like the Platte River in his home state of Nebraska, was “six inches deep and six miles wide at the mouth.”

William Jennings Bryan, Campaigning (Again) in 1908
 The premier orator of his day, Bryan also became a perennial presidential candidate, running in 1896, 1900, and 1908. He lost every time.



Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


 still—very still.” The Democratic minority, including Cleveland, charged that the Populist-silverites had stolen both the name and the clothes of their party. They nominated a lost-cause ticket of their own, and many of them, including Cleveland, not too secretly hoped for a McKinley victory. The Populists now faced a dilemma, because the Democratic majority had appropriated their main plank—“16 to 1,” that “heaven-born ratio.” The bulk of the Populists, fearing a hard-money McKinley victory, endorsed both “fusion” with the Democrats and Bryan for president, sacriﬁcing their identity in the mix. Singing “The Jolly Silver Dollar of the Dads,” they became in effect the “Demo-Pop” party, though a handful of the original Populists refused to support Bryan and went down with their colors nailed to the mast.

 Class Conﬂict: Plowholders Versus Bondholders Mark Hanna smugly assumed that he could make the tariff the focus of the campaign. But Bryan, a dynamo of energy, forced the free-trade issue into the backseat when he took to the stump in behalf of free silver. Sweeping through 27 states and traveling 18,000 miles, he made nearly 600 speeches—36 in one day—and even invaded the East, “the enemy’s country.” Vachel Lindsay caught the spirit of his oratorical orgy: Prairie avenger, mountain lion, Bryan, Bryan, Bryan, Bryan, Gigantic troubadour, speaking like a siege gun, Smashing Plymouth Rock with his boulders from the West.* Free silver became almost as much a religious as a ﬁ nancial issue. Hordes of fanatical free-silverites hailed Bryan as the messiah to lead them out of the wilderness of debt. They sang “We’ll All Have Our Pockets Lined with Silver” and “No Crown of Thorns, No Cross of Gold.” Bryan created panic among eastern conser vatives with his threat of converting their holdings overnight into ﬁ fty-cent dollars. The “Gold Bugs” responded with their own free and unlimited coinage of verbiage. They

 *Reprinted with the permission of Scribner, an imprint of Simon & Schuster Adult Publishing Group, from The Collected Poems of Vachel Lindsay, Revised Edition by Vachel Lindsay. Copyright © 1920 by The Macmillan Company; copyright renewed 1948 by Elizabeth C. Lindsay. All rights reserved.

 vented their alarm in abusive epithets, ranging from “fanatic” and “madman” to “traitor” and “murderer.” “In God We Trust, with Bryan We Bust,” the Republicans sneered, while one eastern clergyman cried, “That platform was made in Hell.” Widespread fear of Bryan and the “silver lunacy” enabled “Dollar Mark” Hanna, now chairman of the Republican National Committee, to shine as a money-raiser. He “shook down” the trusts and plutocrats and piled up an enormous “slush fund” for a “campaign of education”—or of propaganda, depending on one’s point of view. Reminding the voters of Cleveland’s “Democratic panic,” Republicans appealed to the “belly vote” with their prize slogan, “McKinley and the Full Dinner Pail.” The McKinleyites amassed the most formidable political campaign chest thus far in American history. At all levels—national, state, and local—it amounted to about $16 million, as contrasted with about $1 million for the poorer Democrats (roughly “16 to 1”). With some justiﬁcation, the Bryanites accused Hanna of buying the election and of ﬂoating McKinley into the White House on a tidal wave of mud and money. Bryan’s cyclonic campaign began to lose steam as the weeks passed. Fear was probably Hanna’s strongest ally, as it was Bryan’s worst enemy. Republican businesspeople placed contracts with manufacturers, contingent on the election of McKinley. A few factory owners, with thinly veiled intimidation, paid off their workers and told them not to come to work on Wednesday morning if Bryan won. Reports also circulated that employers were threatening to pay their employees in ﬁ fty-cent pieces, instead of in dollars, if Bryan triumphed. Such were some of the “dirty tricks” of the “Stop Bryan, Save America” crusade. Hanna’s campaign methods paid off. On election day McKinley triumphed decisively. The vote was 271 to 176 in the Electoral College and 7,102,246 to

 In gold-standard Britain, there was much relief over McKinley’s victory. The London Standard commented,

“


 The hopelessly ignorant and savagely covetous waifs and strays of American civilization voted for Bryan, but the bulk of the solid sense, business integrity, and social stability sided with McKinley. The nation is to be heartily congratulated.

”




The Free Silver Campaign


 WASH.

N.H.
VT. R-4

D-4


MONT. D-3

 ME.

R-4


N. DAK.

R-6


R-3


 OREGON

 MINN.

R-4


 MASS.

R-9


 IDAHO

S. DAK.

D-3


 WISC.

D-4


 WYO.

R-12


D-3


R-13


D-8


 ILL.

 CALIF.

D-3


R-24


COLO. D-4

ARIZONA TERR.

OKLA. TERR. NEW MEXICO TERR.

 VA.

D-12


R-12/D-1


MD. R-8

N.C.
D-11


D-21


S.C.


 ARK.

D-9


D-8


MISS. D-9

 TEXAS

R-10
R-3


 W.VA.

TENN. IND. TERR.

CONN. N.J. R-6

 DEL.

R-23


 KY.

D-17


D-10


R-15


R-32


OHIO R-6

 MO.

 KANSAS

 IND.

R.I.
R-4


 PA.

 UTAH

R-8/D-1


 MICH.

 IOWA

 NEB.

D-3


R-36


R-14


 NEV.

R-15


N.Y.


ALA. D-11

 GA.

D-13


 LA.

D-15


D-8


FLA. D-4

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


 McKinley (Republican)



61%


7,102,246


51.1%


Bryan (Democrat)




39%


6,492,559


47.7%


Territories, Indian
 reservations, unsettled, etc.

 Map 26.6 Presidential Election of 1896 (with electoral vote by state) This election tolled the death knell of the Gilded Age political party system, with its razor-close elections, strong party loyalties, and high voter turnouts. Bryan’s sweep of the southern states and strong showing in the West gave him only 176 electoral votes to McKinley’s 271 from the more populous North and East. For years after 1896, Republicans predominated, and citizens showed a declining interest in joining parties and voting. Interactive Map

 6,492,559 in the popular election. Driven by fear and excitement, an unprecedented outpouring of voters ﬂocked to the polls. McKinley ran strongly in the populous East, where he carried every county of New England, and in the upper Mississippi Valley. Bryan’s states, concentrated in the debt-burdened South and the trans-Mississippi West, boasted more acreage than McKinley’s but less population (see Map 26.6). The free-silver election of 1896 was perhaps the most signiﬁcant political turning point since Lincoln’s victories in 1860 and 1864. Despite Bryan’s strength in the South and West, the results vividly demonstrated his lack of appeal to the unmortgaged farmer and especially to the eastern urban laborer. Many wage earners in the East voted for their jobs and full dinner pails, threatened as they were by free silver, free trade, and

 ﬁ reless factories. Living precariously on a ﬁ xed wage, the factory workers had no reason to favor inﬂation, which was the heart of the Bryanites’ program. The Bryan-McKinley battle heralded the advent of a new era in American politics. At ﬁ rst glance the election seemed to be the age-old story of the underprivileged many against the privileged few, of the indebted backcountry against the wealthier seaboard, of the country against the city, of the agrarians against the industrialists, of Main Street against Wall Street, of the nobodies against the somebodies. Yet when Bryan made his evangelical appeal to all those supposed foes of the existing social order, not enough of them banded together to form a political majority. The outcome was instead a resounding victory for big business, the big cities, middle-class values, and



Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


 ﬁ nancial conservatism. Bryan’s defeat marked the last serious effort to win the White House with mostly agrarian votes. The future of presidential politics lay not on the farms, with their dwindling population, but in the mushrooming cities, with their growing hordes of freshly arriving immigrants. The Grand Old Party’s smashing victory of 1896 also heralded a Republican grip on the White House for sixteen consecutive years—indeed, for all but eight of the next thirty-six years. McKinley’s election thus imparted a new character to the American political system. The long reign of Republican political dominance that it ushered in was accompanied by diminishing voter participation in elections, the weakening of party orga ni zations, and the fading away of issues like the money question and civil-ser vice reform, which came to be replaced by concern for industrial regulation and the welfare of labor. Scholars have dubbed this new political era the period of the fourth party system, signaling a break with the previous “third party system,” in place since 1860 and characterized by remarkably high voter turnouts and close contests between Democrats and Republicans. The Sacrilegious Candidate A hostile cartoonist makes sport of Bryan’s notorious Cross of Gold speech in 1896.

 Campaign Gimcracks, 1896 These mechanical cards predicted Republican prosperity with McKinley and economic ruin with Bryan.

The Election of 1896


 Republican Stand-pattism Enthroned An eminently “safe” McKinley took the inaugural oath in 1897. With his impeccable white vest, he seemed never to perspire, even in oppressively muggy Washington. Though a man of considerable ability, he was an ear-tothe-ground politician who seldom got far out of line with majority opinion. His cautious, conser vative nature caused him to shy away from the ﬂaming banner of reform. Business was given a free rein, and the trusts, which had trusted him in 1896, were allowed to develop more mighty muscles without serious restraints. Almost as soon as McKinley took ofﬁce, the tariff issue, which had played second ﬁddle to silver in the “Battle of ’96,” quickly forced itself to the fore. The current Wilson-Gorman law was not raising enough revenue to cover the annual Treasury deﬁcits, and the Republican trusts thought that they had purchased the right to additional tariff protection by their lush contributions to Hanna’s war chest. In due course the Dingley Tariff Bill was jammed through the House in 1897, under the pounding gavel of the rethroned “Czar” Reed. The proposed new rates were high, but not high enough to satisfy the paunchy lobbyists, who once again descended upon the Senate. Over 850 amendments were tacked onto the overburdened bill. The resulting piece of patchwork ﬁ nally established the average rates at



 46.5 percent, substantially higher than the Democratic Wilson-Gorman Act of 1894 and in some categories even higher than the McKinley Act of 1890. (See the chart in the Appendix.) Prosperity, long lurking around the corner, began to return with a rush in 1897, the ﬁ rst year of McKinley’s term. The depression of 1893 had run its course, and farm prices rose. Paint-thirsty midwestern barns blossomed in new colors, and the wheels of industry resumed their hum. Republican politicians, like crowing roosters believing they caused the sun to rise, claimed credit for attracting the sunlight of prosperity. With the return of prosperity, the money issue that had overshadowed politics since the Civil War gradually faded away. The Gold Standard Act of 1900, passed over last-ditch silverite opposition, provided that the paper currency be redeemed freely in gold. Nature and science gradually provided an inﬂation that the “Gold Bug” East had fought so frantically to prevent. Electrifying discoveries of new gold deposits in Canada’s fabled Klondike, as well as in Alaska, South Africa, and Australia, brought huge quantities of gold onto world markets, as did the perfecting of the cheap cyanide process for extracting gold from low-grade ore. Moderate inﬂation thus took care of the currency needs of an explosively expanding nation, as its circulatory system greatly improved. The tide of “silver heresy” rapidly receded, and the “Popocratic” ﬁsh were left gasping high and dry on a golden-sanded beach.



Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


 CHRONOLOGY ca. 1700–

 New Indian peoples move onto Great Plains

1889–


North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana,
 Washington, Idaho, and Wyoming admitted to Union



 Census Bureau declares frontier line ended Emergence of People’s party (Populists)



 Pikes Peak gold rush



 Nevada Comstock Lode discovered



Homestead Act






Battle of Wounded Knee
 Construction of Trans-Siberian Railroad begins

 Sand Creek massacre Nevada admitted to Union



 Populist party candidate James B. Weaver polls more than 1 million votes in presidential election



 Frederick Jackson Turner publishes “The Signiﬁcance of the Frontier in American History”



 “Coxey’s Army” marches on Washington Pullman strike



 Utah admitted to Union McKinley defeats Bryan for presidency



Dingley Tariff Act




Gold Standard Act




 Oklahoma admitted to Union



 National Grange orga nized



Battle of the Little Bighorn
 Colorado admitted to Union



Nez Perce war




 Helen Hunt Jackson publishes A Century of Dishonor



 Federal government outlaws Indian Sun Dance



 Canadian Paciﬁc Railway, ﬁ rst transcontinental rail line, completed across Canada.

1885–


 Local chapters of Farmers’ Alliance formed



Dawes Severalty Act




 Indians granted U.S. citizenship



 Oklahoma opened to U.S. citizen settlement



 Indian Reorga ni zation Act

KEY TERMS
reservation system (635) Little Bighorn, Battle of the (637) Wounded Knee, Battle of (639) Dawes Severalty Act (639) mining industry (644) Homestead Act (645) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
mechanization of agriculture (654) Populists (657) Pullman strike (658) fourth party system (664) Gold Standard Act (665) 
Frederick Jackson
Turner
Jacob S. Coxey


 William McKinley Marcus Alonzo Hanna

Varying Viewpoints




Was the West Really “Won”?


F


 or more than half a century, the Turner thesis dominated historical writing about the West. In his famous essay of 1893, “The Signiﬁcance of the Frontier in American History,” historian Frederick Jackson Turner argued that the frontier experience molded both region and nation. Not only the West, Turner insisted, but the national character had been uniquely shaped by the westward movement. Pioneers had brought the raw West into the embrace of civilization. And the struggle to overcome the hazards of the western wilderness—including distance, deserts, drought, and Indians—had transformed Europeans into tough, inventive, and self-reliant Americans. Turner’s thesis raised a question that Americans found especially intriguing in 1893. Just three years earlier, the superintendent of the census declared that the frontier, deﬁ ned as a zone with little or no settled population, had closed forever. What new forces, Turner asked, would shape a distinctive American national character, now that the testing ground of the frontier had been plowed and tamed? Turner’s hypothesis that the American character was forged in the western wilderness is surely among the most provocative statements ever made about the formative inﬂuences on the nation’s development. But as the frontier era recedes ever further into the past, scholars are less persuaded that Turner’s thesis adequately explains the national character. American society is still conspicuously different from European and other cultures, even though Turner’s frontier disappeared more than a century ago. Modern scholars charge that Turner based his thesis on several questionable assumptions. Historian David J. Weber, for example, suggests that the line of the frontier did not deﬁ ne the quavering edge of “civilization,” but marked the boundary between diverse cultures, each with its own claims to legitimacy and, indeed, to legitimate possession of the land. The frontier should therefore be understood not as the place where “civilization” triumphed over “sav-

 agery,” but as the principal site of interaction between those cultures. Several so-called New Western historians take this argument still further. Scholars such as Patricia Nelson Limerick, Richard White, and Donald Worster suggest that the cultural and ecological damage inﬂ icted by advancing “civilization” must be reckoned with in any ﬁ nal accounting of what the pioneers accomplished. These same scholars insist that the West did not lose its regional identity after the frontier line was no longer recognizable in 1890. The West, they argue, is still a unique part of the national mosaic, a region whose history, culture, and identity remain every bit as distinctive as those of New Eng land or the Old South. But where Turner saw the frontier as the principal shaper of the region’s character, the New Western historians emphasize the effects of ethnic and racial confrontation, topography, climate, and the roles of government and big business as the factors that have made the modern West. The New Western historians thus reject Turner’s emphasis on the triumphal civilizing of the wilderness. As they see the matter, European and American settlers did not tame the West, but rather conquered it, by suppressing the Native American and Hispanic peoples who had preceded them into the region. But those conquests were less than complete, so the argument goes, and the West therefore remains, uniquely among American regions, an unsettled arena of commingling and competition among those groups. Moreover, in these accounts the West’s distinctively challenging climate and geography yielded to human habitation not through the efforts of heroic individual pioneers, but only through massive corporate—and especially federal government—investments in transportation systems (like the transcontinental railroad) and irrigation projects (like the watering of Cal i fornia’s Central Valley). Such developments still give western life its special character today.



Chapter 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 1865–1896


To Learn More
Dee Brown, Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian
History of the American West (1970)
 William Cronon, Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West (1991) Lawrence Goodwyn, The Populist Moment: A Short History of the Agrarian Revolt in America (1978) Steven Hahn, The Roots of Southern Populism: Yeoman Farmers and the Transformation of the Georgia Upcountry, 1850–1890 (1983) Robert V. Hine, The American West: A New Interpretive History (2nd ed., 1984) Patricia Nelson Limerick, Legacy of Conquest: The Unbroken Past of the American West (1987)

 Frederick Jackson Turner, “The Signiﬁcance of the Frontier in American History” (1893) Elliott West, The Contested Plains: Indians, Goldseekers, and the Rush to Colorado (1998) Richard White, “It’s Your Misfortune and None of My Own”: A New History of the American West (1991)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Empire and Expansion





1890–1909
 We assert that no nation can long endure half republic and half empire, and we warn the American people that imperialism abroad will lead quickly and inevitably to despotism at home.

I


 n the years immediately following the Civil War, Americans remained astonishingly indifferent to the outside world. Enmeshed in struggles over Reconstruction and absorbed in efforts to heal the wounds of civil war, build an industrial economy, make their cities habitable, and settle the sprawling West, most citizens took little interest in international affairs. But the sunset decades of the nineteenth century witnessed a momentous shift in U.S. foreign policy. America’s new diplomacy reﬂected the far-reaching changes that were reshaping agriculture, industry, and the social structure. American statesmen also responded to the intensifying scramble of several other nations for international advantage in the dawning “age of empire.” By the beginning of the twentieth century, America had acquired its own empire, an astonishing departure from its venerable anticolonial traditions. The world now had to reckon with a new great power, potentially powerful but with diplomatic ambitions and principles that remained to be deﬁ ned.

America Turns Outward
 Many developments fed the nation’s ambition for overseas expansion. Both farmers and factory owners began to look for markets beyond American shores as agricultural and industrial production boomed. Many Americans believed that the United States had to expand or explode. Their country was bursting with a new sense of power generated by the robust growth in population, wealth, and productive capacity—and it was trembling from the hammer blows of labor violence and agrarian unrest. Overseas markets might provide a safety valve to relieve those pressures. Other forces also whetted the popular appetite for overseas involvement. The lurid “yellow press” of Joseph Pulitzer and William Randolph Hearst described foreign exploits as manly adventures, the kind of dashing derring-do that was the stuff of young boys’ dreams. Pious missionaries, inspired by books like the Rever-

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 27 Empire and Expansion, 1890–1909


 The Imperial Menu A pleased Uncle Sam gets ready to place his order with headwaiter William McKinley. Swallowing some of these possessions eventually produced political indigestion.

 end Josiah Strong’s Our Country: Its Possible Future and Its Present Crisis, looked overseas for new souls to harvest. Strong trumpeted the superiority of Anglo-Saxon civilization and summoned Americans to spread their religion and their values to the “backward” peoples. He cast his seed on fertile ground. At the same time, aggressive Americans like Theodore Roosevelt and Congressman (later Senator) Henry Cabot Lodge were

 In 1896 the Washington Post editorialized,

“


 A new consciousness seems to have come upon us—the consciousness of strength—and with it a new appetite, the yearning to show our strength. . . . Ambition, interest, land hunger, pride, the mere joy of ﬁghting, whatever it may be, we are animated by a new sensation. We are face to face with a strange destiny. The taste of Empire is in the mouth of the people even as the taste of blood is in the jungle. It means an Imperial policy, the Republic, renascent, taking her place with the armed nations.

”


 interpreting Darwinism to mean that the earth belonged to the strong and the ﬁt—that is, to Uncle Sam. This view was strengthened as latecomers to the colonial scramble scooped up leavings from the banquet table of earlier diners. Africa, previously unexplored and mysterious, was partitioned by the Europeans in the 1880s in a pell-mell rush of colonial conquest. In the 1890s Japan, Germany, and Russia all extorted concessions from the anemic Chinese Empire. If America was to survive in the competition of modern nationstates, perhaps it, too, would have to become an imperial power. The development of a new steel navy also focused attention overseas. Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan’s book of 1890, The Inﬂuence of Sea Power upon History, 1660–1783, argued that control of the sea was the key to world dominance. Mahan helped stimulate the naval race among the great powers that gained momentum around the turn of the century. Red-blooded Americans joined in the demands for a mightier navy and for an American-built isthmian canal between the Atlantic and the Paciﬁc. America’s new international interest manifested itself in several ways. Two-time secretary of state James G. Blaine pushed his Big Sister policy, aimed at rallying the Latin American nations behind Uncle Sam’s leadership and opening Latin American markets to Yankee

Imperialist Stirrings


 traders. Blaine’s efforts bore some fruit in 1889, when he presided over the ﬁ rst Pan-American Conference, held in Washington, D.C., the modest beginnings of an increasingly important series of inter-American assemblages. A number of diplomatic crises or near-wars also marked the path of American diplomacy in the late 1880s and early 1890s. The American and German navies nearly came to blows in 1889 over the faraway Samoan Islands in the South Paciﬁc, which were formally divided between the two nations in 1899. (German Samoa eventually became an independent republic; American Samoa remains an American possession.) The lynching of eleven Italians in New Orleans in 1891 brought America and Italy to the brink of war, until the United States agreed to pay compensation. In the ugliest affair, American demands on Chile after the deaths of two American sailors in the port of Valparaiso in 1892 made hostilities between the two countries seem inevitable. The threat of attack by Chile’s modern navy spread alarm on the Paciﬁc Coast, until the Chileans ﬁ nally agreed to pay an indemnity. A simmering argument between the United States and Canada over seal hunting near the Pribilof Islands off the coast of Alaska was resolved by arbitration in 1893. The willingness of Americans to risk war over such distant and minor disputes demonstrated the aggressive new national mood. America’s new belligerence combined with oldtime anti-British feeling to generate a serious crisis between the United States and Britain in 1895–1896. The jungle boundary between British Guiana and Venezuela had long been in dispute, but the discovery of gold in the contested area brought the conﬂict between Britain and Venezuela to a head. President Cleveland and his pugnacious secretary of state, Richard Olney, waded into the affair with a

 The undiplomatic note to Britain by Secretary of State Richard Olney (1835–1917) read,

“


 To-day the United States is practically sovereign on this continent, and its ﬁat is law upon the subjects to which it conﬁnes its interposition. . . . Its inﬁnite resources combined with its isolated position render it master of the situation and practically invulnerable as against any or all other powers.

”




 They Can’t Fight Britain and America waged a war of words during the Venezuelan boundary dispute, but cooler heads prevailed. A new era of diplomatic cooperation between the two former foes dawned, as they saw themselves bound together by ties of language, culture, and mutual economic interest. As the German chancellor Otto von Bismarck reportedly remarked, “The supreme geopolitical fact of the modern era is that the Americans speak English.”

 combative note to Britain invoking the Monroe Doctrine. Not content to stop there, Olney haughtily informed the world’s number one naval power that the United States was now calling the tune in the Western Hemisphere. Unimpressed British ofﬁcials shrugged off Olney’s salvo as just another twist of the lion’s tail and replied that the affair was none of Uncle Sam’s business. President Cleveland—“mad clear through,” as he put it— sent a bristling special message to Congress. He urged an appropriation for a commission of experts, who would run the line where it ought to go. If the British would not accept this rightful boundary, he implied, the United States would ﬁght for it. The entire country, irrespective of political party, was swept off its feet in an outburst of hysteria. War seemed inevitable. Fortunately, sober second thoughts



Chapter 27 Empire and Expansion, 1890–1909


 prevailed on both sides of the Atlantic. A rising challenge from Kaiser Wilhelm’s Germany, as well as a looming war with the Dutch-descended Boers in South Africa, left Britain in no mood for war with America. London backed off and consented to arbitration. The chastened British, their eyes fully opened to the European peril, were now determined to cultivate Yankee friendship. The British inaugurated an era of “patting the eagle’s head,” which replaced a century or so of America’s “twisting the lion’s tail.” Sometimes called the Great Rapprochement—or reconciliation— between the United States and Britain, the new AngloAmerican cordiality became a cornerstone of both nations’ foreign policies as the twentieth century opened.

 control the islands. Desperate whites, though only a tiny minority, orga nized a successful revolt early in 1893, openly assisted by American troops, who landed under the unauthorized orders of the expansionist American minister in Honolulu. “The Hawaiian pear is now fully ripe,” he wrote exultantly to his superiors in Washington, “and this is the golden hour for the United States to pluck it.” A treaty of annexation was rushed to Washington, but before it could be railroaded through the Senate, Republican president Harrison’s term expired and Democratic president Cleveland came in. Suspecting that his powerful nation had gravely wronged the deposed Queen Liliuokalani and her people, “Old Grover” abruptly withdrew the treaty. A subsequent investigation determined that a majority of the Hawaiian na-

Spurning the Hawaiian Pear
 Enchanted Hawaii had early attracted the attention of Americans. In the morning years of the nineteenth century, the breeze-brushed islands were a way station and provisioning point for Yankee shippers, sailors, and whalers. In 1820 the ﬁ rst New Eng land missionaries arrived, preaching the twin blessings of Protestant Christianity and protective calico. They came to do good—and did well, as Hawaii became an increasingly important center for sugar production. Americans gradually came to regard the Hawaiian Islands as a virtual extension of their own coastline. The State Department, beginning in the 1840s, sternly warned other powers to keep their grasping hands off. America’s grip was further tightened in 1887 by a treaty with the native government guaranteeing priceless naval-base rights at spacious Pearl Harbor. But trouble was brewing in the insular paradise. Old World pathogens had scythed the indigenous Hawaiian population down to one-sixth of its size at the time of the ﬁ rst contact with Europeans, leading the American sugar lords to import large numbers of Asian laborers to work the caneﬁelds and sugar mills. By century’s end, Chinese and Japa nese immigrants outnumbered both whites and native Hawaiians, amid mounting worries that Tokyo might be tempted to intervene on behalf of its often-abused nationals. Then sugar markets went sour in 1890 when the McKinley Tariff raised barriers against the Hawaiian product. White American planters thereupon renewed their efforts to secure the annexation of Hawaii to the United States. They were blocked by the strong-willed Queen Liliuokalani, who insisted that native Hawaiians should

Queen Liliuokalani (1838–1917) Liliuokalani was the
 last reigning queen of Hawaii, whose defense of native Hawaiian self-rule led to a revolt by white settlers and to her dethronement. She wrote many songs, the most famous of which was “Aloha Oe,” or “Farewell to Thee,” played countless times by Hawaiian bands for departing tourists.

Alaska:
 Purchased from Russia, 1867

Arctic Circle


RUSSIA 60°N

 CANADA

Beijing:
 U.S. troops help suppress Boxer Rebellion, 1900

Beijing


 KOREA

CHINA 30°N

 JAPAN

Shanghai


Hong Kong
(Gr. Br.)


UNITED STATES

 Hawai‘i: Overthrow of monarchy, 1893; annexed, 1898

Tokyo


ATLANTIC OCEAN
Cuba: War with Spain, 1898; U.S. protectorate, 1902 
Midway 1867
Philippines:
 Acquired from Spain, 1898

Tropic of Cancer
Wake I. 1899


Puerto Rico:
 Acquired from Spain, 1898

Johnston Atoll
Guam:
 Acquired from Spain, 1898

Howland I.


0° Equator


Niihau


Kingman Reef


Baker I.


Kauai


Molokai
Maui


Palmyra
Atoll


Jarvis I.


Oahu
Honolulu


PACIFI C

O C EA N


Samoa:
 Potential naval conflict, 1889; divided between Germany and United States, 1899

AUSTRALIA 30°S

Pearl
Harbor


Diamond
Head


Lanai
Kahoolawe


Hilo
Bay


 Hawai’i

 Boundary dispute between Venezuela and British Guiana, 1895–1896

HAWAIIAN ISLANDS

SOUTH AMERICA

Tropic of Capricorn


 Dispute over U.S. sailors attacked in Chile, 1891

N


120°E


Oahu


180°


1,000


2,000 Km.


1,000


150°W


2,000 Mi.


120°W


90°W


 Map 27.1 United States Expansion, 1857–1917 With the annexation of the Philippines, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico in 1898, the United States became an imperial power.

 tives opposed annexation. Although Queen Liliuokalani could not be reinstated, the sugarcoated move for annexation had to be temporarily abandoned. The Hawaiian pear continued to ripen until the fateful year of 1898, when the United States acquired its overseas empire (see Map 27.1).

Cubans Rise in Revolt
 Cuba’s masses, frightfully misgoverned, again rose against their Spanish oppressors in 1895. The roots of their revolt were partly economic. Sugar production— the backbone of the island’s prosperity—was crippled

60°W


30°W


Interactive Map


 when the American tariff of 1894 restored high duties on the toothsome product. The desperate insurgents now sought to drive out their Spanish overlords by adopting a scorched-earth policy. The insurrectos torched caneﬁelds and sugar mills and dynamited passenger trains. Their destructive tactics also menaced American interests on the island. American sympathies went out to the Cuban underdogs. Sentiment aside, American business had an investment stake of about $50 million in Cuba and an annual trade stake of about $100 million, all of it put at risk by revolutionary upheaval. Moreover, as the calculating Senator Lodge put it, Cuba lay “right athwart the line” that led to the much-anticipated Panama Canal.



Chapter 27 Empire and Expansion, 1890–1909


 Whoever controlled Cuba, said Lodge, “controls the Gulf [of Mexico].” Much was riding on the outcome of events in troubled Cuba. Fuel was added to the Cuban conﬂagration in 1896 with the arrival of the Spanish general “Butcher” Weyler. He undertook to crush the rebellion by herding many civilians into barbed-wire reconcentration camps, where they could not give assistance to the armed insurrectos. Lacking proper sanitation, these enclosures turned into deadly pestholes; the victims died like dogs. Atrocities in Cuba were red meat for the sensational new “yellow journalism” of William Randolph Hearst and Joseph Pulitzer. Engaged in a titanic duel for circulation, each attempted to outdo the other with screeching headlines and hair-raising “scoops.” Where atrocity stories did not exist, they were invented. Hearst sent the gifted artist Frederic Remington to Cuba to draw sketches, allegedly with the pointed admonition “You furnish the pictures and I’ll furnish the war.” Among

 other outrages, Remington depicted Spanish customs ofﬁcials brutally disrobing and searching an American woman. Most readers of Hearst’s Journal, their indignation soaring, had no way of knowing that such tasks were performed by female attendants. Hearst also sensationally publicized a private letter from the Spanish minister in Washington, Dupuy de Lôme. The indiscreet epistle, stolen from the mails, described President McKinley in decidedly unﬂattering terms. The resulting uproar forced Dupuy de Lôme’s resignation and further infuriated the American public. Then early in 1898, Washington sent the battleship Maine to Cuba, ostensibly for a “friendly visit” but actually to protect and evacuate Americans if a dangerous ﬂare-up should occur and to demonstrate Washington’s concern for the island’s stability. Tragedy struck on February 15, 1898, when the Maine mysteriously blew up in Havana harbor, with a loss of 260 sailors. Two investigations of the iron cofﬁ n ensued, one by U.S. naval ofﬁcers and the other by Spanish ofﬁcials.

 The Explosion of the Maine, February 15, 1898 Encouraged and ampliﬁed by the “yellow press,” the outcry over the tragedy of the Maine helped drive the country into an impulsive war against Spain.

The Spanish-American War




“Cuba Libre,” by Captain Fritz W. Guerin of St. Louis,
 1898 This elaborately staged tableau depicts Confederate and Union ofﬁcers reconciled three decades after the Civil War as they join hands to liberate innocent Cuba from her chains of bondage to Spain.

 whelming evidence that the initial explosion had resulted from spontaneous combustion in one of the coal bunkers adjacent to a powder magazine. But Americans in 1898, now mad for war, blindly embraced the less likely explanation. Lashed to fury by the yellow press, they leapt to the inaccurate conclusion that the Spanish government had been guilty of intolerable treachery. The battle cry of the hour became Remember the Maine! To hell with Spain!

 The Spaniards concluded that the explosion had been internal and presumably accidental; the Americans argued that the blast had been caused by a submarine mine. Not until 1976 did U.S. Navy admiral H. G. Rickover conﬁ rm the original Spanish ﬁ nding with over-

 Many Spaniards felt that accusations about their blowing up the Maine reﬂected on Spanish honor. One Madrid newspaper spoke up:

“


 The American jingoes . . . imagine us capable of the most foul villainies and cowardly actions. Scoundrels by nature, the American jingoes believe that all men are made like themselves. What do they know about noble and generous feelings? . . . We should not in any way heed the jingoes: they are not even worth our contempt, or the saliva with which we might honor them in spitting at their faces.

”


 Nothing would do but to hurl the “dirty” Spanish ﬂag from the hemisphere. The national war fever burned ever higher, even though American diplomats had already gained Madrid’s agreement to Washington’s two basic demands: an end to the reconcentration camps and an armistice with Cuban rebels. The cautious McKinley found himself in a jam. He did not want hostilities, but neither did he want Spain to remain in possession of Cuba. Nor, for that matter, did he want a fully independent Cuba, over which the United States could exercise no control. More impetuous souls denounced the circumspect president as “Wobbly Willie” McKinley. Fight-hungry Theodore Roosevelt reportedly snarled that the “white-livered” occupant of the White House did not have “the backbone of a chocolate éclair.” The president, whose shaken nerves required sleeping pills, was even being hanged in efﬁgy. McKinley, recognizing the inevitable, eventually yielded and gave the people what they wanted. But public pressure did not fully explain McKinley’s course. He had little faith in Spain’s oft-broken promises. He worried about Democratic reprisals in the upcoming presidential election of 1900 if he continued to appear indecisive in a time of crisis. He also acknowledged America’s commercial and strategic interests in Cuba. On April 11, 1898, McKinley sent his war message to Congress, urging armed intervention to free the oppressed Cubans. The legislators responded uproariously with what was essentially a declaration of war. In a burst of self-righteousness, they likewise adopted



Chapter 27 Empire and Expansion, 1890–1909


 the hand-tying Teller Amendment. This proviso proclaimed to the world that when the United States had overthrown Spanish misrule, it would give the Cubans their freedom—a declaration that caused imperialistic Europeans to smile skeptically.

 Dewey’s May Day Victory at Manila

 Yet Dewey was in a perilous position. He had destroyed the enemy ﬂeet, but he could not storm the

120°E


Hong Kong
(Gr. Br.)


FORMOSA (TAIWAN)

PAC I F IC OCEAN 20°N

(Japan)


Hainan


N


 y we De

 Oh, dewy was the morning Upon the ﬁrst of May, And Dewey was the Admiral, Down in Manila Bay. And dewy were the Spaniards’ eyes, Them orbs of black and blue; And dew we feel discouraged? I dew not think we dew!

110°E


C H IN A


South China
FRENCH
Sea INDOCHINA 
AN TA BA

 The American people plunged into the war lightheartedly, like schoolchildren off to a picnic. Bands blared incessantly “There’ll Be a Hot Time in the Old Town Tonight” and “Hail, Hail, the Gang’s All Here,” leading some foreigners to believe that those were national anthems. The war got off to a giddy start for American forces. Even before the declaration of war, on February 25, 1898, while Navy Secretary John D. Long was away from the ofﬁce, his hot-blooded assistant secretary Theodore Roosevelt took matters into his own hands. Roosevelt cabled Commodore George Dewey, commanding the American Asiatic Squadron at Hong Kong, to descend upon Spain’s Philippines in the event of war. “The very devil seemed to possess him,” Long later wrote of Roosevelt’s actions. But President McKinley subsequently conﬁ rmed Roosevelt’s instructions, even though an attack in the distant Far East seemed like a strange way to free nearby Cuba. Dewey carried out his orders magniﬁcently on May 1, 1898 (see Map 27.2). Sailing boldly with his six warships at night into the fortiﬁed harbor of Manila, he trained his guns the next morning on the moldy ten-ship Spanish ﬂeet. The entire collection of antiquated and overmatched vessels was quickly destroyed, with a loss of nearly four hundred Spaniards killed and wounded, and without the loss of a single American life. Taciturn George Dewey became a national hero overnight. An amateur poet blossomed forth with this:

 forts of Manila with his sailors. His nerves frayed, he was forced to wait in the sweltering bay while troop reinforcements were slowly assembled in America. The appearance of German warships in Manila harbor deepened the tension. Long-awaited American troops, ﬁ nally arriving in force, captured Manila on August 13, 1898, in collaboration with Filipino insurgents commanded by their well-educated, part-Chinese leader, Emilio Aguinaldo. Dewey, to his later regret, had brought this shrewd and magnetic revolutionary from exile in Asia so that he might weaken Spanish resistance. These thrilling events in the Philippines had meanwhile focused attention on Hawaii. An impression spread that America needed the archipelago as a coaling and provisioning way station, in order to send supplies and reinforcements to Dewey. McKinley also worried that Japan might grab the Hawaiian Islands while America was distracted elsewhere. A joint resolution of annexation was rushed through Congress and approved by McKinley on July 7, 1898. It granted Ha-

Luzon


South
Manila
 surrenders Aug. China 13, 1898 Manila Sea Bay

Manila


Philippine
Sea


Manila


PHILIPPINE ISLANDS

Corregidor
Dewey


 Spanish fleet destroyed May 1, 1898

10°N


Sulu
Sea


Mindanao


BRITIS H NORTH BORNEO

 SARAWAK (Gr. Br.) NETH. EAST INDIES





400 Km.


400 Mi.


 American forces American victory Spanish possessions

 Map 27.2 Dewey’s Route in the Philippines, 1898 Interactive Map

 Victory over Spain



 Emilio Aguinaldo (ca. 1869–1964) and Followers, 1900 Aguinaldo had a colorfully checkered career. Exiled from the Philippines by the Spanish in 1897, he was brought back in 1898 to assist the American invasion. A year later he led the Filipino insurrection against the new American rulers. Captured in 1901, he declared his loyalty to the United States. During World War II, he collaborated with the Japanese when they occupied the Philippines. After a lifetime of political intrigue and armed struggle, Aguinaldo died peacefully in Manila in 1964 in his ninety-ﬁfth year.

 waiian residents U.S. citizenship; Hawaii received full territorial status in 1900.

The Confused Invasion
 of Cuba Shortly after the outbreak of war, the Spanish government ordered a ﬂeet of decrepit warships to Cuba. Panic seized the eastern seaboard of the United States. American vacationers abandoned their seashore cottages, while ner vous investors moved their securities to inland depositories. The Spanish “armada” eventually wheezed into bottle-shaped Santiago harbor, Cuba, where it was easily blockaded by the much more powerful American ﬂeet. Sound strategy seemed to dictate that an American army be sent in from the rear to drive out the Spanish ships. Leading the invading force was the grossly overweight General William R. Shafter, a would-be warrior so blubbery and gout-stricken that he had to be carried about on a door. His troops were woefully unequipped for war in the tropics; they had been amply provided with heavy woolen underwear and uniforms designed for subzero operations against the Indians. The Rough Riders, a part of the invading army, now charged onto the stage of history. This colorful regiment of volunteers, short on discipline but long on dash, consisted largely of western cowboys and other hardy characters, with a sprinkling of ex–polo players and ex-convicts. Commanded by Colonel Leonard Wood, the group was orga nized principally by the

 glory-chasing Theodore Roosevelt, who had resigned from the Navy Department to serve as lieutenant colonel. He was so nearsighted that as a safeguard he took along a dozen pairs of spectacles, cached in handy spots on his person or nearby. About the middle of June, a bewildered American army of seventeen thousand men ﬁ nally embarked at congested Tampa, Florida, amid scenes of indescribable confusion. Shafter’s landing near Santiago, thanks to the diversionary tactics of Cuban insurrectos, met little opposition. Brisk ﬁghting broke out on July 1 at El Caney and Kettle Hill, up which Colonel Roosevelt and his horseless Rough Riders charged, with strong support from two crack black regiments. They suffered heavy casualties, but the colorful colonel, having the time of his life, shot a Spaniard with his revolver and

 With a mixture of modesty and immodesty, Colonel Theodore Roosevelt (1858–1919) wrote privately in 1903 of his “Rough Riders,”

“


 In my regiment nine-tenths of the men were better horsemen than I was, and probably two-thirds of them better shots than I was, while on the average they were certainly hardier and more enduring. Yet after I had had them a very short while they all knew, and I knew too, that nobody else could command them as I could.

”




Chapter 27 Empire and Expansion, 1890–1909


 Colonel Theodore Roosevelt with Some of the “Rough Riders” Roosevelt later described his ﬁ rst encounter with the Spanish enemy: “Soon we came to the brink of a deep valley. There was a good deal of cracking of riﬂes way off in front of us, but as they used smokeless powder we had no idea as to exactly where they were, or who they were shooting at. Then it dawned on us that we were the target. The bullets began to come overhead, making a sound like the ripping of a silk dress, with sometimes a kind of pop. . . . We advanced, ﬁring at them, and drove them off.”

 rejoiced to see his victim double up like a jackrabbit. He later wrote a book on his exploits, which the famed satirist Finley Peter Dunne’s character “Mr. Dooley” remarked ought to have been entitled Alone in Cubia [sic]. The American army, fast closing in on Santiago, spelled doom for the badly outgunned Spanish ﬂeet. On July 3 the Spaniards dutifully steamed out of the harbor and into the teeth of the waiting American warships. “Don’t cheer, men,” Captain Philip of the Texas admonished his seamen. “The poor devils are dying.” Shortly thereafter Santiago surrendered (see Map 27.3). Hasty preparations were now made for a descent upon Puerto Rico before the war should end. There the American army met even less resistance than in Cuba. By this time Spain had satisﬁed its honor. On August 12, 1898, it signed an armistice. If the Spaniards had held out a few months longer in Cuba, the American army might have melted away. The inroads of malaria, typhoid fever, dysentery, and yellow fever became so severe that hundreds were incapacitated—“an army of convalescents.” Others suffered from malodorous canned meat known as “embalmed beef.” All told, nearly four hundred men lost their lives to bullets; over ﬁve thousand succumbed to bacteria and other causes.

30°N


U NI TED
STA TES

80°W


El Caney
July 1, 1898


San Juan Hill
July 1, 1898
Santiago
Santiago
Harbor


Gulf of
Tampa
 Mexico FLORIDA

Kettle Hill
July 1, 1898


 BAHAMAS (Gr. Br.)

 Spanish fleet destroyed July 3, 1898

Havana
CUBA 20°N

A TL A NTIC OCEA N

Santiago


USS
Maine exploded Feb. 1898 
HAITI DOMINICAN REPUBLIC JAMAICA
(Gr. Br.) 
Caribbean Sea


N






PUERTO RICO
San 
Juan


Guayama
 Guánica 300 Km.



300 Mi.


 American forces Spanish forces American victory U.S. Naval blockade Spanish possessions

Map 27.3 The Cuban Campaign, 1898
Interactive Map


The Burdens of Empire


 America’s Course (Curse?) of Empire Late in 1898 Spanish and American negotiators met in Paris. War-racked Cuba, as expected, was freed from its Spanish overlords. The Americans had little difﬁculty in securing the remote Paciﬁc island of Guam, which they had captured early in the conﬂ ict from the astonished Spaniards, who, lacking a cable, had not known that a war was on. Spain also ceded Puerto Rico to the United States as payment for war costs. Ironically, the last remnant of Spain’s vast New World empire thus became the ﬁ rst territory ever annexed to the United States without the express promise of eventual statehood. In the decades to come, American investment in the island and Puerto Rican immigration to the United States would make this acquisition one of the weightier consequences of this somewhat carefree war (see “Makers of America: The Puerto Ricans,” pp. 680–681). Knottiest of all was the problem of the Philippines, a veritable apple of discord. These lush islands not only embraced an area larger than the British Isles but also contained an ethnically diverse population of some 7 million souls. McKinley was confronted with a devil’s dilemma. He did not feel that America could honorably give the islands back to Spanish misrule, especially after it had fought a war to free Cuba. And America would be turning its back upon its responsibilities in a cowardly fashion, he believed, if it simply pulled up anchor and sailed away. McKinley viewed virtually all the choices open to him as trouble-fraught. The Filipinos, if left to govern themselves, might fall into anarchy. One of the major powers, possibly aggressive Germany or Japan, might then try to seize them. The result could be a major war into which the United States would be sucked. Seemingly the least of the evils consistent with national honor and safety was to acquire all the Philippines and then perhaps give the Filipinos their freedom later. President McKinley, ever sensitive to public opinion, kept a carefully attuned ear to the ground. The rumble that he heard seemed to call for the entire group of islands. Zealous Protestant missionaries were eager for new converts from Spanish Catholicism,* and the invalid Mrs. McKinley, to whom her husband was de-

 *The Philippines had been substantially Christianized by Catholics before the founding of Jamestown in 1607.



 voted, expressed deep concern about the welfare of the Filipinos. Wall Street had generally opposed the war, but awakened by the booming of Dewey’s guns, it was clamoring for proﬁts in the Philippines. A tormented McKinley later claimed that he went down on his knees seeking divine guidance and heard an inner voice telling him to take all the Philippines and Christianize and civilize them. Accordingly, he decided for outright annexation of the islands. Manila remained a sticking point with the Spaniards because it had been captured the day after the armistice was signed, and the city could not therefore properly be claimed among the spoils of war. But the Americans broke the deadlock by agreeing to pay Spain $20 million for the Philippine Islands—the last great Spanish haul from the New World. The signing of the pact of Paris touched off one of the most impassioned foreign-policy debates in American history. The issue of what to do with the Philippines confronted Americans with fundamental questions about their national identity. Except for glacial Alaska, coral-reefed Hawaii, and a handful of Paciﬁc atolls acquired mostly for whaling stations and guano fertilizer needed to replenish southern soil exhausted by overcultivation, the Republic had hitherto absorbed only contiguous territory on the continent. All previous accessions had been thinly peopled and eligible for ultimate statehood. But in the Philippines, the nation had on its hands a distant tropical area, thickly populated by Asians of a different culture, tongue, and government institutions.

 President William McKinley (1843–1901) later described his decision to annex the Philippines:

“


 When next I realized that the Philippines had dropped into our laps, I confess I did not know what to do with them. . . . I went down on my knees and prayed Almighty God for light and guidance. . . . And one night late it came to me this way. . . . That there was nothing left for us to do but to take them all, and to educate the Filipinos, and uplift and civilize and Christianize them and by God’s grace do the very best we could by them, as our fellow men, for whom Christ also died. And then I went to bed and went to sleep, and slept soundly.

”


MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Puerto Ricans American Migration 
A


 t dawn on July 26, 1898, the U.S. warship Gloucester steamed into Puerto Rico’s Guánica harbor, ﬁ red at the Spanish blockhouse, and landed some thirty-three hundred troops. Within days the Americans had taken possession of the militarily strategic Caribbean island a thousand miles southeast of Florida. In so doing they set in motion changes on the island that ultimately brought a new wave of immigrants to U.S. shores. Puerto Rico had been a Spanish possession since Christopher Columbus claimed it for Castile in 1493. The Spaniards enslaved many of the island’s forty thousand Taino Indians and set them to work on farms and in mines. Many Tainos died of exhaustion and disease, and in 1511 the Indians rebelled. The Spaniards crushed the uprising, killed thousands of Indians, and began importing African slaves—thus establishing the basis for Puerto Rico’s multiracial society. The ﬁ rst Puerto Rican immigrants to the United States arrived as political exiles in the nineteenth century. From their haven in America, they agitated for the island’s independence from Spain. In 1897 Spain ﬁ nally granted the island local autonomy; ironically, however,

The First Puerto Ricans The Spanish
 conquistadores treated the native Taino people in Puerto Rico with extreme cruelty, and the Indians were virtually extinct by the mid-1500s.



 the Spanish-American War the following year placed it in American hands. Puerto Rican political émigrés in the United States returned home, but they were soon replaced by poor islanders looking for work. Changing conditions in Puerto Rico after the U.S. takeover had driven these new immigrants north. Although slow to grant Puerto Ricans U.S. citizenship, the Americans quickly improved health and sanitation on the island, triggering a population surge in the early twentieth century. At the same time, growing monopoly control of Puerto Rico’s sugar cane plantations undermined the island’s subsistence economy, and a series of hurricanes devastated the coffee plantations that had employed large numbers of people. With almost no industry to provide wage labor, Puerto Rico’s unemployment rate soared. Thus when Congress ﬁ nally granted Puerto Ricans U.S. citizenship in 1917, thereby eliminating immigration hurdles, many islanders hurried north to ﬁ nd jobs. Over the ensuing decades, Puerto Ricans went to work in Arizona cotton ﬁelds, New Jersey soup factories, and Utah mines. The majority, however, clustered

 in New York City and found work in the city’s cigar factories, shipyards, and garment industry. Migration slowed somewhat after the 1920s as the Great Depression shrank the job market on the mainland and as World War II made travel hazardous. When World War II ended in 1945, the sudden advent of cheap air travel sparked an immigration explosion (and set the stage for Leonard Bernstein’s great musical production, West Side Story, which adapted the story of Romeo and Juliet to the clash of white and Puerto Rican gangs in New York City). As late as the 1930s, the tab for a boat trip to the mainland exceeded the average Puerto Rican’s yearly earnings. But with an airplane surplus after World War II, the six-hour ﬂ ight from Puerto Rico to New York cost under ﬁ fty dollars. The Puerto Rican population on the mainland quadrupled between 1940 and 1950 and tripled again by 1960. In 1970, 1.5 million Puerto Ricans lived in the United States, one-third of the island’s total population. U.S. citizenship and affordable air travel made it easy for Puerto Ricans to return home. Thus to a far greater degree than most immigrant groups, Puerto Ricans kept one foot in the United States and the other on their native island. By some estimates 2 million people a year journeyed to and from the island during the postwar period. Puerto Rico’s gubernatorial candidates

 Protesting in New York Puerto Ricans demonstrate in April 2001 against U.S. Navy bombing exercises on the Puerto Rican island of Vieques.

Preparing for Carnaval (Carnival)
 This mask-maker displays an elaborate máscara de carton (paper maché mask) made for the annual Puerto Rican festival. Masked ﬁgures at Carnaval have been part of Puerto Rican culture for more than two hundred years.

 sometimes campaigned in New York for the thousands of voters who were expected to return to the island in time for the election. This transience worked to keep Puerto Ricans’ educational attainment and Eng lish proﬁciency far below the national average. At the same time, the immigrants encountered a deep-seated racism in America unlike anything on their multiracial island. Throughout the postwar years, Puerto Ricans remained one of the poorest groups in the United States, with a median family income below that of African Americans and Mexican Americans. Still, Puerto Ricans have fared better economically in the United States than on the island, where, in 1970, 60 percent of all inhabitants lived below the poverty line. In recent years Puerto Ricans have attained more schooling, and many have attended college. Invigorated by the civil rights movement of the 1960s, Puerto Ricans also became more politically active, electing growing numbers of congressmen and state and city ofﬁcials.



Chapter 27 Empire and Expansion, 1890–1909


 Uncle Sam and People from His Colonies, Postcard, ca. 1900 The acquisition of Puerto Rico, the Philippines, Hawaii, and other Paciﬁc islands brought millions of people of color under the American ﬂag and, as depicted here, the paternal watch of “Uncle Sam.” Whether they would eventually become citizens or remain colonial subjects was hotly debated in the United States. Many anti-imperialists opposed colonial expansion precisely because they regarded the exotic new peoples as “unassimilable.”

 Opponents of annexation argued that such a step would dishonor and ultimately destroy America’s venerable commitments to self-determination and anticolonialism. “Goddamn the United States for its vile conduct in the Philippine Isles!” burst out the usually mild-mannered Professor William James. The Harvard philosopher could not believe that the United States could “puke up its ancient soul in ﬁve minutes without a wink of squeamishness.” Speaker of the House Thomas “Czar” Reed resigned in protest against America’s new imperial adventure. Proponents countered that Philippine annexation would simply continue a glorious history of expansion that had pushed American civilization to the Paciﬁc and now beyond. If Americans were “morally bound to abandon the Philippines,” thundered Theodore Roosevelt, “we were also morally bound to abandon Arizona to the Apaches.” The Anti-Imperialist League sprang into being to ﬁght the McKinley administration’s expansionist moves. The orga ni zation counted among its members some of the most prominent people in the United States, includ-

 ing the presidents of Stanford and Harvard Universities and the novelist Mark Twain. The anti-imperialist blanket even stretched over such strange bedfellows as the labor leader Samuel Gompers and the steel titan Andrew Carnegie. Anti-imperialists raised many objections. The Filipinos thirsted for freedom; to annex them would violate the “consent of the governed” philosophy in the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution. Despotism abroad might well beget despotism at home. Imperialism was costly and unlikely ever to turn a proﬁt. Finally, annexation would propel the United States into the political and military cauldron of East Asia. Yet the expansionists or imperialists could sing a seductive song. They appealed to patriotism, invoked America’s “civilizing mission,” and played up possible trade proﬁts. Manila, they claimed, might become another Hong Kong. Rudyard Kipling, the British poet laureate of imperialism, urged America down the slippery path with a quotable poem that he had circulated

Puerto Rico and Cuba


 The contest over American imperialism took place on the Senate ﬂoor as well as around the globe. In 1900 Senator Albert J. Beveridge (1862–1927), Republican from Indiana, returned from an investigative trip to the Philippines to defend its annexation:

“


 The Philippines are ours forever. . . . And just beyond the Philippines are China’s illimitable markets. We will not retreat from either. We will not abandon our opportunity in the Orient. We will not renounce our part in the mission of our race: trustee, under God, of the civilization of the world.

”


 Two years later Senator George F. Hoar (1826–1904), Republican from Massachusetts, broke with his party to denounce American annexation of the Philippines and other territories:

“


 You cannot maintain despotism in Asia and a republic in America. If you try to deprive even a savage or a barbarian of his just rights you can never do it without becoming a savage or a barbarian yourself.

”


 before publication to Theodore Roosevelt and Henry Cabot Lodge (Roosevelt found it “good sense” but “poor poetry”): Take up the White Man’s burden— Ye dare not stoop to less— Nor call too loud on Freedom To cloak your weariness. In short, the wealthy Americans must help to uplift (and exploit) the underprivileged, underfed, and underclad of the world. Over heated protests, the Senate approved the treaty with Spain with just one vote to spare on February 6, 1899. America was now ofﬁcially an empire.

Perplexities in Puerto Rico
 and Cuba From the outset, the status of Puerto Rico was anomalous—neither a state nor a territory, and with little prospect of eventual independence. The Foraker Act



 of 1900 accorded the Puerto Ricans a limited degree of popular government (and outlawed cockﬁghting, a favorite island pastime). Congress granted U.S. citizenship to Puerto Ricans in 1917 but withheld full selfrule. Although the American regime worked wondrous improvements in education, sanitation, and transportation, many of the inhabitants still aspired to independence. Great numbers of Puerto Ricans ultimately moved to New York City, where they added to the complexity of the melting pot. The annexation of Puerto Rico (and the Philippines) posed a thorny legal problem: Did the Constitution follow the ﬂag? Did American laws, including tariff laws and the Bill of Rights, apply with full force to the newly acquired possessions? “Who are we?” a group of Puerto Rican petitioners asked Congress in 1900. “Are we citizens or are we subjects?” Beginning in 1901 with the Insular Cases, a badly divided Supreme Court decreed, in effect, that the ﬂag did outrun the Constitution, and that the outdistanced document did not necessarily extend with full force to the new windfall. Puerto Ricans (and Filipinos) might be subject to American rule, but they did not enjoy all American rights. Cuba, scorched and chaotic, presented another headache. An American military government, set up under the administrative genius of General Leonard Wood of Rough Rider fame, wrought miracles in government, ﬁ nance, education, agriculture, and public health. Under his leadership and that of Colonel William C. Gorgas, a frontal attack was launched on yellow fever. Spectacular experiments were performed by Dr. Walter Reed and others upon American soldiers, who volunteered as human guinea pigs, and the stegomyia mosquito was proved to be the lethal carrier. Cleaning up breeding places for mosquitoes wiped out yellow fever in Havana, while dampening the fear of recurrent epidemics in cities of the South and Atlantic seaboard. The United States, honoring its self-denying Teller Amendment of 1898, withdrew from Cuba in 1902. Old World imperialists could scarcely believe their eyes. But the Washington government could not turn this rich and strategic island completely loose on the international sea; a grasping power like Germany might secure dangerous lodgment near America’s soft underbelly. The Cubans were therefore forced to write into their own constitution of 1901 the so-called Platt Amendment. The Cubans loathed the amendment, which served McKinley’s ultimate purpose of bringing Cuba under American control. (“Plattism” survives as a colloquial



Chapter 27 Empire and Expansion, 1890–1909


 term of derision even in modern-day Cuba.) The newly “liberated” Cubans were forced to agree not to conclude treaties that might compromise their independence (as Uncle Sam saw it) and not to take on debt beyond their resources (as Uncle Sam mea sured them). They further agreed that the United States might intervene with troops to restore order when it saw ﬁt. Finally, the Cubans promised to sell or lease needed coaling or naval stations, ultimately two and then only one (Guantánamo), to their powerful “benefactor.” The United States ﬁ nally abrogated the amendment in 1934, although Uncle Sam still occupies a twenty-eightthousand-acre Cuban beachhead at Guantánamo under an agreement that can be revoked only by the consent of both parties (see p. 855).

 better battleships. A masterly organizer, Secretary of War Elihu Root established a general staff for the army and founded the War College in Washington. One of the most beneﬁcial results of the conﬂ ict was the further closing of the “bloody chasm” between North and South. Thousands of patriotic southerners had ﬂocked to the Stars and Stripes, and the graybearded General Joseph (“Fighting Joe”) Wheeler—a Confederate cavalry hero of about a thousand Civil War skirmishes and battles—was given a command in Cuba. He allegedly cried, in the heat of battle, “To hell with the Yankees! Dammit, I mean the Spaniards.” Even so, the newly imperial nation was not yet prepared to pay the full bill for its new status. By taking on the Philippine Islands, the United States became

New Horizons in
Two Hemispheres
 In essence, the Spanish-American War was a kind of colossal coming-out party. Dewey’s thundering guns merely advertised the fact that the nation was already a world power. The war itself was short (113 days), low in casualties, and theatrically successful—despite the bungling. Secretary of State John Hay called it a “splendid little war.” American prestige rose sharply, and the Europeans grudgingly accorded the Republic more respect. Britain, France, Russia, and other great powers pointedly upgraded their legations in Washington, D. C., which had previously been regarded as a diplomatic backwater. An exhilarating new martial spirit thrilled America, buoyed along by the newly popular military marching-band music of John Philip Sousa. Most Americans did not start the war with consciously imperialistic motives, but after falling through the cellar door of imperialism in a drunken ﬁt of idealism, they wound up with imperialistic and colonial fruits in their grasp. Captain Mahan’s big-navyism seemed vindicated, energizing popular support for more and

 Three years after the Spanish-American War ended, a foreign diplomat in Washington remarked,

“


 I have seen two Americas, the America before the Spanish American War and the America since.

”


 The New Jingoism An enthusiastic Uncle Sam cheers the U.S. Navy in the “splendid little war” of 1898. Many Americans, however, were less than enthused about America’s new imperial adventure.

The Filipino Insurrection




 a full-ﬂedged Far Eastern power. But the distant islands eventually became a “heel of Achilles”—a kind of indefensible hostage given to Japan, as events proved in World War II. Here and elsewhere, the Americans had shortsightedly assumed burdensome commitments that they proved unwilling to defend with appropriate naval and military outlays.

“Little Brown Brothers”
 in the Philippines The liberty-loving Filipinos assumed that they, like the Cubans, would be granted their freedom after the Spanish-American War. They were tragically deceived. Washington excluded them from the peace negotiations with Spain and made clear its intention to stay in the Philippines indeﬁ nitely. Bitterness toward the occupying American troops erupted into open insurrection on February 4, 1899, under Emilio Aguinaldo. Having plunged into war with Spain to free Cuba, the United States was now forced to deploy some 126,000 troops ten thousand miles away to rivet shackles onto a people who asked for nothing but freedom—in the American tradition. The poorly equipped Filipino rebels soon melted into the jungle to wage vicious guerrilla warfare. Months earlier, American soldiers thought they were rescuing innocent victims of Spanish tyranny. Now they viewed the Filipinos as dangerous enemies of the United States. This shift contributed to a mounting “race war” in which both sides perpetrated sordid atrocities. Uncle Sam’s soldiers adopted the “water cure”—forcing water down victims’ throats until they yielded information or died. American-built reconcentration camps rivaled those of “Butcher” Weyler in Cuba. Having begun the Spanish war with noble ideals, America now dirtied its hands. One New York newspaper published a reply to Rudyard Kipling’s famous poem: We’ve taken up the white man’s burden Of ebony and brown; Now will you kindly tell us, Rudyard, How we may put it down? The Americans broke the back of the Filipino insurrection in 1901, when they cleverly inﬁ ltrated a guerrilla camp and captured Aguinaldo. But sporadic ﬁghting dragged on for many dreary months, eventually claiming the lives of 4,234 Americans and as many as 600,000 Filipinos.

Captured Filipino Insurrectionists, ca. 1899
 For three years after its annexation of the Philippine Islands in 1898, the United States fought a savage war to suppress a Filipino rebellion against American rule. Some 600,000 Filipinos perished. There was bitter irony in this clash, as the Americans had claimed to be “liberating” the Filipinos from their oppressive Spanish masters; now the Yankee liberators appeared to be no less oppressive than the Spaniards they had ousted.

 Future president William H. Taft, an able and amiable Ohioan who weighed some 350 pounds, became civil governor of the Philippines in 1901. Forming a strong attachment to the Filipinos, he called them his “little brown brothers” and danced light-footedly with the Filipino women. But McKinley’s “benevolent assimilation” of the Philippines proceeded with painful slowness. Washington poured millions of dollars into the islands to improve roads, sanitation, and public health. Important economic ties, including trade in sugar, developed between the two peoples. American teachers set up an unusually good school system and helped make Eng lish a second language. But all this vast expenditure, which proﬁted America little, was illreceived. The Filipinos hated compulsory Americanization and pined for liberty. They ﬁ nally got their freedom on the Fourth of July, 1946. In the meantime, thousands of Filipinos emigrated to the United States (see “Makers of America: The Filipinos,” pp. 686–687).

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Filipinos American Migration 
A


 t the beginning of the twentieth century, the United States, its imperial muscles just ﬂexed in the war with Spain, found itself in possession of the Philippines. Uncertain of how to manage this empire, which seethed resentfully against its new masters, the United States promised to build democracy in the Philippines and to ready the islanders for home rule. Almost immediately after annexation, the American governor of the archipelago sent a corps of Filipino students to the United States, hoping to forge future leaders steeped in American ways who would someday govern an independent Philippines. Yet this small student group found little favor in their adopted country, although in their native land many went on to become respected citizens and leaders. Most Filipino immigrants to the United States in these years, however, came not to study but to toil. With Chinese immigration banned, Hawaii and the Paciﬁc Coast states turned to the Philippines for cheap agricultural labor. Beginning in 1906 the Hawaiian Sugar Planters Association aggressively recruited Fili-

Filipino Laborers at Work on a
 Hawaiian Pineapple Plantation, 1930s



 pino workers. Enlistments grew slowly at ﬁ rst, but by the 1920s thousands of young Filipino men had reached the Hawaiian Islands and been assigned to sugar plantations or pineapple ﬁelds. Typically a young Filipino wishing to emigrate ﬁ rst made his way to Manila, where he signed a contract with the growers that promised three years’ labor in return for transportation to Hawaii, wages, free housing and fuel, and return passage at the end of the contract. Not all of the emigrants returned; there remain in Hawaii today some former ﬁeld workers still theoretically eligible for free transport back to their native land. Those Filipinos venturing as far as the American mainland found work less arduous but also less certain than did their countrymen on Hawaiian plantations. Many mainlanders worked seasonally—in winter as domestic servants, busboys, or bellhops; in summer journeying to the ﬁelds to harvest lettuce, strawberries, sugar beets, and potatoes. Eventually Filipinos, along with Mexican immigrants, shared the dubious honor of making up Cal i fornia’s agricultural work force.

 Filipino Workers Arriving in Honolulu, 1940s Tags around their necks indicated the plantations to which they had been assigned.

 A mobile society, Filipino Americans also were overwhelmingly male; there was only one Filipino woman for every fourteen Filipino men in Cal i fornia in 1930. Thus the issue of intermarriage became acutely

 sensitive. Cal i fornia and many other states prohibited the marriage of Asians and Caucasians in demeaning laws that remained on the books until 1948. And if a Filipino so much as approached a Caucasian woman, he could expect reprisals—sometimes violent. For example, white vigilante groups roamed the Yakima Valley in Washington and the San Joaquin and Salinas Valleys in Cal i fornia, intimidating and even attacking Filipinos whom they accused of improperly accosting white women. In 1930 one Filipino was murdered and others wounded after they invited some Caucasian women to a dance. Undeterred, the Filipinos challenged the restrictive state laws and the hooligans who found in them an excuse for mayhem. But Filipinos, who did not become eligible for American citizenship until 1946, long lacked political leverage. After World War II, Filipino immigration accelerated. Between 1950 and 1970, the number of Filipinos in the United States nearly doubled, with women and men stepping aboard the new transpaciﬁc airliners in roughly equal numbers. Many of these recent arrivals sprang from sturdy middle-class stock and sought in America a better life for their children than the Philippines seemed able to offer. Today the war-torn and perpetually depressed archipelago sends more immigrants to American shores than does any other Asian nation.

Filipino Nurses
 The nursing shortage in the United States has created many job opportunities for Filipino nurses, who are trained to high medical standards and speak English. A nurse in the United States today can earn more than a physician in the Philippines.



Chapter 27 Empire and Expansion, 1890–1909


Hinging the Open
Door in China
 Ominous events had meanwhile been brewing in faraway and enfeebled China. After its defeat by Japan in 1894–1895, the imperialistic European powers, notably Russia and Germany, moved in. Like vultures descending upon a wounded animal, they began to tear away valuable leaseholds and economic spheres of inﬂuence from the Manchu government. A growing group of Americans viewed the vivisection of China with alarm. Churches worried about their missionary strongholds. Merchants feared that Europeans would monopolize Chinese markets. An alarmed American public, openly prodded by the press and slyly nudged by certain free-trade Britons, demanded that Washington do something. Secretary of State John Hay, a quiet but witty poet-novelist-diplomat with a ﬂair for capturing the popular imagination, ﬁ nally decided upon a dramatic move. In the summer of 1899, Hay dispatched to all the great powers a communication soon known as the Open Door note. He urged them to announce that in their leaseholds or spheres of inﬂuence they would respect certain Chinese rights and the ideal of fair competition. Tellingly, Hay had not bothered to consult the Chinese themselves.

American Missionary Grace Roberts
 Teaching in China, 1903 By the turn of the twentieth century, thousands of American men and women had established Christian missions in faraway places such as Hawaii, China, Africa, and Turkey. Missionaries’ educational and religious work helped build sentimental, political, and economic ties between Americans and distant nations. At times, however, these close connections led to violent confrontations, such as when the nationalist Boxer rebels attacked missionaries in China in 1900 as symbols of foreign encroachment. Protestant women justiﬁed their missionary activities as a logical extension of their traditional female duty to nurture and uplift, but in reality these foreign assignments often propelled them to undertake responsibilities that their stateside mothers and sisters rarely encountered.

 The phrase Open Door quickly caught the American public’s fancy. But Hay’s proposal caused much squirming in the leading capitals of the world, though all the great powers save Russia, with covetous designs on Manchuria, eventually agreed to it. Open Door or not, patriotic Chinese did not care to be used as a doormat by the Western powers. In 1900 a superpatriotic group, known as the “Boxers” for their training in the martial arts, broke loose with the cry “Kill Foreign Devils.” In what became known as the Boxer Rebellion, they murdered more than two hundred foreigners and thousands of Chinese Christians and besieged the foreign diplomatic community in the capital, Beijing (Peking). A multinational rescue force of some eighteen thousand soldiers arrived in the nick of time and quelled the rebellion. They included several thousand American troops dispatched from the Philippines to protect U.S. rights under the 1844 Treaty of Wanghia (see p. 430) and to keep the Open Door propped open. The victorious allied invaders acted angrily and vindictively. They assessed prostrate China an excessive indemnity of $333 million, of which America’s share was to be $24.5 million. When Washington discovered that this sum was much more than enough to pay damages and expenses, it remitted about $18 million, to be used for the education of a selected group of Chinese students in the United States—a not-so-subtle initiative to further the westernization of Asia.

The Rise of Roosevelt




 troubled years and were formally incorporated into the Nine-Power Treaty of 1922, only to be callously violated by Japan’s takeover of Manchuria a decade later (see pp. 802 and 819).

Imperialism or
Bryanism in 1900?


 Columbia’s Easter Bonnet Many Americans felt a surge of pride as the United States became an imperial power at the dawn of the twentieth century. But then and later, America’s world role proved hotly controversial, at home as well as abroad.

 Secretary Hay let ﬂy another paper broadside in 1900, announcing that henceforth the Open Door would embrace the territorial integrity of China, in addition to its commercial integrity. Those principles helped spare China from possible partition in those The commercial interests of Britain and America were imperiled by the power grabs in China, and a close concert between the two powers would have helped both. Yet as Secretary of State John Hay (1838–1905) wrote privately in June 1900,

“


 Every Senator I see says, ‘For God’s sake, don’t let it appear we have any understanding with England.’ How can I make bricks without straw? That we should be compelled to refuse the assistance of the greatest power in the world [Britain], in carrying out our own policy, because all Irishmen are Democrats and some [American] Germans are fools—is enough to drive a man mad.

”


 President McKinley’s renomination by the Republicans in 1900 was a foregone conclusion. He had won a war and acquired rich, though burdensome, real estate; he had safeguarded the gold standard; and he had brought the promised prosperity of the full dinner pail. An irresistible vice-presidential boom developed for Theodore (“Teddy”) Roosevelt (TR), the cowboy-hero of the Cuban campaign. Capitalizing on his war-born popularity, he had been elected governor of New York, where the local political bosses had found him headstrong and difﬁcult to manage. They therefore devised a scheme to kick the colorful colonel upstairs into the vice presidency. This plot to railroad Roosevelt worked beautifully. Gesticulating wildly, he sported a western-style cowboy hat that made him stand out like a white crow at the Republican convention. To cries of “We want Teddy!” he was handily nominated. A wary Mark Hanna reportedly moaned that there would now be only one heartbeat between “that damned cowboy” and the presidency of the United States. William Jennings Bryan was the odds-on choice of the Democrats, meeting at Kansas City. Their platform proclaimed that the paramount issue was Republican overseas imperialism. McKinley, the soul of dignity, once again campaigned safely from his front porch. Bryan again took to the stump in a cyclonic campaign. Lincoln, he charged, had abolished slavery for 3.5 million Africans; McKinley had reestablished it for 7 million Filipinos. Roosevelt out-Bryaned Bryan, touring the country with revolver-shooting cowboys. Flashing his monumental teeth and pounding his ﬁ st into his palm, Roosevelt denounced all dastards who would haul down Old Glory. McKinley handily triumphed by a much wider margin than in 1896: 7,218,491 to 6,356,734 popular votes, and 292 to 155 electoral votes. But victory for the Republicans was not a mandate for or against imperialism. If there was any mandate at all it was for the two Ps: prosperity and protectionism. Meanwhile, the New York bosses gleefully looked forward to watching the nettlesome Roosevelt “take the veil” as vice president.



Chapter 27 Empire and Expansion, 1890–1909


TR:
Brandisher of the Big Stick Kindly William McKinley had scarcely served another six months when, in September 1901, he was murdered by a deranged anarchist in Buffalo, New York. Roosevelt rode a buckboard out of his campsite in the Adirondacks to take the oath of ofﬁce, becoming, at age fortytwo, the youngest president thus far in American history. Born into a wealthy and distinguished New York family, Roosevelt, a red-blooded blue blood, had ﬁercely built up his spindly, asthmatic body by a stern and self-imposed routine of exercise. Educated partly in Europe, he graduated from Harvard with Phi Beta Kappa honors and published, at the age of twenty-four, the ﬁ rst of some thirty volumes of muscular prose. He worked as a ranch owner and cowboy in the Dakotas before pursuing his political career full-time. Barrelchested, bespectacled, and ﬁve feet ten inches tall, with 
 mulelike molars, squinty eyes, droopy mustache, and piercing voice, he was ever the delight of cartoonists. The Rough Rider’s high-voltage energy was electrifying. Believing that it was better to wear out than to rust out, he would shake the hands of some six thousand people at one stretch or ride horseback many miles in a day as an example for portly cavalry ofﬁcers. Incurably boyish and bellicose, Roosevelt ceaselessly preached the virile virtues and denounced paciﬁ stic “ﬂubdubs” and “mollycoddles.” An ardent champion of military and naval preparedness, he adopted as his pet proverb, “Speak softly and carry a big stick, [and] you will go far.” His outsized ego caused it to be said of him that he wanted to be the bride at every wedding and the corpse at every funeral. He loved people and mingled with those of all ranks, from Catholic cardinals to professional prizeﬁghters, one of whom blinded a Rooseveltian eye in a White House bout. “TR” commanded an idolatrous personal following. After visiting him, a journalist wrote, “You go home and wring the personality out of your clothes.” Above all, TR believed that the president should lead, boldly. He had no real respect for the delicate checks and balances among the three branches of the government. The president, he felt, may take any action in the general interest that is not speciﬁcally forbidden by the laws of the Constitution.

Building the Panama Canal


 Theodore Roosevelt Roosevelt gives a speech with both voice and body language in North Carolina in 1902.

 Roosevelt soon applied his bullish energy to foreign affairs. The Spanish-American War had reinvigorated interest in the long-talked-about canal across the Central American isthmus, through which only printer’s ink had ever ﬂowed. Americans had learned a sobering lesson when the battleship Oregon, stationed on the Paciﬁc Coast at the outbreak of war in 1898, took weeks to steam all the way around South America to join the U.S. ﬂeet in Cuban waters. An isthmian canal would plainly augment the strength of the navy by increasing its mobility. Such a waterway would also make easier the defense of such recent acquisitions as Puerto Rico, Hawaii, and the Philippines, while facilitating the operations of the U.S. merchant marine. Initial obstacles in the path of the canal builders were legal rather than geographical. By the terms of the ancient Clayton-Bulwer Treaty, concluded with Britain in 1850, the United States could not secure exclusive control over an isthmian route. But by 1901

Roosevelt and Panama


 America’s British cousins were willing to yield ground. Confronted with an unfriendly Europe and bogged down in the South African Boer War, they consented to the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty in 1901. It not only gave the United States a free hand to build the canal but conceded the right to fortify it as well. But where exactly should the canal be dug? Many American experts favored a route across Nicaragua, but agents of the old French Canal Company were eager to salvage something from their costly failure at S-shaped Panama. Represented by a young, energetic, and unscrupulous engineer, Philippe Bunau-Varilla, the New Panama Canal Company suddenly dropped the price of its holdings from $109 million to the ﬁ re-sale price of $40 million. Congress in June 1902 ﬁ nally decided on the Panama route. The scene now shifted to Colombia, of which Panama was a restive part. The Colombian sen-



 ate rejected an American offer of $10 million and annual payment of $250,000 for a six-mile-wide zone across Panama. Roosevelt railed against “those dagoes” who were frustrating his ambitions. Meanwhile, impatient Panamanians, who had rebelled numerous times, were ripe for another revolt. They had counted on a wave of prosperity to follow construction of the canal, and they feared that the United States would now turn to the Nicaraguan route. Scheming BunauVarilla was no less disturbed by the prospect of losing the company’s $40 million. Working hand in glove with the revolutionists, he helped incite a rebellion on November 3, 1903. U.S. naval forces prevented Colombian troops from crossing the isthmus to quell the uprising. Roosevelt moved rapidly to make steamy Panama a virtual outpost of the United States. Just three days after the insurrection, he hastily extended the right

 Cutting Through the Continental Divide in Panama The Culebra Cut, the southeastern section of the Panama Canal that extends through the Continental Divide, was later renamed the Gaillard Cut in honor of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers ofﬁcer who oversaw this excavation but died shortly before the canal opened in 1914. The cut was one of the greatest engineering feats of its time. Hundreds of drills prepared holes for tons of dynamite, which twice daily blasted the rock so that it could be excavated by steam shovels. Dirt trains, shown in the background, then hauled loads of debris to dumps twelve miles away. The summit of Culebra Mountain, through which the cut was made, was lowered from 193 feet to 40 feet above sea level and widened considerably.



Chapter 27 Empire and Expansion, 1890–1909


 hand of recognition. Fifteen days later, Bunau-Varilla, who was now the Panamanian minister despite his French citizenship, signed the Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty in Washington. The price of the canal strip was left the same, but the zone was widened from six to ten miles. The French company gladly pocketed its $40 million from the U.S. Treasury. Roosevelt, it seems clear, did not actively plot to tear Panama from the side of Colombia. But the conspirators knew of his angrily expressed views, and they counted on his using the big stick to hold Colombia at bay. The Rough Rider became so indiscreetly involved in the Panama affair as to create the impression that he had been a secret party to the intrigue, and the so-called rape of Panama marked an ugly downward lurch in U.S. relations with Latin America. Canal construction began in 1904, in the face of daunting difﬁculties ranging from labor troubles to landslides and lethal tropical diseases. Colonel William C. Gorgas, the quiet and determined exterminator of yellow fever in Havana, ultimately made the Canal Zone “as safe as a health resort.” At a cost of some $400 million, an autocratic West Point engineer, Colonel George Washington Goethals, ultimately brought the project to completion in 1914, just as World War I was breaking out.

 Theodore Roosevelt wrote to a correspondent in February 1904,

“


 I have been hoping and praying for three months that the Santo Domingans would behave so that I would not have to act in any way. I want to do nothing but what a policeman has to do. . . . As for annexing the island, I have about the same desire to annex it as a gorged boa-constrictor might have to swallow a porcupine wrong-end-to.

”


 TR’s Perversion of Monroe’s Doctrine Latin American debt defaults prompted further Rooseveltian involvement in affairs south of the border. Nations such as Venezuela and the Dominican Republic were chronically in arrears in their payments to European creditors. Germany actually bombarded a town in delinquent Venezuela in 1903.

Theodore Roosevelt and His Big
Stick in the Caribbean,
 1904 Roosevelt’s policies seemed to be turning the Caribbean into a Yankee pond.

Roosevelt Mediates Between Russia and Japan


 Roosevelt feared that if the Germans or British got their foot in the door as bill collectors, they might remain in Latin America, in ﬂagrant violation of the Monroe Doctrine. He therefore declared a brazen policy of “preventive intervention,” better known as the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine. He announced that in the event of future ﬁnancial malfeasance by the Latin American nations, the United States itself would intervene, take over the customs-houses, pay off the debts, and keep the troublesome Europeans on the other side of the Atlantic. In short, no outsiders could push around the Latin nations except Uncle Sam, Policeman of the Caribbean. This new brandishing of the big stick in the Caribbean became effective in 1905, when the United States took over the management of tariff collections in the Dominican Republic, an arrangement formalized in a treaty with the Dominicans two years later. TR’s rewriting of the Monroe Doctrine probably did more than any other single step to promote the “Bad Neighbor” policy begun in these years. As time wore on, the new corollary was used to justify wholesale interventions and repeated landings of the marines, all of which helped turn the Caribbean into a “Yankee lake.” To Latin Americans it seemed as though the revised Monroe Doctrine, far from providing a shield, was a cloak behind which the United States sought to strangle them. The shadow of the big stick likewise fell again on Cuba in 1906. Revolutionary disorders brought an appeal from the Cuban president, and “necessity being the mother of intervention,” U.S. Marines landed. These police forces were withdrawn temporarily in 1909, but in Latin American eyes the episode was but another example of the creeping power of the Colossus of the North.

Roosevelt on the
World Stage
 Booted and spurred, Roosevelt charged into international affairs far beyond Latin America. The outbreak of war between Russia and Japan in 1904 gave him a chance to perform as a global statesman. The Russian bear, having lumbered across Asia, was seeking to bathe its frostbitten paws in the ice-free ports of China’s Manchuria, particularly Port Arthur. In Japanese eyes, Manchuria and Korea in tsarist hands were pistols pointed at Japan’s strategic heart. The Japa nese



 responded in 1904 with a devastating surprise pounce on the Russian ﬂeet at Port Arthur. They proceeded to administer a humiliating series of beatings to the inept Russians—the ﬁ rst serious military setback to a major European power by a non-European force since the Turkish invasions of the sixteenth century. But as the war dragged on, Japan began to run short of men and yen—a weakness it did not want to betray to the enemy. Tokyo ofﬁcials therefore approached Roosevelt in the deepest secrecy and asked him to help sponsor peace negotiations. Roosevelt was happy to oblige, as he wanted to avoid a complete Russian collapse so that the tsar’s empire could remain a counterweight to Japan’s growing power. At Portsmouth, New Hampshire, in 1905, TR guided the warring parties to a settlement that satisﬁed neither side and left the Japa nese, who felt they had won the war, especially resentful. Japan was forced to drop its demands for a cash indemnity and Russian evacuation of Sakhalin Island, though it received some compensation in the form of effective control over Korea, which it formally annexed in 1910. For achieving this agreement, as well as for helping arrange an international conference at Algeciras, Spain, in 1906 to mediate North African disputes, TR received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1906. But the price of his diplomatic glory was high for U.S. foreign relations. Two historic friendships withered on the windswept plains of Manchuria. U.S. relations with Russia, once friendly, soured as the Russians implausibly accused Roosevelt of robbing them of military victory. Revelations about savage massacres of Russian Jews further poisoned American feeling against Russia. Japan, once America’s protégé, felt cheated out of its due compensation. Both newly powerful, Japan and America now became rivals in Asia, as fear and jealousy between them grew. “A subjick race is on’y funny whin it’s raaly subjek,” said Finley Peter Dunne’s Mr. Dooley (see “Thinking Globally: The Age of Empire,” pp. 694–695). “About three years ago I stopped laughin’ at Japa nese jokes.”

 Japa nese Laborers in California America’s Paciﬁc Coast soon felt the effects of the Russo-Japa nese War. A new restlessness swept over the rice paddies of Japan, occasioned by the recent conﬂ ict’s dislocations and tax burdens. A new wave of Japa nese immigrants began pouring into the spacious

THINKING GLOBALLY

The Age of Empire


T


 he closing years of the nineteenth century witnessed an unprecedented explosion of imperialism, roughly deﬁned as the forcible imposition of one country’s rule on the unwilling inhabitants of another. Between 1870 and the outbreak of World War I in 1914, a handful of European states extended their sway over nearly one-quarter of the earth’s surface. Other countries followed suit, notably Japan and eventually the United States. All the imperial powers had in common a heritage of nationalism and a high degree of industrialization. They commanded the elaborate administrative apparatus of large uniﬁed states, along with quantities of wealth, technology, and murderous ﬁrepower utterly beyond the capacity of the so-called backward peoples they sought to dominate. As a result, imperialism was, from the start, a lopsided game. As one English wit mordantly noted in 1898, Whatever happens, we have got The Maxim gun, and they have not. Yet ultimately, even with their enormously disproportionate advantages, the imperial states were unable to sustain the age of imperialism for much more than a century. In many ways, modern imperialism resembled eighteenth-century mercantilism, as economically advanced states backed away from the free-trade doctrines that had energized the early stages of the Industrial Revolution and sought instead to create what one British imperialist called “a great self-sustaining and self-protecting empire.” The new imperialism also differed from older colonialism in that the imperial powers sought not merely to exploit but also to transform, modernize, and “westernize” the “backward” societies under their control. Imperialists often justiﬁed their dominion over less developed societies with high-toned slogans. The British professed to be nobly shouldering “the white man’s burden.” The French piously invoked their mission civilisatrice (civilizing mission). The Germans touted the beneﬁts of spreading their vaunted Kultur (culture). The Americans prated about the superiority of the Anglo-Saxons, as the Japanese did about their own “Yamato” race.

A
Young Ho Chi Minh Ho Chi Minh (1890–1969)  attended the Congress of the Socialist Party in Tours, France, where the French Communist party was created in late December 1920.

 These protestations may have been sincere, but other motives more powerfully propelled the imperial enterprise. Prominent among them was the quest for new markets, as maturing industrial economies appeared to be exhausting the possibilities for economic growth at home. The need for reliable sources of products such as cotton, sugar, copper, coffee, and tea also ﬁgured conspicuously. An even more compelling incentive was the need to protect the huge investments of capital that built the railroads, highways, bridges, ports, mills, foundries, mines, smelters, and telegraphs of the developing world. By the eve of the First World War, fully one-quarter of Britain’s accumulated wealth was invested overseas. But perhaps the most important factor driving the imperialist venture was simply the competitive nature of the international system itself. In an unstable, unpredictable world inhabited by ambitious and wary powers, no state thought it could afford to cede an advantage, however illdeﬁned, to any real or imagined rival. Indeed, quite independently of their hard economic value, colonies came to be considered the necessary symbols of great-power status. This perverse logic proved to be a powerful dynamic: once the imperial race began, it was difﬁcult to stop. As Cecil Rhodes, the fabled British colonizer in southern Africa, once said, “I would annex the planets, if I could. I often think of that.” So when Belgium’s King Leopold took an interest in Africa’s Congo basin in the 1870s, he touched off a mad imperial scramble that eventually involved Belgium, Britain, Germany, France, Italy, and Portugal. Less than two decades later, with the exceptions of Ethiopia and Liberia, the entire continent, much of it unexplored and of dubi-

30°W


0°


30°E


60°E


90°E


120°E


150°E


 GREENLAND (Denmark)

Arctic Circle
60°N


GREAT BRITAIN

RUSSIA NETH. GERMANY BELG.

 MOROCCO

PERSIA ALGER IA

 NEJD

 EGYPT

RIO DE ORO

 TIBET

TRUCIAL OMAN

 KUWAIT

LI BYA

 QATAR

Macao
(Port.)


 INDIA

F R ENCH WEST AF R IC A

NIGERIA TOGO KAMERUN

R.


SP. GUINEA F

 ETHIOPIA

 CEYLON

BRITISH SOMALILAND

Formosa


BRITISH EAST AFRICA

BELGIAN CONGO

FRENCH INDOCHINA

SARAWAK MALAY STATES

ITALIAN SOMALILAND

 DU

GERMAN EAST AFRICA ANGOLA NORTHERN RHODESIA

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

 SIAM

HADHRAMAUT FRENCH SOMALILAND

 UGANDA

UA T.

 LIBERIA

0° Equator


IC A

GOLD COAST

 AFR

SIERRA LEONE

 EQ

PORT. GUINEA

ANGLOEGYPTIAN SUDAN

 TC

 NYASALAND

N


Mariana Is.


Philippine Is.
(U.S.)


Marshall
Is.
BR. NORTH BORNEO

Caroline Is.


S
H EA
ST INDIE

PA P

Solomon
Is.


 UA

New Hebrides
(Gr. Br. and France)


 MADAGASCAR

Tropic of Capricorn
AU ST R ALI A

MOZAMBIQUE UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA

Tropic of Cancer


East Timor
(Port.)


INDIAN OCEAN

SOUTHERN RHODESIA GERMAN SOUTHWEST BECHUANALAND AFRICA

30°S


PAC I F IC OCEAN

Hong Kong
(Gr. Br.)


 BURMA

ERITREA GAMBIA

 JAPAN

Shanghai
(Gr. Br.)


 BHUTAN

 NEPAL

 OMAN

 KOREA

 CHINA

 AFGHANISTAN

 CYPRUS

 KARAFUTO

 MANCHURIA

Port Arthur
(Japan)


OTTOMAN EMPIRE

 TUNISIA

30°N


 MONGOLIA

 ITALY

PORTUGAL SPAIN

 IFNI

Sakhalin


 AUSTRIAHUNGARY

 FRANCE

New
Caledonia
(France)


Fiji Is.
(Gr. Br.)


SWAZILAND LESOTHO NEW ZEALAND

 The colonial powers and their possessions Germany

Netherlands


Russia


France


Portugal


United States




Great Britain


Italy


Japan




Belgium


Spain


Map 27.4 The Great Powers and Their Colonial Possessions, 1913


 ous economic value, lay under European domination (see Map 27.4). In Asia, Germany annexed part of New Guinea in 1884. France completed its annexation of Indochina (present-day Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia) that same year. Britain acquired Burma (now Myanmar) in 1885 and parts of Borneo and the Malay Peninsula soon after. Japan closed its grip on Okinawa in 1872, Formosa (Taiwan) in 1895, Port Arthur in 1905, and Korea in 1910. All those powers, in addition to Russia, also had designs on China, which despite its venerable history seemed a poor match for the energetic “nations on the make.” In the Open Door notes of 1899 and 1900 (see pp. 688–689), the United States tried to temper the imperialists’ appetites for Chinese territory and concessions, while at the same time America was becoming an imperial power itself with the takeover of the Philippines and Puerto Rico.

1,000


2,000 Km.


1,000


2,000 Mi.


Interactive Map


 The imperialists brought not only their might and their majesty, their capital and their Maxim guns. They also brought their ideas, including concepts of nationalism, selfdetermination, and democracy. In 1919 a young Vietnamese nationalist named Nguyen Sinh Cung unsuccessfully petitioned the post–World War I peacemakers at Versailles for his country’s right to self-determination. A little more than half a century later, under the name Ho Chi Minh, he secured Vietnam’s independence by prevailing in a war ﬁrst against the French and then against the Americans. By that time the United States had long since voluntarily relinquished the Philippines (in 1946, though Puerto Rico remains an American possession), and virtually all of Africa and Asia had been decolonized. With the handover of Hong Kong (1997) and Macao (1999) to the People’s Republic of China, the age of empire effectively ended.





Chapter 27 Empire and Expansion, 1890–1909


Japanese Workers
Building a Road in
California, ca. 1910


 valleys of California. Although Japanese residents never amounted to more than 3 percent of the state’s population, white Cal i fornians ranted about a new “yellow peril” and feared being drowned in an Asian sea. A showdown on the inﬂux came in 1906, when San Francisco’s school board, coping with the aftermath of a frightful earthquake and ﬁ re, ordered the segregation of Chinese, Japa nese, and Korean students in a special school to free more space for whites. Instantly the incident boiled into an international crisis. The people of Japan, understandably sensitive on questions of race, regarded this discrimination as an insult to them and their beloved children. On both sides of the Paciﬁc, irresponsible war talk sizzled in the yellow press—the real “yellow peril.” Roosevelt, who as a Rough Rider had relished shooting, was less happy over the prospect that Cal i fornia might stir up a war that all the other states would have to wage. He therefore invited the entire San Francisco Board of Education, headed by a bassoon-playing mayor under indictment for graft, to come to the White House. TR ﬁ nally broke the deadlock, but not until he had brandished his big stick and bared his big teeth. The Cal i fornians were induced to repeal the offensive school order and to accept what came to be known as the “Gentlemen’s Agreement.” By this secret understanding, worked out during 1907–1908, Tokyo agreed

 to stop the ﬂow of laborers to the American mainland by withholding passports. Worried that his intercession might be interpreted in Tokyo as prompted by fear, Roosevelt hit upon a dramatic scheme to impress the Japa nese with the heft of his big stick. He daringly decided to send the entire battleship ﬂeet on a highly visible voyage around the world. Late in 1907 sixteen sparkling-white, smokebelching battleships started from Virginia waters. Their commander pointedly declared that he was ready for “a feast, a frolic, or a ﬁght.” The Great White Fleet— saluted by cannonading champagne corks— received tumultuous welcomes in Latin America, Hawaii, New Zealand, and Australia (though it ended up having to borrow coal from the British to complete the voyage). As events turned out, an overwhelming reception in Japan was the high point of the trip. Tens of thousands of kimonoed schoolchildren, trained to wave tiny American ﬂags, movingly sang “The Star-Spangled Banner.” In the warm diplomatic at mosphere created by the visit of the ﬂeet, the U.S. signed the RootTakahira agreement with Japan in 1908. It pledged both powers to respect each other’s territorial possessions in the Paciﬁc and to uphold the Open Door in China. For the moment, at least, the two rising rival powers had found a means to maintain the peace.

Chronology




 CHRONOLOGY

Supreme Court Insular Cases
Platt Amendment
 McKinley assassinated; Roosevelt becomes president Filipino rebellion suppressed Hay-Pauncefote Treaty with Britain gives United States exclusive right to build Panama Canal



 U.S. troops leave Cuba Colombian senate rejects U.S. proposal for canal across Panama



 Panamanian revolution against Colombia Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty gives United States control of Canal Zone in newly independent Panama

 Cubans revolt against Spain



Roosevelt Corollary to Monroe Doctrine


1895–


 Venezuelan boundary crisis with Britain

1904–


Construction of Panama Canal




 Maine explosion in Havana harbor Spanish-American War Teller Amendment Dewey’s victory at Manila Bay Hawaii annexed



 United States takes over Dominican Republic customs ser vice Roosevelt mediates Russo-Japa nese peace treaty



 San Francisco Japa nese education crisis Roosevelt arranges Algeciras Conference

1906–


U.S.
Marines occupy Cuba 


 Great White Fleet makes world voyage

1907–


 “Gentlemen’s Agreement” with Japan



 Root-Takahira agreement



 Puerto Ricans granted U.S. citizenship



 New Eng land missionaries arrive in Hawaii



 Samoa crisis with Germany Pan-American Conference



 Mahan publishes The Inﬂuence of Sea Power upon History



 New Orleans crisis with Italy



 Valparaiso crisis with Chile



 Pribilof Islands dispute with Canada White planter revolt in Hawaii Cleveland refuses Hawaii annexation







 Senate ratiﬁes treaty acquiring Philippines Aguinaldo launches rebellion against United States in Philippines First American Open Door note Hawaii receives full territorial status Foraker Act for Puerto Rico Boxer Rebellion and U.S. military expedition to China Second Open Door note McKinley defeats Bryan for presidency



Chapter 27 Empire and Expansion, 1890–1909


KEY TERMS
Big Sister policy (670) Great Rapprochement (672) McKinley Tariff (672) insurrectos (673) Maine (674) Teller Amendment (676) Rough Riders (677) Anti-Imperialist League (682) Foraker Act (683) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Insular Cases (683) Platt Amendment (683) Open Door note (688) Boxer Rebellion (688) Hay-Pauncefote Treaty (691) Roosevelt Corollary (693) Root-Takahira agreement (696) 
Josiah Strong
Alfred Thayer Mahan
James G. Blaine
Richard Olney
Liliuokalani
“Butcher” Weyler
 Dupuy de Lôme

George Dewey
Emilio Aguinaldo
William H. Taft
John Hay
Theodore (“Teddy”)
Roosevelt


Why Did America Become a World Power?


A


 merican imperialism has long been an embarrassing topic for students of American history, who remember the Republic’s own revolutionary origins and anticolonial tradition. Perhaps for that reason, many historians have tried to explain the dramatic overseas expansionism of the 1890s as some kind of aberration—a sudden, singular, and shortlived departure from time-honored American principles and practices. Various explanations have been offered to account for this spasmodic lapse. Scholars such as Julius Pratt pointed to the irresponsible behavior of the yellow press. Richard Hofstadter ascribed America’s imperial ﬂ ing as the “psychic crisis of the 1890s,” a crisis brought on, he argued, by the strains of the decade’s economic depression and the Populist upheaval. Howard K. Beale emphasized the contagious scramble for imperial possessions by the European powers, as well as Japan, in these years. In Beale’s argument, the United States—and Theodore Roosevelt in particular—succumbed to a kind of international peer pressure: if other countries were expanding their international roles and even establishing colonies around the globe, could the United States safely refrain from doing the same? In Beale’s view, Theodore Roosevelt was no simpleminded imperial swashbuckler, but a coolly calculating diplomatic realist who perceived that if the United States did not

 hold its own against other powers, it would soon risk being pushed around, even in its own hemisphere, despite the Monroe Doctrine. More recent scholarship by Paul Kramer and others has stressed the degree to which American imperialists turned to European precedents for guidance and inspiration. U.S. colonial ofﬁcials in the Philippines and Puerto Rico circulated widely in the British colonial world, selectively adapting elements of British imperial policy. Perhaps the most controversial interpretation of American imperialism has come from a so-called New Left school of writers, inspired by William Appleman Williams (and before him by V. I. Lenin’s 1916 book Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism). Historians such as Williams and Walter LaFeber argue that the explanation for political and military expansion abroad is to be found in economic expansion at home. Increasing industrial output, so the argument goes, required ever more raw materials and, especially, overseas markets. To meet those needs, the nation adopted a strategy of “informal empire,” shunning formal territorial possessions (with the conspicuous exceptions of Puerto Rico and the Philippines), but seeking economic dominance over foreign markets, materials, and investment outlets. That “revisionist” interpretation, in turn, has been sharply

To Learn More


 criticized by scholars who point out that foreign trade accounted for only a tiny share of American output and that the diplomacy of this period was far too complex to be reduced to “economic need.” Most recently, historians have highlighted the importance of race and gender in the march toward empire. Roosevelt and other imperialists perceived their world in gendered terms. American society, many feared, was losing touch with the manly virtues. It had grown soft and “feminine” since the closing of the frontier. Imperialists also saw the nations of the world in a strict racial hierarchy, with “primi-



 tive” blacks and Indians at the bottom and “civilized” Anglo-Saxons at the top. In this world-view the conquest of “inferior” peoples seemed natural—a tropical tonic to restore the nation’s masculine virility. Scholars who emphasize these explanations of imperialism are less likely to see the expansionism of the 1890s as an aberration in American history. Instead, they argue, these overseas adventures were part of a long tradition of race-fueled militarism, from the nation’s earliest Indian wars to Cold War engagements in Korea and Vietnam.

To Learn More
Gail Bederman, Manliness and Civilization: A Cultural
History of Gender and Race in the United States, 1880–
1917 (1995)
 Robert L. Beisner, Twelve Against Empire: The AntiImperialists, 1898–1900 (1968) William R. Hutchison, Errand to the World: American Protestant Thought and Foreign Missions (1987) Matthew Frye Jacobson, Barbarian Virtues: The United States Encounters Foreign Peoples at Home and Abroad, 1876–1917 (2000) Paul A. Kramer, The Blood of Government: Race, Empire, the United States, and the Philippines (2006) Walter LaFeber, The Cambridge History of American Foreign Relations, vol. 2: The American Search for Opportunity, 1865–1913 (1993)

Ernest R. May, Imperial Democracy: The Emergence of
America as a Great Power (1961)
Thomas G. Paterson, American Foreign Policy: A Brief
 History (2nd ed., 1983) Louis A. Perez, Jr., The War of 1898: The United States and Cuba in History and Historiography (1998) Emily S. Rosenberg, Spreading the American Dream: American Economic and Cultural Expansion, 1890–1945 (1982) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

 PART

 FIVE

Struggling for Justice
 at Home and Abroad




1901–1945


T


 he new century brought astonishing changes to the United States. Victory in the Spanish-American War made it clear that the United States was now a world power. Industrialization ushered in giant corporations, sprawling factories, sweatshop labor, and the ubiquitous automobile. A huge wave of immigration was altering the face of the nation, especially the cities, where a majority of Americans lived by 1920. With bigger cities came bigger fears—of crime, vice, poverty, and disease. Changes of such magnitude raised vexing questions. What role should the United States play in the world? How could the enormous power of industry be controlled? How would the millions of new immigrants make their way in America? What should the

 country do about poverty, disease, and the continuing plague of racial inequality? All these issues turned on a fundamental point: should government remain narrowly limited in its powers, or did the times require a more potent government that would actively shape society and secure American interests abroad? The progressive movement represented the ﬁ rst attempt to answer those questions. Reform-minded men and women from all walks of life and from both major parties shared in the progressive crusade for greater government activism. Buoyed by this outlook, Presidents Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Woodrow Wilson enlarged the capacity of government to ﬁght graft, “bust” business trusts, regulate

Suffrage Parade in Brooklyn, New York
 Reformers fought on many fronts in the progressive era. The enormous political effort of American suffragists to secure the vote for women ﬁnally succeeded with the ratiﬁcation of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920.

Struggling for Justice at Home and Abroad


 corporations, and promote fair labor practices, child welfare, conservation, and consumer protection. These progressive reformers, convinced that women would bring greater morality to politics, bolstered the decades-long struggle for female suffrage. Women ﬁ nally secured the vote in 1920 with the ratiﬁcation of the Nineteenth Amendment. The progressive-era presidents also challenged America’s tradition of isolationism in foreign policy. They felt the country had a moral obligation to spread democracy and an economic opportunity to reap proﬁts in foreign markets. Roosevelt and Taft launched diplomatic initiatives in the Caribbean, Central America, and East Asia. Wilson aspired to “make the world safe for democracy” by rallying support for American intervention in the First World War. The progressive spirit waned, however, as the United States retreated during the 1920s into what President Harding called “normalcy.” Isolationist sentiment revived with a vengeance. Blessed with a booming economy, Americans turned their gaze inward to baseball heroes, radio, jazz, movies, and the ﬁrst mass-produced American automobile, the Model T Ford. Presidents Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover backed off from the economic regulatory zeal of their predecessors. “Normalcy” also had a brutal side. Thousands of suspected radicals were jailed or deported in the red scare of 1919 and 1920. Anti-immigrant passions ﬂared until immigration quotas in 1924 squeezed the ﬂow of newcomers to a trickle. Race riots scorched several northern cities in the summer of 1919, a sign of how embittered race relations had become in the wake of the “great migration” of southern blacks to wartime jobs in northern industry. A reborn Ku Klux Klan staged a comeback, not just in the South but in the North and West as well. “Normalcy” itself soon proved short-lived, a casualty of the stock-market crash of 1929 and the Great Depression that followed. As Americans watched



Bound for Guadalcanal, 1942
 These troops were headed for one of the bloodiest battles of World War II, in the southwest Paciﬁc’s Solomon Islands. America threw some 15 million men and the full weight of its enormous economy into the struggle against German and Japanese aggression.

 banks fail, businesses collapse, and millions of people lose their jobs, they asked with renewed urgency what role the government should play in rescuing the nation. President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s answer was the “New Deal”—an ambitious array of relief programs, public works, and economic regulations that failed to cure the depression but furnished an impressive legacy of social reforms. Most Americans came to accept an expanded federal government role at home under FDR’s leadership in the 1930s, but they still clung stubbornly to isolationism. The United States did little in the 1930s to check the rising military aggression of Japan and Germany. By the early 1940s, events forced Americans to reconsider. Once Hitler’s Germany had seized control of most of Europe, Roosevelt, who had long opposed the isolationists, found ways to aid a beleaguered Britain. When Japan attacked the American naval base at Pearl Harbor in December 1941, isolationists at last fell silent. Roosevelt led a stunned but determined nation into the Second World War, and victory in 1945 positioned the United States to assume a commanding position in the postwar world order. The Great Depression and the Second World War brought to a head a half-century of debate over the role of government and the place of the United States in the world. In the name of a struggle for justice, Roosevelt established a new era of government activism at home and internationalism abroad. The New Deal’s legacy set the terms of debate in American political life for the rest of the century.

Progressivism and the
Republican Roosevelt





1901–1912
 When I say I believe in a square deal I do not mean . . . to give every man the best hand. If the cards do not come to any man, or if they do come, and he has not got the power to play them, that is his affair. All I mean is that there shall be no crookedness in the dealing. THEODORE ROOSEVELT, 1905

N


 early 76 million Americans greeted the new century in 1900. Almost one in seven of them was foreign-born. In the fourteen years of peace that remained before the Great War of 1914 engulfed the globe, 13 million more migrants would carry their bundles down the gangplanks to the land of promise. Hardly had the twentieth century dawned on the ethnically and racially mixed American people than they were convulsed by a reform movement, the likes of which the nation had not seen since the 1840s. The new crusaders, who called themselves “progressives,” waged war on many evils, notably monopoly, corruption, inefﬁciency, and social injustice. The progressive army was large, diverse, and widely deployed, but it had a single battle cry: “Strengthen the State.” The “real heart of the movement,” explained one of the progressive reformers, was “to use government as an agency of human welfare.”

Progressive Roots
 The groundswell of the new reformist wave went far back—to the Greenback Labor party of the 1870s and the Populists of the 1890s, to the mounting unrest throughout the land as grasping industrialists concentrated more and more power in fewer and fewer hands. An outworn philosophy of hands-off individualism seemed increasingly out of place in the modern machine age. Social and economic problems were now too complex for the intentionally feeble Jeffersonian organs of government. Progressive theorists were insisting that society could no longer afford the luxury of a limitless “let-alone” (laissez-faire) policy. The people, through government, must substitute mastery for drift. Well before 1900, perceptive politicians and writers had begun to pinpoint targets for the progressive at-

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Critics of Social Injustice




 Melting Pot in P.S. 188, 1910 These immigrant children from the Lower East Side of New York are dressed in costumes from their native lands and surround their teacher, adorned as the Statue of Liberty. Schools like this one, ﬂooded with immigrant children who could scarcely speak English, tried to respect their students’ ancestral cultures while also cultivating loyalty to their adopted country by teaching American “civics” and appreciation for patriotic symbols and rituals.

 tack. Bryan, Altgeld, and the Populists loudly branded the “bloated trusts” with the stigma of corruption and wrongdoing. In 1894 Henry Demarest Lloyd charged headlong into the Standard Oil Company with his book Wealth Against Commonwealth. Eccentric Thorstein Veblen assailed the new rich with his prickly pen in The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899), a savage attack on “predatory wealth” and “conspicuous consumption.” In Veblen’s view the parasitic leisure class engaged in wasteful “business” (or making money for money’s sake) rather than productive “industry” (or making goods to satisfy real needs). He urged that social leadership pass from these superﬂuous titans to truly useful engineers. Other pen-wielding knights likewise entered the fray. The keen-eyed and keen-nosed Danish immigrant Jacob A. Riis, a reporter for the New York Sun, shocked middle-class Americans in 1890 with How the Other

 Half Lives. His account was a damning indictment of the dirt, disease, vice, and misery of the rat-gnawed human rookeries known as New York slums. The book deeply inﬂuenced a future New York City police commissioner, Theodore Roosevelt. Novelist Theodore Dreiser used his blunt prose to batter promoters and proﬁteers in The Financier (1912) and The Titan (1914). Caustic critics of social injustice issued from several other corners. Socialists, many of whom were European immigrants inspired by the strong movement for state socialism in the Old World, began to register appreciable strength at the ballot box (see “Thinking Globally: ‘Why Is There No Socialism in the United States?’” pp. 706–707). High-minded messengers of the social gospel promoted a brand of progressivism based on Christian teachings. They used religious doctrine to demand better housing and living conditions for the urban poor. University-based economists urged new



Chapter 28 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 1901–1912


Room in a Tenement Flat, 1910
 Tenement life on the Lower East Side of New York City was exposed by the camera of Jacob Riis, who compiled a large photographic archive of turn-of-the-century urban life. Many families counted themselves lucky to share a single room, no matter how squalid.

 reforms modeled on European examples, importing policy ideas from Berlin to Baltimore. Feminists in multiplying numbers added social justice to suffrage on their list of needed reforms. With urban pioneers like Jane Addams in Chicago and Lillian Wald in New York blazing the way, women entered the ﬁght to improve the lot of families living and working in the festering cities.

 Raking Muck with the Muckrakers Beginning about 1902 the exposing of evil became a ﬂourishing industry among American publishers. A group of aggressive ten- and ﬁ fteen-cent popular magazines surged to the front, notably McClure’s, Cosmopolitan, Collier’s, and Everybody’s. Waging ﬁerce circulation wars, they dug deep for the dirt that the public loved to hate. Enterprising editors ﬁ nanced extensive research and encouraged pugnacious writing by their bright young reporters, whom President Roosevelt branded as muckrakers in 1906. Annoyed by their excess of zeal, he compared the mudslinging magazine dirt-diggers to the ﬁgure in Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress who was so intent on raking manure that he could not see the celestial crown dangling overhead. Despite presidential scolding, these muckrakers boomed circulation, and some of their most scandalous exposures were published as best-selling books.

 The reformer-writers ranged far, wide, and deep in their crusade to lay bare the muck of iniquity in American society. In 1902 a brilliant New York reporter, Lincoln Steffens, launched a series of articles in McClure’s titled “The Shame of the Cities.” He fearlessly unmasked the corrupt alliance between big business and municipal government. Steffens was followed in the same magazine by Ida M. Tarbell, a pioneering journalist who published a devastating but factual exposé of the Standard Oil Company. (Her father had been ruined by the oil interests.)

 In his muckraker speech (1906), Theodore Roosevelt (1858–1919) said,

“


 Now, it is very necessary that we should not ﬂinch from seeing what is vile and debasing. There is ﬁlth on the ﬂoor and it must be scraped up with the muck-rake; and there are times and places where this service is the most needed of all the services that can be performed. But the man who never does anything else, who never thinks or speaks or writes, save of his feats with the muck-rake, speedily becomes, not a help to society, not an incitement to good, but one of the most potent forces for evil.

”


Progressives Battle Corruption and Corporations




 In his muckraking classic The Shame of the Cities (1904), Lincoln Steffens (1866–1936) decried the great threat posed by New York City’s Tammany machine:

“


 Bribery is no ordinary felony, but treason; . . . ‘corruption which breaks out here and there and now and then’ is not an occasional offense, but a common practice, and . . . the effect of it is literally to change the form of our government from one that is representative of the people to an oligarchy, representative of special interests.

”


 Ida Tarbell (1857–1944) in Her Ofﬁce Tarbell was the most eminent woman in the muckraking movement and one of the most respected business historians of her generation. In 1904 she earned a national reputation for publishing a scathing history of the Standard Oil Company, the “Mother of Trusts.” Two years later she joined Ray Stannard Baker, William Allen White, and other muckrakers in purchasing the American magazine, which became a journalistic podium in their campaign for honest government and an end to business abuses.

 Plucky muckrakers fearlessly tilted their pen-lances at varied targets. They assailed the malpractices of life insurance companies and tariff lobbies. They roasted the beef trust, the “money trust,” the railroad barons, and the corrupt amassing of American fortunes. Thomas W. Lawson, an erratic speculator who had himself made $50 million on the stock market, laid bare the practices of his accomplices in “Frenzied Finance,” a series of articles that appeared in Everybody’s. Lawson, by fouling his own nest, made many enemies among his rich associates, and he died a poor man. David G. Phillips shocked an already startled nation by his series in Cosmopolitan titled “The Treason of the Senate” (1906). He boldly charged that seventy-ﬁve

 of the ninety senators did not represent the people at all but the railroads and trusts. This withering indictment, buttressed by facts, impressed President Roosevelt. Phillips continued his attacks through novels and was fatally shot in 1911 by a deranged young man whose family he had allegedly maligned. Some of the most effective ﬁ re of the muckrakers was directed at social evils. The ugly list included the immoral “white slave” trafﬁc in women, the rickety slums, and the appalling number of industrial accidents. The sorry subjugation of America’s 9 million blacks—of whom 90 percent still lived in the South and one-third were illiterate—was spotlighted in Ray Stannard Baker’s Following the Color Line (1908). The abuses of child labor were brought luridly to light by John Spargo’s The Bitter Cry of the Children (1906). Vendors of potent patent medicines (often heavily spiked with alcohol) likewise came in for bitter criticism. These conscienceless vultures sold incredible quantities of adulterated or habit-forming drugs, while “doping” the press with lavish advertising. Muckraking attacks in Collier’s were ably reinforced by Dr. Harvey W. Wiley, chief chemist of the Department of Agriculture, who with his famous “Poison Squad” performed experiments on himself. Full of sound and fury, the muckrakers signiﬁed much about the nature of the progressive reform movement. They were long on lamentation but stopped short of revolutionary remedies. To right social wrongs, they counted on publicity and an aroused public conscience, not drastic political change. They sought not to overthrow capitalism but to cleanse it. The cure for the ills of American democracy, they earnestly believed, was more democracy.

THINKING GLOBALLY

“Why Is There No Socialism in the United States?”


T


 he Industrial Revolution that began in Britain in the late eighteenth century had by 1900 utterly transformed life in the Western world and beyond. It also had spawned a powerful theory of history, grounded in the writings of Karl Marx. Marxists believed that history’s driving engine was class conﬂict; that in the industrial era that conﬂict had been starkly reduced to the contest between capitalists and workers (the bourgeoisie and the proletariat); and that an inevitable socialist revolution would result in the triumph of the proletariat and the emergence of a classless society. Its organizing principle would be “From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs.” Improbable as it might seem today, many nineteenthcentury Marxists expected the ﬁrst socialist revolution to occur in the United States. Marx himself saw America as the country where capitalism had developed more “shamelessly” than elsewhere, thus setting the stage for the “ﬁnal conﬂict” that would yield the socialist utopia. Violent labor upheavals like those at Homestead (see p. 557), Haymarket

The Prophet of the Class Struggle, Karl Marx
(1818–1883)


 (see p. 589), and Pullman (see p. 658) seemed to conﬁrm that analysis, and a chorus of European Marxists stepped up their prophecies. Marx’s collaborator Friedrich Engels wrote in the aftermath of the Haymarket eruption in May 1886 that in Europe it had taken workers decades to evolve a common “class consciousness,” but “on the more favored soil of America, where no medieval ruins bar the way . . . the working class” would do so “within 10 months.” But it was not to be. Twenty years later the head of the German Social Democratic party lamented that “we are waiting for you Americans to do something.” The Americans had done a little something, but amid all the ferment of reform in the progressive era, they remained a sore disappointment to European radicals. Eugene V. Debs organized the Socialist party in 1901 and won 6 percent of the vote in the presidential election of 1912. But the Socialist party remained a tiny, marginal group. It never posed a serious challenge to the major American parties and never remotely approached the stature of Old World working-class parties such as the French Socialists, the Italian Communists, the German Social Democrats, and the British Labour party. At one time or another, most of these European organizations became ruling parties that implemented socialist ideas such as national ownership of core industries, robust support for labor unions, and lavish welfare programs—developments that to this day have had only feeble if any counterparts in the United States. The failure of Marx’s predictions about America occasioned much soul-searching about the plausibility of his entire theory of history. In 1904 a young German scholar named Werner Sombart traveled to the United States— much as Alexis de Tocqueville had nearly seventy-ﬁve years earlier—to examine America’s puzzling reality ﬁrsthand (see “Thinking Globally: Alexis de Tocqueville on Democracy in America and Europe” pages 278–279)). Two years later he published the notable book Why Is There No Socialism in the United States? “If Socialism follows as a necessary reaction to capitalism,” he asked, why was there no socialist movement worthy of the name in “the country with the most advanced capitalist development, namely the United States?” Sombart gave several answers: 1. The strikingly egalitarian manners of all Americans. “The bowing and scraping before the ‘upper classes,’ which produces such an unpleasant impression in Europe, is completely unknown,” he noted, reﬂecting the workers’ refusal or inability to consider themselves a class apart.



 The IWW Seeks Subscribers, 1911 This poster aimed to attract subscribers to Industrial Worker, the newspaper of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW). The IWW was a small but vocal radical labor union that hoped to unify American workers in “one big union,” irrespective of their particular jobs, gender, or race. Its motto was “An injury to one is an injury to all.” At its peak in 1923, the union claimed 100,000 members, commonly known as Wobblies, and could marshal the support of some 300,000 more, mostly workers on the docks and in mines, lumbering, and textiles.

 2. The “safety valve” of the western frontier, which allowed workers to walk away from oppressive employers and strike out on their own. Sombart exaggerated the effects of the frontier (see p. 650), but he did call attention to the remarkable geographic mobility of American workers, which, together with their astonishing racial and ethnic diversity, worked to inhibit their sense of class permanence and class solidarity. 3. The American workers’ remarkably high standard of living. “On roast beef and apple pie,” he concluded in a famous sentence, “all socialist utopias have gone to pot.” 4. An accident of historical timing. Sombart shared with Tocqueville a deep insight into the American experience. Unlike Europe, where the struggles for political and economic rights went forward in tandem, in America workers had largely achieved full political equality before the onset of America’s own Industrial Revolution. They had a stake in the existing political order

 from the outset and little incentive to overturn it. As another German socialist put it, for the purposes of building class consciousness, “the struggle for freedom is very much superior to the effortless possession of a freedom that others have won before.” That observation echoed Tocqueville’s celebrated dictum that because the United States never had a feudal phase, it was born free, instead of becoming so, and was “reaping the fruits of the democratic revolution without having had the revolution itself.” More than a century after Sombart’s inquiry, and especially since the collapse of Soviet communism, Marxism stands largely discredited, and some western European societies are edging away from socialist ideas such as national ownership of industries. As one historian has suggested, “One might well ask not ‘Why is there no socialism in the United States?’ but “Why has there been no socialist transformation in any advanced capitalist society?”





Chapter 28 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 1901–1912


Political Progressivism
 The question “Who were the progressives?” evokes contradictory answers. Progressive reformers included militarists such as Theodore Roosevelt, who thrilled to the strenuous life, as well as paciﬁsts such as Jane Addams, whose loftiest goals included the abolition of war. Female settlement workers hoping to “Americanize” recent immigrants mobilized alongside labor unionists and enlightened businessmen to strengthen the helping hand of government. In diverse ways, and sometimes with divergent aims, the progressives sought to modernize American institutions to achieve two chief goals: to use the state to curb monopoly power and to improve the common person’s conditions of life and labor. Progressives emerged in both major parties, in all regions, and at all levels of government. The truth is that progressivism was less a monolithic minority movement and more a broadly dispersed majority mood. (See Varying Viewpoints, p. 744–745.)

 One of the ﬁ rst objectives of progressives was to regain the power that had slipped from the hands of the people into those of the “interests.” These ardent reformers pushed for direct primary elections so as to undercut power-hungry party bosses. They favored the initiative so that voters could directly propose legislation themselves, thus bypassing the boss-bought state legislatures. Progressives also agitated for the referendum. This device would place laws on the ballot for ﬁ nal approval by the people, especially laws that had been railroaded through a compliant legislature by free-spending agents of big business. The recall would enable the voters to remove faithless elected ofﬁcials, particularly those who had been bribed by bosses or lobbyists. Rooting out graft also became a prime goal of earnest progressives. A number of the state legislatures passed corrupt-practices acts, which limited the amount of money that candidates could spend for their election. Such legislation also restricted huge gifts from corporations, for which the donors would expect

 Jane Addams and Fellow Paciﬁsts, 1915 Addams cofounded the Women’s Peace Party in 1915. Its paciﬁst platform was said to represent the views of the “mother half of humanity.” Although the party initially attracted twenty-ﬁve thousand members, America’s entry into the war two years later eroded popular support, since paciﬁst internationalism became suspect as anti-American.

Urban Reformers


 special favors. The secret Australian ballot was likewise being introduced more widely in the states to counteract boss rule. Bribery was less feasible when bribers could not tell if they were getting their money’s worth from the bribed. Direct election of U.S. senators became a favorite goal of progressives, especially after the muckrakers had exposed the scandalous intimacy between greedy corporations and Congress. By 1900 the Senate had so many rich men that it was often sneered at as the “Millionaires’ Club.” Too many of these prosperous solons, elected as they then were by trust-dominated legislatures, heeded the voice of their “masters” rather than the voice of the masses. A constitutional amendment to bring about the popular election of senators had rough sledding in Congress, for the plutocratic members of the Senate were happy with existing methods. But a number of states established primary elections in which the voters expressed their preferences for the Senate. The local legislatures, when choosing senators, found it politically wise to heed the voice of the people. Partly as a result of such pressures, the Seventeenth Amendment to the Constitution, approved in 1913, established the direct election of U.S. senators (see the Appendix). But the expected improvement in caliber was slow in coming. Woman suffrage, the goal of female reformers for many decades, likewise received powerful new support from the progressives early in the 1900s. The political reformers believed that women’s votes would elevate the political tone, and the foes of the saloon felt that they could count on the support of enfranchised females. The suffragists, with their cry of “Votes for Women” and “Equal Suffrage for Men and Women,” protested bitterly against “Taxation Without Representation.” Many of the states, especially the more liberal ones in the West, such as Washington, Cal i fornia, and

 The suffrage campaign of the early twentieth century beneﬁted from a new generation of women who considered themselves “feminists.” At a mass meeting in New York in 1914, Marie Jenny Howe (1870–1934), a minister by training as well as a prominent early feminist, proclaimed,

“


 We intend simply to be ourselves, not just our little female selves, but our whole big human selves.

”




 Oregon, gradually extended the vote to women. But by 1910 nationwide female suffrage was still a decade away, and a suffragist could still be sneeringly deﬁned as “one who has ceased to be a lady and has not yet become a gentleman.”

Progressivism in the
Cities and States
 Progressives scored some of their most impressive gains in the cities. Frustrated by the inefﬁciency and corruption of machine-oiled city government, many localities followed the pioneering example of Galveston, Texas. In 1901 it had appointed expert-staffed commissions to manage urban affairs. Other communities adopted the city-manager system, also designed to take politics out of municipal administration. Some of these “reforms” obviously valued efﬁciency more highly than democracy, as control of civic affairs was further removed from the people’s hands. Urban reformers likewise attacked “slumlords,” juvenile delinquency, and wide-open prostitution (viceat-a-price), which ﬂourished in red-light districts unchallenged by bribed police. Public-spirited Americans looked to Eng lish and German cities for lessons on how to clean up their water supplies, light their streets, and run their trolley cars. The vogue of public ownership of utilities swept the nation as local governments tried to halt the corrupt sale of franchises. Progressivism naturally bubbled up to the state level, notably in Wisconsin, which became a yeasty laboratory of reform. The governor of the state, pompadoured Robert M. (“Fighting Bob”) La Follette, was an undersized but overbearing crusader who emerged as the most militant of the progressive Republican leaders. After a desperate ﬁght with entrenched monopoly, he reached the governor’s chair in 1901. Routing the lumber and railroad “interests,” he wrested considerable control from the crooked corporations and returned it to the people. He also perfected a scheme for regulating public utilities, while laboring in close association with experts on the faculty of the state university at Madison. Other states marched steadily toward the progressive camp, as they undertook to regulate railroads and trusts, chieﬂy through public utility commissions. Oregon was not far behind Wisconsin, and Cal i fornia made giant bootstrides under the stocky Hiram W. Johnson. Elected Republican governor in 1910, this dynamic prosecutor of grafters helped break the dominant grip of the Southern Paciﬁc Railroad on Cal i fornia



Chapter 28 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 1901–1912


 politics and then, like La Follette, set up a political machine of his own. Heavily whiskered Charles Evans Hughes, the able and audacious reformist Republican governor of New York, had earlier gained national fame as an investigator of malpractices by gas and insurance companies and by the coal trust.

Progressive Women
 Women proved themselves an indispensable part of the progressive army. A crucial focus for women’s activism was the settlement house movement (see p. 607). At a time when women could neither vote nor hold political ofﬁce, settlement houses offered a side door to public life. They exposed middle-class women to the problems plaguing America’s cities, including poverty, political corruption, and intolerable working and living conditions. They also gave them the skills and conﬁdence to attack those evils. The women’s club movement provided an even broader civic entryway for many middle-class women. Literary clubs, where educated women met to improve themselves with poetry and prose, had existed for decades. But in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, many of these clubs set aside Shakespeare and Henry James for social issues and current events. “Dante has been dead for several centuries,” observed the president of the General Federation of Women’s Clubs in 1904. “I

Progressive Women Inspect
 Factories This photograph by Lewis Hine for the National Child Labor Committee depicts female factory inspectors from all over the country. From left to right, as they were identiﬁed at the time: Miss Ella Haas, state factory inspector, Dayton, Ohio; Miss Mary Malone, state inspector of the ten-hour law, Delaware; Mrs. Florence Kelley, chief state factory inspector of Illinois, 1893–1897; Miss Jean Gordon, factories inspector, Parish of New Orleans, 1908; Miss Madge Nave, factory inspector, Louisville, Kentucky; Mrs. Martha D. Gould, factories inspector, Parish of New Orleans.

 think it is time that we dropped the study of his Inferno and turned our attention to our own.” Nineteenth-century notions of “separate spheres” dictated that a woman’s place was in the home, so most female progressives defended their new activities as an extension—not a rejection—of the traditional roles of wife and mother. Thus they were often drawn to moral and “maternal” issues like keeping children out of smudgy mills and sweltering sweatshops, attacking the scourge of tuberculosis bred in airless tenements, winning pensions for mothers with dependent children, and ensuring that only safe food products found their way to the family table. Female activists agitated through orga ni zations like the National Consumers League (1899) and the Women’s Trade Union League (1903), as well as through two new federal agencies, the Children’s Bureau (1912) and the Women’s Bureau (1920), both in the Department of Labor. These wedges into the federal bureaucracy, however small, gave female reformers a national stage for social investigation and advocacy. Campaigns for factory reform and temperance particularly attracted women foot soldiers. Unsafe and unsanitary sweatshops—factories where workers toiled long hours for low wages—were a public scandal in many cities. Florence Kelley, a former resident of Jane Addams’s Hull House, became the State of Illinois’s ﬁ rst chief factory inspector and one of the nation’s leading advocates for improved factory con-

Progressivism in the Courts




 The Wages of Negligence Ofﬁcials review the charred remains of some of the survivors of the catastrophic Triangle Shirtwaist Company ﬁre in 1911. Outrage over this calamity galvanized a generation of reformers to ﬁght for better workplace safety rules.

 ditions. In 1899 Kelley took control of the newly founded National Consumers League, which mobilized female consumers to pressure for laws safeguarding women and children in the workplace. In the landmark case Muller v. Oregon (1908), crusading attorney Louis D. Brandeis persuaded the Supreme Court to accept the constitutionality of laws protecting women workers by presenting evidence of the harmful effects of factory labor on women’s weaker bodies. Although this argument calling for special protection for women seemed discriminatory by later standards and closed many “male” jobs to women, progressives at the time hailed Brandeis’s achievement as a triumph over existing legal doctrine, which afforded employers total control over the workplace. The American welfare state that emerged from female activism focused more on protecting women and children than on granting beneﬁts to everyone, as was the case in much of western Europe, with its stronger labor movements.

 Crusaders for these humane mea sures did not always have smooth sailing. One dismaying setback came in 1905, when the Supreme Court, in Lochner v. New York, invalidated a New York law establishing a ten-hour day for bakers. Yet the reformist progressive wave ﬁ nally washed up into the judiciary, and in 1917 the Court upheld a ten-hour law for factory workers. Laws regulating factories were worthless if not enforced, a truth horribly demonstrated by a lethal ﬁ re in 1911 at the Triangle Shirtwaist Company in New York City. Locked doors and other ﬂagrant violations of the ﬁ re code turned the factory into a death trap. One hundred forty-six workers, most of them young immigrant women, were incinerated or leapt from eighth- and ninth-story windows to their deaths. Lashed by the public outcry, including a massive strike by women in the needle trades, the New York legislature passed much stronger laws regulating the hours and conditions of sweatshop toil. Other legislatures



Chapter 28 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 1901–1912


 Frances E. Willard, who would fall to her knees in prayer on saloon ﬂoors, mobilized nearly 1 million women to “make the world homelike” and built the WCTU into the largest orga ni zation of women in the world. She found a vigorous ally in the Anti-Saloon League, which was aggressive, well orga nized, and well ﬁnanced. Caught up in the crusade, some states and numerous counties passed “dry” laws, which controlled, restricted, or abolished alcohol. The big cities were generally “wet,” for they had a large immigrant vote accustomed in the Old Country to the free ﬂow of wine and beer. When World War I erupted in 1914, nearly one-half of the population lived in “dry” territory, and nearly three-fourths of the total area had outlawed saloons. Demon Rum was groggy and about to be ﬂoored—temporarily—by the Eighteenth Amendment in 1919.

 TR’s Square Deal for Labor

Out of Work and the Reason Why, 1899
 This temperance propaganda from an 1899 magazine illustrates the role of women in the temperance movement. Alcohol abuse threatened the stability of the family, still predominantly considered the “woman’s sphere” in the late nineteenth century.

 followed, and by 1917 thirty states had put workers’ compensation laws on the books, providing insurance to workers injured in industrial accidents. Gradually the concept of the employer’s responsibility to society was replacing the old dog-eat-dog philosophy of unregulated free enterprise. Corner saloons, with their shutter doors, naturally attracted the ire and ﬁ re of progressives. Alcohol was intimately connected with prostitution in red-light districts, with the drunken voter, with crooked city ofﬁcials dominated by “booze” interests, and with the blowsy “boss” who counted poker chips by night and miscounted ballots by day (including the “cemetery vote”). By 1900 cities like New York and San Francisco had one saloon for about every two hundred people. Antiliquor campaigners received powerful support from several militant organizations, notably the Woman’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU). Founder

 Theodore Roosevelt, although something of an imperialistic busybody abroad, was touched by the progressive wave at home. Like other reformers, he feared that the “public interest” was being submerged in the drifting seas of indifference. Everybody’s interest was nobody’s interest. Roosevelt decided to make it his. His sportsman’s instincts spurred him into demanding a “Square Deal” for capital, labor, and the public at large. Broadly speaking, the president’s program embraced three C’s: control of the corporations, consumer protection, and conservation of natural resources. The Square Deal for labor received its acid test in 1902, when a crippling strike broke out in the anthracite coal mines of Pennsylvania. Some 140,000 besooted workers, many of them illiterate immigrants, had long been frightfully exploited and accidentplagued. They demanded, among other improvements, a 20 percent increase in pay and a reduction of the working day from ten to nine hours. Unsympathetic mine owners, conﬁdent that a chilled public would react against the miners, refused to arbitrate or even negotiate. One of their spokesmen, multimillionaire George F. Baer, reﬂected the highand-mighty attitude of certain ungenerous employers. Workers, he wrote, would be cared for “not by the labor agitators, but by the Christian men to whom God in His inﬁ nite wisdom has given the control of the property interests of this country.” As coal supplies dwindled, factories and schools were forced to shut down, and even hospitals felt the

Muller v. Oregon, 1908
 ourt records provide notably fruitful sources for historians. They not only tell often-colorful stories about the lives of ordinary men and women caught up in the legal system; they also by their very nature testify to the norms and values that lawyers employ to make their cases and that judges invoke to explain their decisions. The case of Muller v. Oregon (see p. 711) is especially instructive on both counts. The ofﬁcial Supreme Court records tell how on September 4, 1905, Joe Haselbock, a supervisor in Curt Muller’s Grand Laundry in Portland, Oregon, asked an employee, Mrs. E. Gotcher, to remain after hours to do an extra load of laundry. That

C


 request violated Oregon’s law prohibiting women from working more than ten hours per day. Mrs. Gotcher later complained to the authorities, and Muller was ﬁned $10. Muller refused to pay and took his case all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court. In its landmark decision (below), the Court upheld the constitutionality of the Oregon statute, and Muller at last had to cough up his ﬁ ne. On what grounds did the Court justify its ruling? What does Justice David J. Brewer’s argument on behalf of the Court’s decision suggest about the cultural identity and social role of women in early-twentieth-century American society?

(208 U.S. 412)
CURT MULLER,
Plff. in Err., v. STATE OF OREGON. . . . That woman’s physical structure and the performance of material functions place her at a disadvantage in the struggle for subsistence is obvious. This is especially true when the burdens of motherhood are upon her. . . . and as healthy mothers are essential to vigorous offspring, the physical well-being of woman becomes an object of public interest and care in order to preserve the strength and vigor of the race. Still again, history discloses the fact that woman has always been dependent upon man. He established his control at the outset by superior physical strength, and this control in various forms, with diminishing intensity, has continued to the present. . . . It is still true that in the struggle for subsistence she is not an equal competitor with her brother. . . . Differentiated by these matters from the other sex, she is properly placed in a class by herself, and legislation designed for her protection may be sustained, even when like legislation is not necessary for men, and could not be sustained. 
 It is impossible to close one’s eyes to the fact that she still looks to her brother and depends upon him. . . . The two sexes differ in structure of body, in the functions to be performed by each, in the amount of physical strength, in the capacity for long continued labor, particularly when done standing, the influence of vigorous health upon the future well-being of the race, the self-reliance which enables one to assert full rights, and in the capacity to maintain the struggle for subsistence. This difference justifies a difference in legislation, and upholds that which is designed to compensate for some of the burdens which rest upon her. We have not referred in this discussion to the denial of the elective franchise in the state of Oregon, for while that may disclose a lack of political equality in all things with her brother, that is not of itself decisive. The reason runs deeper, and rests in the inherent difference between the two sexes, and in the different functions in life which they perform. . . .





Chapter 28 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 1901–1912


 Roosevelt was a charismatic ﬁgure who made a powerful impression on his contemporaries. The journalist William Allen White (1868–1944) later wrote of his ﬁrst meeting with TR in 1897,

“


 He sounded in my heart the ﬁrst trumpet call of the new time that was to be. . . . I had never known such a man as he, and never shall again. He overcame me. And in the hour or two we spent that day at lunch, and in a walk down F Street, he poured into my heart such visions, such ideals, such hopes, such a new attitude toward life and patriotism and the meaning of things, as I had never dreamed men had. . . . After that I was his man.

”


 icy grip of winter. Desperately seeking a solution, Roosevelt summoned representatives of the striking miners and the mine owners to the White House. He was profoundly annoyed by the “extraordinary stupidity and bad temper” of the “wooden-headed gentry” who operated the mines. As he later confessed, if it had not been for the dignity of his high ofﬁce, he would have taken one of them “by the seat of the breeches” and “chucked him out of the window.” Roosevelt ﬁ nally resorted to his trusty big stick when he threatened to seize the mines and operate them with federal troops. Faced with this ﬁ rst-timeever threat to use federal bayonets against capital, rather than labor, the owners grudgingly consented to arbitration. A compromise decision ultimately gave the miners a 10 percent pay boost and a working day of nine hours. But their union was not ofﬁcially recognized as a bargaining agent. Keenly aware of the mounting antagonisms between capital and labor, Roosevelt urged Congress to create the new Department of Commerce and Labor. This goal was achieved in 1903. (Ten years later the agency was split in two.) An important arm of the newborn cabinet body was the Bureau of Corporations, which was authorized to probe businesses engaged in interstate commerce. The bureau was highly useful in helping to break the stranglehold of monopoly and in clearing the road for the era of “trust-busting.”

TR
Corrals the Corporations The sprawling railroad octopus sorely needed restraint. The Interstate Commerce Commission, created in 1887 as a feeble sop to the public, had proved woefully inadequate. Railroad barons could simply appeal the commission’s decisions on rates to the federal courts—a process that might take ten years. Spurred by the former-cowboy president, Congress passed effective railroad legislation, beginning with the Elkins Act of 1903. This curb was aimed primarily at the rebate evil. Heavy ﬁ nes could now be imposed both on the railroads that gave rebates and on the shippers that accepted them. Still more effective was the Hepburn Act of 1906. Free passes, with their hint of bribery, were severely restricted. The once-infantile Interstate Commerce Commission was expanded, and its reach was extended to include express companies, sleeping-car companies, and pipelines. For the ﬁ rst time, the commission was given real molars when it was authorized, on complaint of shippers, to nullify existing rates and stipulate maximum rates. Railroads also provided Roosevelt with an opportunity to brandish his antitrust bludgeon. Trusts had come to be a ﬁghting word in the progressive era. Roosevelt believed that these industrial behemoths, with their efﬁcient means of production, had arrived to stay. He concluded that there were “good” trusts, with public consciences, and “bad” trusts, which lusted greedily for power. He was determined to respond to the popular outcry against the trusts but was also determined not to throw out the baby with the bathwater by indiscriminately smashing all large businesses. Roosevelt as a trustbuster ﬁ rst burst into the headlines in 1902 with an attack on the Northern Securities Company, a railroad holding company orga nized by ﬁnancial titan J. P. Morgan and empire builder James J. Hill. These Napoleonic moguls of money sought to achieve a virtual monopoly of the railroads in the Northwest. Roosevelt was therefore challenging the most regal potentates of the industrial aristocracy. The railway promoters appealed to the Supreme Court, which in 1904 upheld Roosevelt’s antitrust suit and ordered the Northern Securities Company to be dissolved. The Northern Securities decision jolted Wall Street and angered big business but greatly enhanced Roosevelt’s reputation as a trust smasher. Roosevelt’s big stick crashed down on other giant monopolies, as he initiated over forty legal proceedings 
Protecting Consumers




 dustrial behemoths were healthier—though perhaps more “tame”—at the end of Roosevelt’s reign than they had been before. His successor, William Howard Taft, actually “busted” more trusts than TR did. In one celebrated instance in 1907, Roosevelt even gave his personal blessing to J. P. Morgan’s plan to have U.S. Steel absorb the Tennessee Coal and Iron Company, without fear of antitrust reprisals. When Taft then launched a suit against U.S. Steel in 1911, the political reaction from TR was explosive.

Caring for the Consumer


 Roosevelt Tames the Trusts Legend to the contrary, Roosevelt did not attack all trusts indiscriminately. Rather, he pursued a few high-proﬁle cases against a handful of corporate giants, in order to “tame” other businesses into accepting government regulation.

 against them. The Supreme Court in 1905 declared the beef trust illegal, and the heavy ﬁst of justice fell upon monopolists controlling sugar, fertilizer, harvesters, and other key products. Much mythology has inﬂated Roosevelt’s reputation as a trustbuster. The Rough Rider understood the political popularity of monopoly-smashing, but he did not consider it sound economic policy. Combination and integration, he felt, were the hallmarks of the age, and to try to stem the tide of economic progress by political means he considered the rankest folly. Bigness was not necessarily badness, so why punish success? Roosevelt’s real purpose in assaulting the Goliaths of industry was symbolic: to prove conclusively that the government, not private business, ruled the country. He believed in regulating, not fragmenting, the big business combines. The threat of dissolution, he felt, might make the sultans of the smokestacks more amenable to federal regulation—as it did. In truth, Roosevelt never swung his trust-crushing stick with maximum force. In many ways the huge in-

 Roosevelt backed a noteworthy mea sure in 1906 that beneﬁted both corporations and consumers. Big meatpackers were being shut out of certain European markets because some American meat—from the small packinghouses, claimed the giants—had been found to be tainted. Foreign governments were even threatening to ban all American meat imports by throwing out the good beef with the bad botulism. At the same time, American consumers hungered for safer canned products. Their appetite for reform was whetted by Upton Sinclair’s sensational novel The Jungle, published in 1906. Sinclair, a dedicated Socialist, intended his revolting tract to focus attention on the plight of the workers in the big canning factories, but instead he appalled the public with his description of disgustingly unsanitary food products. (As he put it, he aimed for the nation’s heart but hit its stomach.) The book described in noxious detail the ﬁ lth, disease, and putrefaction in Chicago’s damp, illventilated slaughterhouses. Many readers, including Roosevelt, were so sickened that for a time they found meat unpalatable. The president was moved by the loathsome mess in Chicago to appoint a special investigating commission, whose cold-blooded report almost outdid Sinclair’s novel. It related how piles of poisoned rats, rope ends, splinters, and other debris were scooped up and canned as potted ham. A cynical jingle of the time ran, Mary had a little lamb, And when she saw it sicken, She shipped it off to Packingtown, And now it’s labeled chicken. Backed by a nauseated public, Roosevelt induced Congress to pass the Meat Inspection Act of 1906. It decreed that the preparation of meat shipped over state lines would be subject to federal inspection from



Chapter 28 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 1901–1912


Sausage Making, ca. 1906
 White-jacketed inspectors like those on the right made some progress in cleaning up the septic slaughterhouses after the passage of the Meat Inspection Act in 1906.

 corral to can. Although the largest packers resisted certain features of the act, they accepted it as an opportunity to drive their smaller, ﬂy-by-night competitors out of business. At the same time, they could receive the government’s seal of approval on their exports. As a companion to the Meat Inspection Act, the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 was designed to prevent the adulteration and mislabeling of foods and pharmaceuticals.

Earth Control
 Wasteful Americans, assuming that their natural resources were inexhaustible, had looted and polluted their incomparable domain with unparalleled speed and greed. Western ranchers and timbermen were especially eager to accelerate the destructive process, for they panted to build up the country, and the environmental consequences be hanged. But even before the end of the nineteenth century, far-visioned leaders saw that such a squandering of the nation’s birthright would have to be halted, or America would sink from resource richness to despoiled dearth. A ﬁ rst feeble step toward conservation had been taken with the Desert Land Act of 1877, under which the federal government sold arid land cheaply on the condition that the purchaser irrigate the thirsty soil within three years. More successful was the Forest Re-

 serve Act of 1891, authorizing the president to set aside public forests as national parks and other reserves. Under this statute some 46 million acres of magniﬁcent trees were rescued from the lumberman’s saw in the 1890s and preserved for posterity. The Carey Act of 1894 distributed federal land to the states on the condition that it be irrigated and settled. A new day in the history of conservation dawned with Roosevelt (see “Makers of America: The Environmentalists,” pp. 718–719). Huntsman, naturalist, rancher, lover of the great outdoors, he was appalled by the pillaging of timber and mineral resources. Other dedicated conservationists, notably Gifford Pin-

 In his annual message to Congress in 1907, Roosevelt declared prophetically,

“


 We are prone to speak of the resources of this country as inexhaustible; this is not so. The mineral wealth of the country, the coal, iron, oil, gas, and the like, does not reproduce itself, and therefore is certain to be exhausted ultimately; and wastefulness in dealing with it to-day means that our descendants will feel the exhaustion a generation or two before they otherwise would.

”


The Conservation Crusade


 High Point for Conservation Roosevelt and famed naturalist John Muir visit Glacier Point, on the rim of Yosemite Valley, California. In the distance is Yosemite Falls; a few feet behind Roosevelt is a sheer drop of 3,254 feet.

 chot, head of the federal Division of Forestry, had broken important ground before him. But Roosevelt seized the banner of leadership and charged into the fray with all the weight of his prestige, his energy, his ﬁ rsthand knowledge, and his slashing invective. The thirst of the desert still unslaked, Congress responded to the whip of the Rough Rider by passing the landmark Newlands Act of 1902. Washington was authorized to collect money from the sale of public lands in the sun-baked western states and then use these funds for the development of irrigation projects. Settlers repaid the cost of reclamation from their nowproductive soil, and the money was put into a revolving fund to ﬁ nance more such enterprises. The giant Roosevelt Dam, constructed on Arizona’s Salt River, was appropriately dedicated by Roosevelt in 1911. Thanks to this epochal legislation, dozens of dams



 were thrown across virtually every major western river in the ensuing decades. Roosevelt pined to preserve the nation’s shrinking forests. By 1900 only about a quarter of the once-vast virgin timberlands remained standing. Lumbermen had already logged off most of the ﬁ rst-growth timber from Maine to Michigan, and the sharp thud of their axes was beginning to split the silence in the great ﬁ r forests of the Paciﬁc slope. Roosevelt proceeded to set aside in federal reserves some 125 million acres, or almost three times the acreage thus saved from the saw by his three predecessors. He similarly earmarked millions of acres of coal deposits, as well as water resources useful for irrigation and power. To set a shining example, in 1902 he banned Christmas trees from the White House. Conservation, including reclamation, may have been Roosevelt’s most enduring tangible achievement. He was buoyed in this effort by an upwelling national mood of concern about the disappearance of the frontier—believed to be the source of such national characteristics as individualism and democracy. An increasingly citiﬁed people worried that too much civilization might not be good for the national soul. City dwellers snapped up Jack London’s Call of the Wild (1903) and other books about nature, and urban youngsters made the outdoor-oriented Boy Scouts of America the country’s largest youth orga ni zation. Middle-class clubwomen raised money for nature preserves and orga nized the Massachusetts—and later National— Audubon Society to save wild native birds by banning the use of plumes to ornament fashionable ladies’ hats. The Sierra Club, founded in 1892, dedicated itself to preserving the wildness of the western landscape.

 Gifford Pinchot (1865–1946), a leading conservationist in the Roosevelt administration, wrote,

“


 The object of our forest policy is not to preserve the forests because they are refuges for the wild creatures of the wilderness, but the making of prosperous homes. Every other consideration comes as secondary. . . . The test of utility . . . implies that no lands will be permanently reserves which can serve the people better in any other way.

”


MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Environmentalists American Migration 
H


 umans have long been awed by nature, but they have also yearned to be its masters. Native American peoples did what they could to shape the natural environment to serve their purposes—burning forests and grasslands, for example, to improve hunting habitats—but they lacked the tools to make Mother Earth bow deeply to their will. The earliest European colonists saw North America as a “howling wilderness” and toiled mightily with ax and plow to tame it. By the mid-nineteenth century, Americans commanded powerful new technologies like the railroad and steam-powered dredges, which promised unbridled dominion over the natural world. Only then did voices begin to be heard in defense of the wounded earth—the faint ﬁ rst stirrings of what would come to be called “environmentalism.” In a pattern that would often be repeated, nature’s earliest defenders tended to be well-off townsfolk and city dwellers, like Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson. The Americans most likely to appreciate the value of the pristine wilderness, it seemed, were those who had ceased to struggle against it. (“Cities, not log cabins, produce Sierra Clubbers,” one historian noted.) For the loggers, miners, and farmers who continued to sweat their living out of nature’s grudging embrace, concern for environmental niceties often seemed like the sanctimonious piety of a privileged elite. By the dawn of the twentieth century, many genteel, urban Americans had come to romanticize their pioneer forebears. They reinvented hunting and ﬁshing as sports for the well-to-do, not simply as ways to put food on the table. Preservationists like John Muir waxed lyrical about the mystic allure of unspoiled nature. Seizing the popular mood, Theodore Roosevelt deliberately constructed a public image of himself as a manly outdoorsman—raising cattle in the Dakotas, shooting lions in Africa, rafting down wild rivers in the Amazon basin—and as president he greatly expanded the system of national forests. But Roosevelt was also a pioneer of another sort—as a prominent promoter of the progressive-era “conservation” movement, composed of a loose coalition of scientists, bureaucrats, and businesspeople dependent on stable access to America’s rich endowment of natural resources. Progressive conservationists believed that nature must



 be neither uncritically reverenced nor wastefully exploited, but must instead be efﬁciently utilized. Thus the same TR who admired the wonders of Yosemite Valley in the company of John Muir also supported the professional forester Gifford Pinchot, who declared that “the object of our forest policy is not to preserve the forests because they are refuges for the wild creatures of the wilderness, but the making of prosperous homes. . . . Use must be the test by which the forester tries himself.” Pinchot’s “rational use” philosophy guided America’s natural resource policy until the mid-twentieth century. It justiﬁed the systematic harvesting of millions of trees in the sprawling national forests whose boundaries Roosevelt had expanded, and the drowning of vast river valleys behind massive dams that Roosevelt’s Reclamation Service helped to build. This attitude toward nature triumphed in the New Deal era of the 1930s, when the federal government initiated colossal projects that undertook nothing less than reengineering the face of the continent—including the Tennessee Valley Authority, the Soil Conservation Service, and the Shelterbelt tree-planting project on the Great Plains. The huge reach of these New Deal projects also introduced millions of Americans to the con-

 Gifford Pinchot Going Trout Fishing The father of the modern Forest Service, Pinchot championed the concept of “rational use” as the guiding principle of the federal government’s natural resource management policies.

 Lake Powell, Utah Named for the famed explorer John Wesley Powell and formed by one of the several dams on the Colorado River, Lake Powell has been a focus of intense controversy. It drowned the spectacularly beautiful Glen Canyon but created recreational facilities for countless Americans.

 cept that nature had to be treated with respect, helping to stimulate the post–World War II grassroots environmental movement. The rise of ecological science in the post–World War II era fundamentally changed the debate about the relation of nature to civilization. Ecologists charged that the apparent “rationality” of the earlier conservationists dangerously neglected the fateful intricacies of

 Earth Day, 1999 Some ﬁfteen hundred schoolchildren gathered on the shoreline near Los Angeles to participate in a beach cleanup project. The “O” here represents planet earth; the children inside it represent the North and South American continents.

 biological systems. They called attention to the stunningly complex webs of interrelationships that linked together seemingly unrelated organisms—and to the perils of tampering even slightly with the delicate biological fabrics that nature had taken millennia to weave. Rachel Carson helped to popularize the new outlook in her sensational 1962 exposé, Silent Spring, about the far-reaching effects of pesticides on birds, plants, and animals—including humans. The advent of ecological studies coincided with a revival of preservationist sentiment, especially in the suburbs, where Americans increasingly dwelled. Hordes of afﬂuent baby boomers took to America’s trails, slopes, and waterways—often on public lands like Arizona’s wondrous Grand Canyon National Park, or public waters like Utah’s shimmering (and manmade) Lake Powell. Membership in environmental orga ni zations such as the Sierra Club and the Audubon Society soared, as a generation infatuated with nature demanded a clean and green world. The ﬁ rst celebration of Earth Day, on April 22, 1970, marked the political maturation of modern-day environmentalism, which wedded scientiﬁc analysis with respect for nature’s majesty. That same year saw the creation of the federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), soon followed by the Endangered Species Act and other legislation designed to regulate the relationship between humans and nature. At the outset of the twenty-ﬁ rst century, developments like global warming served dramatic notice that planet earth was the biggest ecological system of them all—one that did not recognize national boundaries. Yet while Americans took pride in the efforts they had made to clean up their own turf, who were they, having long since consumed much of their own timberlands, to tell the Brazilians that they should not cut down the Amazon rain forest? Who were they, having tamed virtually all their own free-ﬂowing waters, to tell the Chinese not to dam their rivers? For the peoples of the developing world, struggling to match America’s standard of living, environmentalists often seemed like spoiled spoilers, preaching the same privileged pieties that had infuriated generations of working Americans.





Chapter 28 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 1901–1912


Loggers in the State of Washington,
 1912 It took the sweat and skill of many men to conquer a giant Douglas ﬁr like this one. An axwielding “sniper” had rounded the edges of this log so that a team of oxen, driven by a “bullwhacker,” could more easily drag it out of the woods along a “skid road.” Skid road (sometimes corrupted as skid row) was also a name for the often-sleazy sections of logging towns, where loggers spent their time in the off-season.

 The preservationists lost a major battle in 1913 when the federal government allowed the city of San Francisco to build a dam for its municipal water supply in the spectacular, high-walled Hetch Hetchy Valley in Yosemite National Park. The Hetch Hetchy controversy laid bare a deep division between conservationists that persists to the present day. To the preservationists of the Sierra Club, including famed

Flooding the Hetch Hetchy Valley
 to Quench San Francisco’s Thirst Preservationists led by John Muir battled for seven years— unsuccessfully—to prevent the building of a dam that would turn this spectacular glacial valley in Yosemite National Park into the Hetch Hetchy Reservoir, which would provide San Francisco with water. Muir observed, “Dam Hetch Hetchy! As well dam for water-tanks the people’s cathedrals and churches, for no holier temple has ever been consecrated by the heart of man.” Today environmentalists are campaigning to restore the Hetch Hetchy Valley by removing the dam.

 naturalist John Muir, Hetch Hetchy was a “temple” of nature that should be held inviolable by the civilizing hand of humanity. But other conservationists, among them President Roosevelt’s chief forester, Gifford Pinchot, believed that “wilderness was waste.” Pinchot and Roosevelt wanted to use the nation’s natural endowment intelligently. In their eyes they had to battle on two fronts: against greedy commercial interests

The Panic of 1907


 that abused nature, as well as against romantic preservationists in thrall to simple “woodman-spare-thattree” sentimentality. Under Roosevelt professional foresters and engineers developed a policy of “multiple-use resource management.” They sought to combine recreation, sustained-yield logging, watershed protection, and summer stock grazing on the same expanse of federal land. At ﬁ rst many westerners resisted the federal management of natural resources, but they soon learned



 how to take advantage of new agencies like the Forest Service and especially the Bureau of Reclamation. The largest ranches and timber companies in particular ﬁgured out how to work hand in glove with federal conservation programs devoted to the rational, largescale, and long-term use of natural resources. The one-man-and-a-mule logger or the one-man-and-adog sheepherder had little clout in the new resources bureaucracy. Single-person enterprises were shouldered aside, in the interest of efﬁciency, by the combined bulk of big business and big government.

The “Roosevelt Panic” of 1907


 The Machine and Nature These hardy sightseers at the Grand Canyon in 1911 ironically and probably unwittingly foreshadowed the mass tourism that arrived with the dawning automobile age. Soon millions of motorized Americans would regularly ﬂee from the cities and suburbs to “get away from it all” in wilderness sites increasingly overrun by their fellow refugees from “civilization.”

 Roosevelt was handily elected president “in his own right” in 1904 and entered his new term buoyed by his enormous personal popularity—the cuddly “teddy bear” honored one of his bear-hunting exploits (when he saved the life of a cub), and children piped vigorously on whistles modeled on his famous teeth. Yet the conser vative Republican bosses considered him as dangerous and unpredictable as a rattlesnake. They grew increasingly restive as Roosevelt in his second term called ever more loudly for regulating corporations, taxing incomes, and protecting workers. Roosevelt, meanwhile, had partly defanged himself after his election in 1904 by announcing that under no circumstances would he be a candidate for a third term. This was a tactical blunder, for the power of the king wanes when the people know he will be dead in four years. Roosevelt suffered a sharp setback in 1907, when a short but punishing panic descended on Wall Street. The ﬁ nancial ﬂurry featured frightened “runs” on banks, suicides, and criminal indictments against speculators. The ﬁ nancial world hastened to blame Roosevelt for the storm. It cried that this “quack” had unsettled industry with his boat-rocking tactics. Conservatives damned him as “Theodore the Meddler” and branded the current distress the “Roosevelt panic.” The hottempered president angrily lashed back at his critics when he accused “certain malefactors of great wealth” of having deliberately engineered the monetary crisis to force the government to relax its assaults on trusts. Fortunately, the panic of 1907 paved the way for long-overdue ﬁscal reforms. Precipitating a currency shortage, the ﬂurry laid bare the need for a more elastic medium of exchange. In a crisis of this sort, the hardpressed banks were unable to increase the volume of



Chapter 28 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 1901–1912


 money in circulation, and those with ample reserves were reluctant to lend to their less fortunate competitors. Congress in 1908 responded by passing the Aldrich-Vreeland Act, which authorized national banks to issue emergency currency backed by various kinds of collateral. The path was thus smoothed for the momentous Federal Reserve Act of 1913 (see p. 733).

The Rough Rider
Thunders Out
 Still warmly popular in 1908, Roosevelt could easily have won a second presidential nomination and almost certainly the election. But he felt bound by his impulsive postelection promise after his victory in 1904. The departing president thus naturally sought a successor who would carry out “my policies.” The man of his choice was amiable, ample-girthed, and hugeframed William Howard Taft, secretary of war and a mild progressive. As an heir apparent, he had often been called upon in Roosevelt’s absence to “sit on the lid”—all 350 pounds of him. At the Republican convention of 1908 in Chicago, Roosevelt used his control of the party machinery—the “steamroller”—to push through Taft’s nomination on the ﬁ rst ballot. Three weeks later, in mile-high Denver, in the heart of silver country, the Democrats nominated twice-beaten William Jennings Bryan. The dull campaign of 1908 featured the rotund Taft and the now-balding “Boy Orator” both trying to don the progressive Roosevelt mantle. The solid Judge Taft read cut-and-dried speeches, while Bryan griped that Roosevelt had stolen his policies from the Bryanite camp. A majority of voters chose stability with Roosevelt-endorsed Taft, who polled 321 electoral votes to 162 for Bryan. The victor’s popular count was 7,675,320 to 6,412,294. The election’s only surprise came from the Socialists, who amassed 420,793 votes for Eugene V. Debs, the hero of the Pullman strike of 1894 (see pp. 658–659). Roosevelt, ever in the limelight, left soon after the election for a lion hunt in Africa. His numerous enemies clinked glasses while toasting “Health to the lions,” and a few irreverently prayed that some big cat would “do its duty.” But TR survived, still bursting with energy at the age of ﬁ fty-one in 1909. Roosevelt was branded by his adversaries as a wild-eyed radical, but his reputation as an eater of errant industrialists now seems inﬂated. He fought many a sham battle, and the number of laws he inspired was

 Baby, Kiss Papa Good-bye Theodore Roosevelt leaves his baby, “My Policies,” in the hands of his chosen successor, William Howard Taft. Friction between Taft and Roosevelt would soon erupt, however, prompting Roosevelt to return to politics and challenge Taft for the presidency.

 certainly not in proportion to the amount of noise he emitted. He was often under attack from the reigning business lords, but the more enlightened of them knew that they had a friend in the White House. Roosevelt should be remembered ﬁ rst and foremost as the cowboy who started to tame the bucking bronco of adolescent capitalism, thus ensuring it a long adult life. TR’s enthusiasm and perpetual youthfulness, like an overgrown Boy Scout’s, appealed to the young of all ages. “You must always remember,” a British diplomat cautioned his colleagues, “that the president is about six.” He served as a political lightning rod to protect capitalists against popular indignation—and against socialism, which Roosevelt regarded as “ominous.” He strenuously sought the middle road between

Taft as President


 unbridled individualism and paternalistic collectivism. His conservation crusade, which tried to mediate between the romantic wilderness-preservationists and the rapacious resource-predators, was probably his most typical and his most lasting achievement. Several other contributions of Roosevelt lasted beyond his presidency. First, he greatly enlarged the power and prestige of the presidential ofﬁce—and masterfully developed the technique of using the big stick of publicity as a political bludgeon. Second, he helped shape the progressive movement and beyond it the liberal reform campaigns later in the century. His Square Deal, in a sense, was the grandfather of the New Deal later launched by his ﬁ fth cousin, Franklin D. Roosevelt. Finally, to a greater degree than any of his predecessors, TR opened the eyes of Americans to the fact that they shared the world with other nations. As a great power, they had fallen heir to responsibilities—and had been seized by ambitions—from which there was no escaping.

Taft: A Round Peg
 in a Square Hole William Howard Taft, with his ruddy complexion and upturned mustache, at ﬁ rst inspired widespread conﬁdence. “Everybody loves a fat man,” the saying goes, and the jovial Taft, with “mirthquakes” of laughter bubbling up from his abundant abdomen, was personally popular. He had graduated second in his class at Yale and had established an enviable reputation as a lawyer and judge, though he was widely regarded as hostile to labor unions. He had been a trusted administrator under Roosevelt—in the Philippines, at home, and in Cuba, where he had served capably as a troubleshooter. But “good old Will” suffered from lethal political handicaps. Roosevelt had led the conﬂ icting elements of the Republican party by the sheer force of his personality. Taft, in contrast, had none of the arts of a dashing political leader and none of Roosevelt’s zest for the fray. Recoiling from the clamor of controversy, he generally adopted an attitude of passivity toward Congress. He was a poor judge of public opinion, and his candor made him a chronic victim of “foot-inmouth” disease. “Peaceful Bill” was no doubt a mild progressive, but at heart he was more wedded to the status quo than to change. Signiﬁcantly, his cabinet did not contain a single representative of the party’s “insurgent” wing,



 which was on ﬁ re for reform of current abuses, especially the tariff.

The Dollar Goes Abroad
 as a Diplomat Though ordinarily lethargic, Taft bestirred himself to use the lever of American investments to boost American political interests abroad, an approach to foreign policy that his critics denounced as dollar diplomacy. Washington warmly encouraged Wall Street bankers to sluice their surplus dollars into foreign areas of strategic concern to the United States, especially in the Far East and in the regions critical to the security of the Panama Canal. By preempting investors from rival powers, such as Germany, New York bankers would thus strengthen American defenses and foreign policies, while bringing further prosperity to their homeland—and to themselves. The almighty dollar thereby supplanted the big stick. China’s Manchuria was the object of Taft’s most spectacular effort to inject the reluctant dollar into the Far Eastern theater. Newly ambitious Japan and imperialistic Russia, recent foes, controlled the railroads of this strategic province. President Taft saw in the Manchurian railway monopoly a possible strangulation of Chinese economic interests and a consequent slamming of the Open Door in the faces of U.S. merchants. In 1909 Secretary of State Philander C. Knox blunderingly proposed that a group of American and foreign bankers buy the Manchurian railroads and then turn them over to China under a self-liquidating arrangement. Both Japan and Russia, unwilling to be jockeyed out of their dominant position, bluntly rejected Knox’s overtures. Taft was showered with ridicule. Another dangerous new trouble spot was the revolution-riddled Caribbean—now virtually a Yankee lake. Hoping to head off trouble, Washington urged Wall Street bankers to pump dollars into the ﬁ nancial vacuums in Honduras and Haiti to keep out foreign funds. The United States, under the Monroe Doctrine, would not permit foreign nations to intervene, and consequently felt obligated to put its money where its mouth was to prevent economic and political instability. Again necessity was the mother of armed Caribbean intervention. Sporadic disorders in palm-fronded Cuba, Honduras, and the Dominican Republic brought American forces to these countries to restore order and protect American investment. A revolutionary



Chapter 28 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 1901–1912


 Ex-President Theodore Roosevelt Watches President Taft Struggle with the Demands of Government, 1910

 upheaval in Nicaragua, partly fomented by American interests, resulted in the landing of twenty-ﬁve hundred marines in 1912. The marines remained in Nicaragua for thirteen years (see Map 29.2 on p. 735).

Taft the Trustbuster
 Taft managed to gain some fame as a smasher of monopolies. The ironic truth is that the colorless Taft brought 90 suits against the trusts during his 4 years in ofﬁce, as compared with some 44 for Roosevelt in 7½ years. By fateful happenstance the most sensational judicial actions during the Taft regime came in 1911. In that year the Supreme Court ordered the dissolution of the mighty Standard Oil Company, which was judged to be a combination in restraint of trade in violation of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act of 1890. At the same time, the Court handed down its famous “rule of reason.” This doctrine held that only those combinations that “unreasonably” restrained trade were illegal. This ﬁ neprint proviso ripped a huge hole in the government’s antitrust net.

 Even more explosively, in 1911 Taft decided to press an antitrust suit against the U.S. Steel Corporation. This initiative infuriated Roosevelt, who had personally been involved in one of the mergers that prompted the suit. Once Roosevelt’s protégé, President Taft was increasingly taking on the role of his antagonist. The stage was being set for a bruising confrontation.

Taft Splits the
Republican Party
 Lowering the barriers of the formidable protective tariff—the “Mother of Trusts”—was high on the agenda of the progressive members of the Republican party, and they at ﬁ rst thought they had a friend and ally in Taft. True to his campaign promises to reduce tariffs, Taft called Congress into special session in March 1909. The House proceeded to pass a moderately reductive bill, but senatorial reactionaries tacked on hundreds of upward tariff revisions. Only items such as hides, sea moss, and canary seed were left on the duty-free list. Much to the dismay of his supporters, Taft signed the Payne-Aldrich Bill, rubbing salt in their wounds by

Taft and the Progressives


 proclaiming it “the best bill that the Republican party ever passed.” Taft revealed a further knack for shooting himself in the foot in his handling of conservation. The portly president was a dedicated conservationist, and his contributions—like the establishment of the Bureau of Mines to control mineral resources—actually equaled or surpassed those of Roosevelt. But his praiseworthy accomplishments were largely erased in the public mind by the noisy Ballinger-Pinchot quarrel that erupted in 1910. When Secretary of the Interior Richard Ballinger opened public lands in Wyoming, Montana, and Alaska to corporate development, he was sharply criticized by Gifford Pinchot, chief of the Agriculture Department’s Division of Forestry and a stalwart Rooseveltian. When Taft dismissed Pinchot on the narrow grounds of insubordination, a storm of protest arose from conservationists and from Roosevelt’s friends, who were legion. The whole unsavory episode further widened the growing rift between the president and the former president, onetime bosom political partners. The reformist wing of the Republican party was now up in arms, while Taft was being pushed increasingly into the embrace of the stand-pat Old Guard. By the spring of 1910, the Grand Old Party was split wideopen, owing largely to the clumsiness of Taft. A suspicious Roosevelt returned triumphantly to New York in June 1910 and shortly thereafter stirred up a tempest. Unable to keep silent, he took to the stump at Osawatomie, Kansas, and shocked the Old Guard with a ﬂaming speech. The doctrine that he proclaimed— popularly known as the “New Nationalism”—urged the national government to increase its power to remedy economic and social abuses. Weakened by these internal divisions, the Republicans lost badly in the congressional elections of 1910. In a victory of landslide proportions, the Democrats emerged with 228 seats, leaving the once-dominant Republicans with only 161. In a further symptom of the reforming temper of the times, a Socialist representative, Austrian-born Victor L. Berger, was elected from Milwaukee.* The Republicans, by virtue of holdovers, retained the Senate, 51 to 41, but the insurgents in their midst were numerous enough to make that hold precarious.

 *He was eventually denied his seat in 1919, during a wave of antired hysteria.



The Taft-Roosevelt Rupture
 The sputtering uprising in Republican ranks had now blossomed into a full-ﬂedged revolt. Early in 1911 the National Progressive Republican League was formed, with the ﬁery, white-maned Senator La Follette of Wisconsin its leading candidate for the Republican presidential nomination. The assumption was that Roosevelt, an anti–third termer, would not permit himself to be “drafted.” But the restless Rough Rider began to change his views about third terms as he saw Taft, hand in glove with the hated Old Guard, discard “my policies.” In February 1912 Roosevelt formally wrote to seven state governors that he was willing to accept the Republican nomination. His reasoning was that the third-term tradition applied to three consecutive elective terms. Exuberantly he cried, “My hat is in the ring!” and “The ﬁght is on and I am stripped to the buff!” Roosevelt forthwith seized the Progressive banner, while La Follette, who had served as a convenient pathbreaker, was protestingly elbowed aside. Girded for battle, the Rough Rider came clattering into the presidential primaries then being held in many states. He shouted through half-clenched teeth that the president had fallen under the thumb of the reactionary bosses and that although Taft “means well, he means well feebly.” The once-genial Taft, now in a ﬁghting mood, retorted by branding Roosevelt supporters “emotionalists and neurotics.” A Taft-Roosevelt explosion was near in June 1912, when the Republican convention met in Chicago. The Rooseveltites, who were about 100 delegates short of winning the nomination, challenged the right of some 250 Taft delegates to be seated. Most of these contests were arbitrarily settled in favor of Taft, whose supporters held the throttle of the convention steamroller. The Roosevelt adherents, crying “fraud” and “naked theft,” in the end refused to vote, and Taft triumphed. Roosevelt, the supposedly good sportsman, refused to quit the game. Having tasted for the ﬁ rst time the bitter cup of defeat, he was now on ﬁre to lead a thirdparty crusade.



Chapter 28 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 1901–1912


 CHRONOLOGY

 Sierra Club founded



 National Consumers League founded



 Commission system established in Galveston, Texas Progressive Robert La Follette elected governor of Wisconsin American Socialist party formed



 Lincoln Steffens and Ida Tarbell publish muckraking exposés Anthracite coal strike Newlands Act



Department of Commerce and Labor
 established Elkins Act Women’s Trade Union League founded



 Northern Securities case Roosevelt defeats Alton B. Parker for presidency



Lochner v. New York




Hepburn Act
 Upton Sinclair publishes The Jungle Meat Inspection Act Pure Food and Drug Act





Muller v. Oregon
 Taft defeats Bryan for presidency Aldrich-Vreeland Act



Payne-Aldrich Tariff




 Ballinger-Pinchot affair Washington State grants woman suffrage



Triangle Shirtwaist Company ﬁ re
 Standard Oil antitrust case U.S. Steel Corporation antitrust suit Cal i fornia grants woman suffrage



 Taft wins Republican nomination over Roosevelt Arizona, Kansas, and Oregon grant woman suffrage Children’s Bureau established in Department of Labor



 Seventeenth Amendment passed (direct election of U.S. senators) Federal Reserve Act San Francisco decides to build Hetch Hetchy Reservoir



 Women’s Bureau established in Department of Labor

 “Roosevelt panic”

KEY TERMS
social gospel (703) muckrakers (704) initiative (708) referendum (708) recall (708) Australian ballot (709) Muller v. Oregon (711) Lochner v. New York (711) Woman’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) (712) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Elkins Act (714) Meat Inspection Act (715) Pure Food and Drug Act (716) Hetch Hetchy Valley (720) dollar diplomacy (723) Payne-Aldrich Bill (724) 
Henry Demarest Lloyd
Thorstein Veblen
Jacob A. Riis
Robert M. (“Fighting
Bob”) La Follette
Hiram W. Johnson
Florence Kelley


Frances E. Willard
Gifford Pinchot
John Muir


To Learn More




To Learn More
Nancy Cott, The Grounding of Modern Feminism (1987)
Alan Dawley, Struggles for Justice: Social Responsibility and
 the Liberal State (1991) Glenda Gilmore, Gender and Jim Crow: Women and the Politics of White Supremacy in North Carolina, 1896–1920 (1996) Samuel P. Hays, Conservation and the Gospel of Efﬁciency (1959) Richard Hofstadter, The Age of Reform (1955) T. J. Jackson Lears, No Place of Grace: Antimodernism and the Transformation of American Culture (1981) Robyn Muncy, Creating a Female Dominion in American Reform (1991)

Daniel T. Rodgers, Atlantic Crossings: Social Politics in a
Progressive Age (1998)
Nick Salvatore, Eugene V. Debs: Citizen and Socialist
(1982)
 Kathryn Kish Sklar, Florence Kelley and the Nation’s Work (1995)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Wilsonian
Progressivism at
Home and Abroad





1912–1916
 American enterprise is not free; the man with only a little capital is ﬁnding it harder and harder to get into the ﬁeld, more and more impossible to compete with the big fellow. Why? Because the laws of this country do not prevent the strong from crushing the weak.

O


 fﬁce-hungry Democrats—the “outs” since 1897— were jubilant over the disruptive Republican brawl at the convention in Chicago. If they could come up with an outstanding reformist leader, they had an excellent chance to win the White House. Such a leader appeared in Dr. Woodrow Wilson, once a mild conservative but now a militant progressive. Beginning professional life as a brilliant academic lecturer on government, he had risen in 1902 to the presidency of Princeton University, where he had achieved some sweeping educational reforms. Wilson entered politics in 1910 when New Jersey bosses, needing a respectable “front” candidate for the governorship, offered him the nomination. They expected to lead the academic novice by the nose, but to

 their surprise, Wilson waged a passionate reform campaign in which he assailed the “predatory” trusts and promised to return state government to the people. Riding the crest of the progressive wave, the “Schoolmaster in Politics” was swept into ofﬁce. Once in the governor’s chair, Wilson drove through the legislature a sheaf of forward-looking mea sures that made reactionary New Jersey one of the more liberal states. Filled with righteous indignation, Wilson revealed irresistible reforming zeal, burning eloquence, superb powers of leadership, and a refreshing habit of appealing over the heads of the scheming bosses to the sovereign people. Now a ﬁgure of national eminence, Wilson was being widely mentioned for the presidency.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Roosevelt Versus Wilson




GOP
Divided by Bull Moose Equals Democratic Victory, 1912 
The “Bull Moose”
Campaign of 1912
When the Democrats met at Baltimore in 1912, Wilson
 was nominated on the forty-sixth ballot, aided by William Jennings Bryan’s switch to his side. The Democrats gave Wilson a strong progressive platform to run on; dubbed the New Freedom program, it included calls for stronger antitrust legislation, banking reform, and tariff reductions. Surging events had meanwhile been thrusting Roosevelt to the fore as a candidate for the presidency on a third-party Progressive Republican ticket. The ﬁghting ex-cowboy, angered by his recent rebuff, was eager to lead the charge. A pro-Roosevelt Progressive convention, with about two thousand delegates from forty states, assembled in Chicago during August 1912. Dramatically symbolizing the rising political status of women, as well as Progressive support for the cause of social justice, settlement-house pioneer Jane Addams placed Roosevelt’s name in nomination for the presidency. Roosevelt was applauded tumultuously as he cried in a vehement speech, “We stand at Armageddon, and we battle for the Lord!” The hosanna spirit of a religious revival meeting suffused the convention, as the hoarse delegates sang “Onward Christian Soldiers” and “Battle Hymn of the Republic.” William Allen White, the caustic Kansas journalist, later wrote, “Roosevelt bit me and I went mad.” Fired-up Progressives entered the campaign with righteousness and enthusiasm. Roosevelt boasted that he felt “as strong as a bull moose,” and the bull moose took its place with the donkey and the elephant

 in the American political zoo. As one poet whimsically put it, I want to be a Bull Moose, And with the Bull Moose stand With antlers on my forehead And a Big Stick in my hand. Roosevelt and Taft were bound to slit each other’s political throats; by dividing the Republican vote, they virtually guaranteed a Democratic victory. The two antagonists tore into each other as only former friends can. “Death alone can take me out now,” cried the once-jovial Taft, as he branded Roosevelt a “dangerous egotist” and a “demagogue.” Roosevelt, ﬁghting mad, assailed Taft as a “fathead” with the brain of a “guinea pig.” Beyond the clashing personalities, the overshadowing question of the 1912 campaign was which of two varieties of progressivism would prevail—Roosevelt’s New Nationalism or Wilson’s New Freedom. Both men favored a more active government role in economic and social affairs, but they disagreed sharply over speciﬁc strategies. Roosevelt preached the theories spun out by the progressive thinker Herbert Croly in his book The Promise of American Life (1910). Croly and TR both favored continued consolidation of trusts and labor unions, paralleled by the growth of powerful regulatory agencies in Washington. Roosevelt and his “bull moosers” also campaigned for woman suffrage and a broad program of social welfare, including minimum wage laws and “socialistic” social insurance. Clearly, the bull moose Progressives looked forward to the kind of activist welfare state that Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal would one day make a reality.



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


 Wilson’s New Freedom, by contrast, favored small enterprise, entrepreneurship, and the free functioning of unregulated and unmonopolized markets. The Democrats shunned social-welfare proposals and pinned their economic faith on competition—on the “man on the make,” as Wilson put it. The keynote of Wilson’s campaign was not regulation but fragmentation of the big industrial combines, chieﬂy by means of vigorous enforcement of the antitrust laws. The election of 1912 thus offered the voters a choice not merely of policies but of political and economic philosophies—a rarity in U.S. history. The heat of the campaign cooled a bit when, in Milwaukee, Roosevelt was shot in the chest by a fanatic. The Rough Rider suspended active campaigning for more than two weeks after delivering, with bull moose gameness and a bloody shirt, his scheduled speech.

Woodrow Wilson:
A
Minority President  Former professor Wilson won handily, with 435 electoral votes and 6,296,547 popular votes. The “thirdparty” candidate, Roosevelt, ﬁ nished second, receiving 88 electoral votes and 4,118,571 popular votes. Taft won only 8 electoral votes and 3,486,720 popular votes (see Map 29.1). The election ﬁgures are fascinating. Wilson, with only 41 percent of the popular vote, was clearly a minority president, though his party won a majority in Congress. His popular total was actually smaller than Bryan had amassed in any of his three defeats, despite the increase in population. Taft and Roosevelt together polled over 1.25 million more votes than the Demo-

 WASH.

N.H.
VT. D-4

P-7


MONT. D-4

 ME.

R-4


N. DAK.

D-6


D-5


 OREGON

 MINN.

D-8


 MASS.

P-12


 IDAHO

S. DAK.

D-4


 WISC.

P-5


 WYO.

D-13


D-3


 NEBR.

D-13


D-8


 CALIF.

R-4


 ILL.

D-29


COLO. D-6

 KANSAS

D-3


N. MEX.

D-10


D-3


D-15


 OHIO

N.J. D-7


D-14
D-3


 W.VA.

 VA.

D-12


D-13


MD. D-8

N.C.


 TENN.

D-12


D-12


S.C.


 ARK.

D-9


D-9


MISS. D-10

 TEXAS

 CONN.

 DEL.

D-24


 KY.

D-18


 OKLA.

 IND.

P-38


D-8


 MO.

D-10


 ARIZ.

R.I.


D-5


 PA.

 IOWA

 UTAH

P-11/D-2


D-45


MICH. P-15

NEV. D-3

D-18


N.Y.


ALA. D-12

 GA.

D-14


 LA.

D-20


D-10


FLA. D-6

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Wilson (Democrat)




82.0%


6,296,547


41.9%




16.5%


4,118,571


27.4%


Taft (Republican)




1.5%


3,486,720


23.2%


Debs (Socialist)




0.0%


900,672


6.0%


Roosevelt (Progressive)


 No returns, unsettled, etc.

 Map 29.1 Presidential Election of 1912 (showing votes by county, with electoral vote by state) The Republican split surely boosted Wilson to victory, as he failed to win a clear majority in any state outside the old Confederacy. The election gave the Democrats solid control of the White House and both houses of Congress for the ﬁrst time since the Civil War.

Interactive Map


Wilson in the White House


 crats. Progressivism rather than Wilson was the runaway winner. Although the Democratic total obviously included many conser vatives in the solid South, the combined progressive vote for Wilson and Roosevelt, totaling 68 percent, far exceeded the tally of the more conser vative Taft, who got only 23 percent. To the progressive tally must be added some support for the Socialist candidate, the persistent Eugene V. Debs, who rolled up 900,672 votes, 6 percent of the total cast, or more than twice as many as he had netted four years earlier. Starry-eyed Socialists dreamed of being in the White House within eight years. Roosevelt’s lone-wolf course was tragic both for himself and for his former Republican associates. Perhaps, to rephrase William Allen White, he had bitten himself and gone mad. The Progressive party, which was primarily a one-man show, had no future because it had elected few candidates to state and local ofﬁces; the Socialists, in contrast, elected more than a thousand. Without patronage plums to hand out to faithful workers, death by slow starvation was inevitable for the upstart party. Yet the Progressives made a tremendous showing for a hastily orga nized third party and helped spur the enactment of many of their pet reforms by the Wilsonian Democrats. As for the Republicans, they were thrust into unaccustomed minority status in Congress for the next six years and were frozen out of the White House for eight years. Taft himself had a fruitful old age. He taught law for eight pleasant years at Yale University and in 1921 became chief justice of the Supreme Court—a job for which he was far more happily suited than the presidency.

Wilson: The Idealist
 in Politics ( Thomas) Woodrow Wilson, the second Democratic president since 1861, looked like the ascetic intellectual he was, with his clean-cut features, pinched-on eyeglasses, and trim ﬁgure. Born in Virginia shortly before the Civil War and reared in Georgia and the Carolinas, the professor-politician was the ﬁ rst man from one of the seceded southern states to reach the White House since Zachary Taylor, sixty-four years earlier. The impact of Dixieland on young “Tommy” Wilson was profound. He sympathized with the Confederacy’s gallant attempt to win its independence, a sentiment that partly inspired his ideal of self-determination for people of other countries. Steeped in the traditions of



 Jeffersonian democracy, he shared Jefferson’s faith in the masses—if they were properly informed. Son of a Presbyterian minister, Wilson was reared in an at mosphere of fervent piety. He later used the presidential pulpit to preach his inspirational political sermons. A moving orator, Wilson could rise on the wings of spiritual power to soaring eloquence. Skillfully using a persuasive voice, he relied not on arm-waving but on sincerity and moral appeal. As a lifelong student of ﬁ nely chiseled words, he turned out to be a “phraseocrat” who coined many noble epigrams. Someone has remarked that he was born halfway between the Bible and the dictionary and never strayed far from either. A profound student of government, Wilson believed that the chief executive should play a dynamic role. He was convinced that Congress could not function properly unless the president, like a kind of prime minister, got out in front and provided leadership. He enjoyed dramatic success, both as governor and as president, in appealing over the heads of legislators to the sovereign people. Splendid though Wilson’s intellectual equipment was, he suffered from serious defects of personality. Though jovial and witty in private, he could be cold and standofﬁsh in public. Incapable of unbending and acting the showman, like “Teddy” Roosevelt, he lacked the common touch. He loved humanity in the mass rather than the individual in person. His academic background caused him to feel most at home with scholars, although he had to work with politicians. An austere and somewhat arrogant intellectual, he looked down his nose through pince-nez glasses upon lesser minds, including journalists. He was especially intolerant of stupid senators, whose “bungalow” minds made him “sick.” Wilson’s burning idealism—especially his desire to reform ever-present wickedness—drove him forward faster than lesser spirits were willing to go. His sense of moral righteousness was such that he often found compromise difﬁcult; black was black, wrong was wrong, and one should never compromise with wrong. President Wilson’s Scottish Presbyterian ancestors had passed on to him an inﬂexible stubbornness. When convinced that he was right, the principled Wilson would break before he would bend, unlike the pragmatic Roosevelt.

Wilson Tackles the Tariff
 Few presidents have arrived at the White House with a clearer program than Wilson’s or one destined to be so



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


 completely achieved. The new president called for an all-out assault on what he called “the triple wall of privilege”: the tariff, the banks, and the trusts. He tackled the tariff ﬁ rst, summoning Congress into special session in early 1913. In a precedentshattering move, he did not send his presidential message over to the Capitol to be read loudly by a bored clerk, as had been the custom since Jefferson’s day. Instead he appeared in person before a joint session of Congress and presented his appeal with stunning eloquence and effectiveness.

 Moved by Wilson’s aggressive leadership, the House swiftly passed the Underwood Tariff, which provided for a substantial reduction of rates. When a swarm of lobbyists descended on the Senate seeking to disembowel the bill, Wilson promptly issued a combative message to the people, urging them to hold their elected representatives in line. The tactic worked. The force of public opinion, aroused by the president’s oratory, secured late in 1913 ﬁ nal approval of the bill Wilson wanted. The new Underwood Tariff substantially reduced import fees. It also was a landmark in tax legislation. Under authority granted by the recently ratiﬁed Sixteenth Amendment, Congress enacted a graduated income tax, beginning with a modest levy on incomes over $3,000 (then considerably higher than the average family’s income). By 1917 revenue from the income tax shot ahead of receipts from the tariff. This gap has since been vastly widened.

Wilson Battles the Bankers


Woodrow Wilson (1856–1924) at Princeton
 Commencement with Andrew Carnegie, 1906 Before his election to the presidency of the United States in 1912, Wilson (left) served as president of Princeton University (1902–1910) and governor of New Jersey (1910–1912). In all three ofﬁces, he undertook substantial reforms. Fighting desperately later for the League of Nations, at the cost of his health, Wilson said, “I would rather fail in a cause that I know some day will triumph than to win in a cause that I know some day will fail.”

 A second bastion of the “triple wall of privilege” was the antiquated and inadequate banking and currency system, long since outgrown by the Republic’s lusty economic expansion. The country’s ﬁ nancial structure, still creaking along under the Civil War National Banking Act, revealed glaring defects. Its most serious shortcoming, as exposed by the panic of 1907, was the inelasticity of the currency. Banking reserves were heavily concentrated in New York and a handful of other large cities and could not be mobilized in times of ﬁ nancial stress into areas that were badly pinched. In 1908 Congress had authorized an investigation headed by a mossback banker, Republican senator Aldrich. Three years later Aldrich’s special commission recommended a gigantic bank with numerous branches—in effect, a third Bank of the United States. For their part, Democratic banking reformers heeded the ﬁ ndings of a House committee chaired by Congressman Arsene Pujo, which traced the tentacles of the “money monster” into the hidden vaults of American banking and business. President Wilson’s conﬁdant, progressive-minded Massachusetts attorney Louis D. Brandeis, further fanned the ﬂames of reform with his incendiary though scholarly book Other People’s Money and How the Bankers Use It (1914). In June 1913, in a second dramatic personal appearance before both houses of Congress, the president delivered a stirring plea for sweeping reform of the banking system. He ringingly endorsed Demo-

 Wilson’s Economic Reforms



 the amount of money in circulation could be swiftly increased as needed for the legitimate requirements of business. The Federal Reserve Act was a red-letter achievement. It carried the nation with ﬂying banners through the ﬁnancial crises of the First World War of 1914–1918. Without it, the Republic’s progress toward the modern economic age would have been seriously retarded.

The President Tames the Trusts


 Reading the Death Warrant This cartoon appeared in a New York newspaper soon after Woodrow Wilson called for dramatic reform of the banking system before both houses of Congress. With the “money trust” of bankers and businessmen cowed, Wilson was able to win popular and congressional support for the Federal Reserve Act of 1913.

 cratic proposals for a decentralized bank in government hands, as opposed to Republican demands for a huge private bank with ﬁ fteen branches. Again appealing to the sovereign people, Wilson scored another triumph. In 1913 he signed the epochal Federal Reserve Act, the most important piece of economic legislation between the Civil War and the New Deal. The new Federal Reserve Board, appointed by the president, oversaw a nationwide system of twelve regional reserve districts, each with its own central bank. Although these regional banks were actually bankers’ banks, owned by member ﬁnancial institutions, the ﬁ nal authority of the Federal Reserve Board guaranteed a substantial mea sure of public control. The board was also empowered to issue paper money— “Federal Reserve Notes”—backed by commercial paper, such as promissory notes of businesspeople. Thus

 Without pausing for breath, Wilson pushed toward the last remaining rampart in the “triple wall of privilege”— the trusts. Early in 1914 he again went before Congress in a personal appearance that still carried drama. Nine months and thousands of words later, Congress responded with the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914. The new law empowered a presidentially appointed commission to turn a searchlight on industries engaged in interstate commerce, such as the meatpackers. The commissioners were expected to crush monopoly at the source by rooting out unfair trade practices, including unlawful competition, false advertising, mislabeling, adulteration, and bribery. The knot of monopoly was further cut by the Clayton Anti-Trust Act of 1914. It lengthened the shopworn Sherman Act’s list of business practices that were deemed objectionable, including price discrimination and interlocking directorates (whereby the same individuals served as directors of supposedly competing ﬁ rms), an end often achieved through holding companies (see Figure 29.1). The Clayton Act also conferred long-overdue beneﬁts on labor. Conservative courts had unexpectedly

 Voting stock

SUPER HOLDING COMPANY

 Other stock

HOLDS MORE THAN 50% OF VOTING STOCK HOLDING COMPANY A

HOLDING COMPANY B

HOLDING COMPANY C

HOLDS MORE THAN 50% OF VOTING STOCK

CORP. A

CORP. B

CORP. C

CORP. D

CORP. E

CORP. F

CORP. G

CORP. H

CORP. I

Figure 29.1 Organization of Holding Companies
 Keep in mind that the voting stock of a corporation is often only a fraction of the total stock.



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


 been ruling that trade unions fell under the antimonopoly restraints of the Sherman Act. A classic case involved striking hatmakers in Danbury, Connecticut, who were assessed triple damages of more than $250,000, which resulted in the loss of their savings and homes. The Clayton Act therefore sought to exempt labor and agricultural orga ni zations from antitrust prosecution, while explicitly legalizing strikes and peaceful picketing. Union leader Samuel Gompers hailed the act as the Magna Carta of labor because it legally lifted human labor out of the category of “a commodity or article of commerce.” But the rejoicing was premature, as conservative judges in later years continued to clip the wings of the union movement.

Wilsonian Progressivism
 at High Tide Energetically scaling the “triple wall of privilege,” Woodrow Wilson had treated the nation to a dazzling demonstration of vigorous presidential leadership. He proved nearly irresistible in his ﬁ rst eighteen months in ofﬁce. For once, a political creed was matched by deed, as the progressive reformers racked up victory after victory. Standing at the peak of his powers at the head of the progressive forces, Wilson pressed ahead with further reforms. The Federal Farm Loan Act of 1916 made credit available to farmers at low rates of interest—as long demanded by the Populists. The Warehouse Act of 1916 authorized loans on the security of staple crops— another Populist idea. Other laws beneﬁted rural America by providing for highway construction and the establishment of agricultural extension work in the state colleges. Sweaty laborers also made gains as the progressive wave foamed forward. Sailors, treated brutally from cat-o’-nine-tails days onward, were given relief by the La Follette Seaman’s Act of 1915. It required decent treatment and a living wage on American merchant ships. One unhappy result of this well-intentioned law was the crippling of America’s merchant marine, as freight rates spiraled upward with the crew’s wages. Wilson further helped the workers with the Workingmen’s Compensation Act of 1916, granting assistance to federal civil-service employees during periods of disability. In the same year, the president approved an act restricting child labor on products ﬂowing into interstate commerce, though the stand-pat Supreme Court soon invalidated the law. Railroad workers, num-

 bering about 1.7 million, were not sidetracked. The Adamson Act of 1916 established an eight-hour day for all employees on trains in interstate commerce, with extra pay for overtime. Wilson earned the enmity of businesspeople and bigots but endeared himself to progressives when in 1916 he nominated for the Supreme Court the prominent reformer Louis D. Brandeis—the ﬁ rst Jew to be called to the high bench. Yet even Wilson’s progressivism had its limits, and it clearly stopped short of better treatment for blacks. The southern-bred Wilson actually presided over accelerated segregation in the federal bureaucracy. When a delegation of black leaders personally protested to him, the schoolmasterish president virtually froze them out of his ofﬁce. Despite these limitations, Wilson knew that to be reelected in 1916, he needed to identify himself clearly as the candidate of progressivism. He appeased business people by making conser vative appointments to the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Trade Commission, but he devoted most of his energy to cultivating progressive support. Wilson’s election in 1912 had been something of a ﬂuke, owing largely to the TaftRoosevelt split in the Republican ranks. To remain in the White House, the president would have to woo the bull moose voters into the Democratic fold.

New Directions in
Foreign Policy
 In one important area, Wilson chose not to answer the trumpet call of the bull moosers. In contrast to Roosevelt and even Taft, Wilson recoiled from an aggressive foreign policy. Hating imperialism, he was repelled by TR’s big stickism. Suspicious of Wall Street, he detested the so-called dollar diplomacy of Taft. In ofﬁce only a week, Wilson declared war on dollar diplomacy. He proclaimed that the government would no longer offer special support to American investors in Latin America and China. Shivering from this Wilsonian bucket of cold water, American bankers pulled out of the Taft-engineered six-nation loan to China the next day. In a similarly self-denying vein, Wilson persuaded Congress in early 1914 to repeal the Panama Canal Tolls Act of 1912, which had exempted American coastwise shipping from tolls and thereby provoked sharp protests from injured Britain. The president further chimed in with the anti-imperial song of Bryan and other Democrats when he signed the Jones Act in 1916. It granted to the Philippines the boon of territorial status and prom-



 Wilson’s Foreign Policy

 ised independence as soon as a “stable government” could be established. Wilson’s racial prejudices, however, made it difﬁcult for him to anticipate anything other than a long political tutelage for the Filipinos. Indeed, not until July 4, 1946—thirty years later—did the United States accept Philippine independence. Wilson also partially defused a menacing crisis with Japan in 1913. The California legislature, still seeking to rid the Golden State of Japanese settlers, prohibited them from owning land. Tokyo, understandably irritated, lodged vigorous protests. At Fortress Corregidor, in the Philippines, American gunners were put on around-the-clock alert. But when Wilson dispatched Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan to plead with the Cal i fornia legislature to soften its stand, tensions eased somewhat. Political turmoil in Haiti soon forced Wilson to eat some of his anti-imperialist words. The climax of the

 disorders came in 1914–1915, when an outraged populace literally tore to pieces the brutal Haitian president. In 1915 Wilson reluctantly dispatched marines to protect American lives and property. They remained for nineteen years, making Haiti an American protectorate. In 1916 he stole a page from Roosevelt’s corollary to the Monroe Doctrine and concluded a treaty with Haiti providing for U.S. supervision of ﬁ nances and the police. In the same year, he sent the leathernecked marines to quell riots in the Dominican Republic, and that debt-cursed land came under the shadow of the American eagle’s wings for the next eight years. In 1917 Wilson purchased from Denmark the Virgin Islands, in the West Indies, tightening the grip of Uncle Sam in these shark-infested waters. Increasingly, the Caribbean Sea, with its vital approaches to the nownavigable Panama Canal, was taking on the earmarks of a Yankee preserve (see Map 29.2).

 Map 29.2 The United States in the Caribbean, 1898–1941 This map explains why many Latin Americans accused the United States of turning the Caribbean Sea into a “Yankee lake.” It also suggests that Uncle Sam was much less “isolationist” in his own backyard than he was in faraway Europe or Asia.

Interactive Map


100°W


Columbus


U.S.
Expeditionary Force, 1916 –1917


 SONOR

A


30°N


90°W


U N I T E D S TAT E S


 ALABAMA

MISS. TEXAS

80°W


 GEORGIA



400 Mi.


AT L A N T I C O C E A N
Sinking of Maine, 1898 
Gulf of Mexico


 U.S. troops, 1915 –1934 Financial supervision, 1916 –1941

Miami


Revolutions, 1868 –1878, 1895 –1898
 U.S. troops, 1898 –1902, 1906 –1909, 1912, 1917 –1922 Platt Amendment, 1903 –1934 U.S. exports to, 1865 –1917 = $1.6 billion

Tropic of Cancer


400 Km.


 FLORIDA

New Orleans


Santa Ysabel
Parral






 LA.

Houston




 U.S. attempted to buy, 1869 U.S. troops, 1916 –1924 Financial supervision, 1905 –1941

Bahamas
(Gr. Br.)


Havana


 CUBA

 Purchased from Denmark, 1917

Tampico


 MEXICO

 Guantánamo

 U.S. attack, 1914

DOMINICAN PUERTO REPUBLIC RICO HAITI

 U.S. naval base, 1903 –

20°N


Mexico
City


Veracruz


Revolution, 1910
 Americans controlled 43% of Mexican property, 1910 U.S. exports to, 1865 –1917 = $1.3 billion

BR. HONDURAS GUATEMALA

Caribbean Sea


 U.S. possession after 1898 Puerto Ricans became U.S. citizens, 1917

EL SALVADOR

U.S. ZONE

10°N
60°W


Caracas
 U.S. leased Corn Is., 1914

COSTA RICA

Colon


 U.S. acquired Canal Zone, 1903 Canal completed, 1914

Barbados
(Gr. Br.)
Trinidad
(Gr. Br.)


 NICARAGUA

Caribbean
Sea


Martinique
(Fr.)


 U.S. troops, 1909 –1910, 1912 –1925, 1926 –1933 Financial supervision, 1911–1924 Canal option, 1916

 HONDURAS

 United Fruit Co. organized for banana trade, 1899

PACIFIC OCEAN

Virgin Is.
Jamaica
(Gr. Br.)


 U.S. troops, 1924 –1925

Guadeloupe
(Fr.)


 VENEZUELA

N


 Venezuelan crisis, 1895 –1896

PANAMA
Bogatá 
 United States possession United States protectorate or quasi-protectorate

Panama City


CANAL ZONE

Gulf of
Panama


 COLOMBIA

70°W


 BRAZIL



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


U.S.
Marines in Haiti, 1919  The United States sent the marines to Haiti in 1915 to protect American economic interests. They remained for nineteen years.

Moralistic Diplomacy
 in Mexico Riﬂe bullets whining across the southern border served as a constant reminder that all was not quiet in Mexico. For decades Mexico had been sorely exploited by foreign investors in oil, railroads, and mines. By 1913 American capitalists had sunk about a billion dollars into the underdeveloped but generously endowed country. But if Mexico was rich, the Mexicans were poor. Fed up with their miserable lot, they at last revolted. Their revolution took an ugly turn in early 1913, when a conscienceless clique (with the support of President Taft’s ambassador to Mexico) murdered the popular new revolutionary president and installed General Victoriano Huerta, an Indian, in the president’s chair. All this chaos accelerated a massive migration of Mexicans to the United States. More than a million Spanishspeaking newcomers tramped across the southern border in the ﬁ rst three decades of the twentieth century. Settling mostly in Texas, New Mexico, Arizona,

 and Cal i fornia, they swung picks building highways and railroads or followed the fruit harvests as pickers. Though often segregated in Spanish-speaking enclaves, they helped to create a unique borderland culture that blended Mexican and American folkways. The revolutionary bloodshed also menaced American lives and property in Mexico. Cries for intervention burst from the lips of American jingoes. Prominent among those chanting for war was the inﬂuential chain newspaper publisher William Randolph Hearst, whose views presumably were colored by his ownership of a Mexican ranch larger than Rhode Island. Yet once again, President Wilson refused to practice the same old dollar diplomacy of his predecessors, deeming it “perilous” to determine foreign policy “in the terms of material interest.” Wilson strove as best he could to steer a moral course in Mexico. He sent his aggressive ambassador packing, imposed an arms embargo, and refused to recognize ofﬁcially the murderous government of “that brute” Huerta, even though most foreign powers acknowledged Huerta’s bloody-handed regime. “I am going to teach the South American republics to elect

The Mexican Imbroglio


 good men,” the former professor declared. He put his munitions where his mouth was in 1914, when he allowed American arms to ﬂow to Huerta’s principal rivals, white-bearded Venustiano Carranza and the ﬁ rebrand Francisco (“Pancho”) Villa. The Mexican volcano erupted at the Atlantic seaport of Tampico in April 1914, when a small party of American sailors was arrested. The Mexicans promptly released the captives and apologized, but they refused the affronted American admiral’s demand for a salute of twenty-one guns. Wilson, heavy-hearted but stubbornly determined to eliminate Huerta, asked Congress for authority to use force against Mexico. Before Congress could act, Wilson ordered the navy to seize the Mexican port of Veracruz to thwart the arrival of a German steamer carrying Huerta-bound guns and ammunition. Huerta as well as Carranza hotly protested against this high-handed Yankee maneuver. Just as a full-dress shooting conﬂ ict seemed inevitable, Wilson was rescued by an offer of mediation from the ABC Powers—Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. Huerta collapsed in July 1914 under pressure from within and without. He was succeeded by his archrival, Venustiano Carranza, still ﬁercely resentful of Wilson’s military meddling. The whole sorry Tampico Incident did not augur well for the future of United States–Mexican relations. “Pancho” Villa, a combination of bandit and Robin Hood, had meanwhile stolen the spotlight. He emerged as the chief rival to President Carranza, whom Wilson now reluctantly supported. Challenging Carranza’s authority while also punishing the gringos, Villa’s men ruthlessly hauled sixteen young American mining en-

In October 1913 President Woodrow Wilson (1856–
 1924) addressed the Southern Commercial Congress in Mobile, Alabama, and drew a connection between the battle against the trusts at home and the travails of countries south of the border:

“


 We have seen material interests threaten constitutional freedom in the United States. Therefore, we will now know how to sympathize with those in the rest of [Latin] America who have to contend with such powers, not only from within their borders but from outside their borders also.

”




 Wilson Confronts Huerta A Mexican view of the tense standoff between Wilson and the Mexican president, Victoriano Huerta. The artist’s rendering seems to reﬂect the famous observation of long-time Mexican leader Porﬁrio Diaz: “Poor Mexico! So far from God, so close to the United States.”

 gineers off a train traveling through northern Mexico in January 1916 and killed them. A month later Villa and his followers, hoping to provoke a war between Wilson and Carranza, blazed across the border into Columbus, New Mexico, and murdered another nineteen Americans. General John J. (“Black Jack”)* Pershing, a grimfaced and ramrod-erect veteran of the Cuban and Philippine campaigns, was ordered to break up the bandit band. His hastily orga nized force of several

 *So called from his earlier ser vice as an ofﬁcer with the crack black 10th Cavalry.



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


 “Pancho” Villa with His Ragtag Army in Mexico, ca. 1916 His daring, impetuosity, and horsemanship made Villa a hero to the masses of northern Mexico. Yet he proved to be a violent and ineffective crusader against social abuses, and he was assassinated in 1923.

 thousand mounted troops penetrated deep into rugged Mexico with surprising speed. They clashed with Carranza’s forces and mauled the Villistas but missed capturing Villa himself. As the threat of war with Germany loomed larger, the invading army was withdrawn in January 1917.

Thunder Across the Sea
 Europe’s powder magazine, long smoldering, blew up in the summer of 1914, when the ﬂaming pistol of a Serb patriot killed the heir to the throne of AustriaHungary in Sarajevo. An outraged Vienna government, backed by Germany, forthwith presented a stern ultimatum to neighboring Serbia. An explosive chain reaction followed. Tiny Serbia, backed by its powerful Slav neighbor Russia, refused to bend the knee sufﬁciently. The Russian tsar began to mobilize his ponderous war machine, menacing Germany on the east, even as his ally, France, confronted Germany on the west. In alarm, the Germans struck suddenly at France through unoffending Belgium; their objective was to knock their ancient enemy out of action so that they would have two free hands to repel Russia. Great Britain, its coastline jeopardized by the assault on Belgium, was sucked into the conﬂagration on the side of France. Almost overnight most of Europe was locked in a ﬁght to the death. On one side were arrayed the Cen-

 tral Powers: Germany and Austria-Hungary, and later Turkey and Bulgaria. On the other side were the Allies: principally France, Britain, and Russia, and later Japan and Italy. Americans thanked God for the ocean moats and self-righteously congratulated themselves on having had ancestors wise enough to have abandoned the hell pits of Europe. America felt strong, snug, smug, and secure—but not for long.

A
Precarious Neutrality  President Wilson’s grief at the outbreak of war was compounded by the recent death of his wife. He sorrowfully issued the routine neutrality proclamation and called on Americans to be neutral in thought as well as deed. But such scrupulous evenhandedness proved difﬁcult. Both sides wooed the United States, the great neutral in the West. The British enjoyed the boon of close cultural, linguistic, and economic ties with America and had the added advantage of controlling most of the transatlantic cables. Their censors sheared away war stories harmful to the Allies and drenched the United States with tales of German bestiality. The Germans and the Austro-Hungarians counted on the natural sympathies of their transplanted countrymen in America. Including persons with at least one foreign-born parent, people with blood ties to the

War Breaks Out in Europe




Table 29.1 Principal Foreign Elements in the United States, Census of 1910


Country of Origin


Foreign-Born


 Natives with Two Foreign-Born Parents

 Natives with One Foreign-Born Parent

Total


Central
Powers


{


Germany
Austria-Hungary


2,501,181
1,670,524


3,911,847
900,129


1,869,590
131,133


8,282,61
2,701,786


Allied
Powers


{


Great Britain
(Ireland)*
Russia
Italy


1,219,968
1,352,155
1,732,421
1,343,070


852,610
2,141,577
949,316
695,187


1,158,474
1,010,628
70,938
60,103


3,231,052
4,504,360
2,752,675
2,098,360


13,345,545


12,916,311


5,981,526


32,243,282


14.5


14.0


6.5


35.0


 TOTAL (for all foreign countries, including those not listed) Percentage of total U.S. population (91,972,266) *Ireland was not yet independent.

 Central Powers numbered some 11 million in 1914. Some of these recent immigrants expressed noisy sympathy for the fatherland, but most were simply grateful to be so distant from the fray (see Table 29.1). Most Americans were anti-German from the outset. With his villainous upturned mustache, Kaiser Wilhelm II seemed the embodiment of arrogant autocracy, an impression strengthened by Germany’s ruthless strike at neutral Belgium. German and Austrian agents further tarnished the image of the Central Powers in American eyes when they resorted to violence in American factories and ports. When a German operative in 1915 absentmindedly left his briefcase on a New York elevated car, its documents detailing plans for industrial sabotage were quickly discovered and publicized. American opinion, already ill-disposed, was further inﬂamed against the kaiser and Germany. Yet the great majority of Americans earnestly hoped to stay out of the horrible war.

America Earns Blood Money
 When Europe burst into ﬂames in 1914, the United States was bogged down in a worrisome business recession. But as fate would have it, British and French war orders soon pulled American industry out of the morass of hard times and onto a peak of war-born

 prosperity (see Table 29.2). Part of this boom was ﬁnanced by American bankers, notably the Wall Street ﬁ rm of J. P. Morgan and Company, which eventually advanced to the Allies the enormous sum of $2.3 billion during the period of American neutrality. The Central Powers protested bitterly against the immense trade between America and the Allies, but this trafﬁc did not in fact violate the international neutrality laws. Germany was technically free to trade with the United States. It was prevented from doing so not by American policy but by geography and the British navy. Trade between Germany and America had to move across the Atlantic; but the British controlled the sea-lanes, and they threw a noose-tight blockade of mines and ships across the North Sea, gateway to German ports. Over the unavailing protests of American shippers, farmers, and manufacturers, the British began forcing American vessels off the high seas and into their ports. This harassment of American shipping proved highly effective, as trade between Germany and the United States virtually ceased. Hard-pressed Germany did not tamely consent to being starved out. In retaliation for the British blockade, in February 1915 Berlin announced a submarine war area around the British Isles (see Map 29.3). The submarine was a weapon so new that existing international law could not be made to ﬁt it. The old rule that a warship must stop and board a merchantman



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


Table 29.2 U.S. Exports to Belligerents, 1914–1916


Belligerent
Britain
France
Italy*
Germany








$594,271,863
159,818,924
74,235,012
344,794,276


$911,794,954
369,397,170
184,819,688
28,863,354


$1,526,685,102
628,851,988
269,246,105
288,899


1916 Figure as
 a Percentage of 1914 Figure 257% 0.08

 *Italy joined the Allies in April 1915.

 could hardly apply to submarines, which could easily be rammed or sunk if they surfaced. The cigar-shaped marauders posed a dire threat to the United States—so long as Wilson insisted on maintaining America’s neutral rights. Berlin ofﬁcials declared that they would try not to sink neutral shipping, but they warned that mistakes would probably occur. Wilson now determined on a policy of calculated risk. He would continue to claim proﬁtable neutral

20°W 70°N 10°W


 British military area

0°


 German submarine war zone N

Allied Powers


 ICELAND



Central Powers
 Neutral nations

400 Km.


400 Mi.


10°E


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

60°N


 NORWAY



20°E


 ic

B


 a

Y


 RM

 AN

NETH. BELG.

Lusitania
 torpedoed May 7, 1915

 DENMARK

 GE

50°N


North
Sea


 lt

UNITED KINGDOM

Sea


 SWEDEN

 trading rights, while hoping that no high-seas incident would force his hand to grasp the sword of war. Setting his peninsular jaw, he emphatically warned Germany that it would be held to “strict accountability” for any attacks on American vessels or citizens. The German submarines (known as U-boats, from the German Unterseeboot, or “undersea boat”) meanwhile began their deadly work. In the ﬁ rst months of 1915, they sank about ninety ships in the war zone. Then the submarine issue became acute when the British passenger liner Lusitania was torpedoed and sank off the coast of Ireland on May 7, 1915, with the loss of 1,198 lives, including 128 Americans. The Lusitania was carrying forty-two hundred cases of small-arms ammunition, a fact the Germans used to justify the sinking. But Americans were swept by a wave of shock and anger at this act of “mass murder” and “piracy.” The eastern United States, closer to the war, seethed with talk of ﬁghting, but the rest of the country showed a strong distaste for hostilities. The peace-loving Wilson had no stomach for leading a disunited nation into war. He well remembered the mistake in 1812 of his fellow Princetonian, James Madison. Instead, by a series of increasingly strong notes, Wilson attempted to bring the German warlords sharply to book. Even this mea sured approach was too

 The Fatherland, the chief German-American propaganda newspaper in the United States, cried,

 FRANCE

“


 SWITZ.

 Map 29.3 British Military Area (declared November 3, 1914) and German Submarine War Zone (declared February 4, 1915)

Interactive Map


 We [Americans] prattle about humanity while we manufacture poisoned shrapnel and picric acid for proﬁt. Ten thousand German widows, ten thousand orphans, ten thousand graves bear the legend ‘Made in America.’

”


American Neutrality




A
German U-boat This deadly new weapon rendered useless existing rules of naval warfare, eventually pushing the United States to declare war against Germany in 1917. 
 much for Secretary of State Bryan, who resigned rather than sign a protestation that might spell shooting. But Wilson resolutely stood his ground. “There is such a thing,” he declared, “as a man being too proud to ﬁght.” This kind of talk incensed the war-thirsty Theodore Roosevelt. The Rough Rider assailed the spineless simperers who heeded the “weasel words” of the paciﬁstic professor in the White House. Yet Wilson, sticking to his verbal guns, made some diplomatic progress. After another British liner, the Arabic, was sunk in August 1915, with the loss of two American lives, Berlin reluctantly agreed not to sink unarmed and unresisting passenger ships without warning.

 Advertisement from the New York Herald, May 1, 1915 Six days later the Lusitania was sunk. Note the German warning.



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


Wilson Wins Reelection in 1916


 “Here’s Money for Your Americans. I May Drown Some More.” Germany expressed “profound regret” for the deaths of 128 Americans aboard the torpedoed passenger liner Lusitania in 1915, but the incident helped feed a mounting anti-German sentiment in the United States.

 This pledge appeared to be violated in March 1916, when the Germans torpedoed a French passenger steamer, the Sussex. The infuriated Wilson informed the Germans that unless they renounced the inhuman practice of sinking merchant ships without warning, he would break diplomatic relations—an almost certain prelude to war. Germany reluctantly knuckled under to President Wilson’s Sussex ultimatum, agreeing not to sink passenger ships and merchant vessels without giving warning. But the Germans attached a long string to their Sussex pledge: the United States would have to persuade the Allies to modify what Berlin regarded as their illegal blockade. This, obviously, was something that Washington could not do. Wilson promptly accepted the German pledge, without accepting the “string.” He thus won a temporary but precarious diplomatic victory—precarious because Germany could pull the string whenever it chose, and the president might suddenly ﬁ nd himself tugged over the cliff of war.

 Against this ominous backdrop, the presidential campaign of 1916 gathered speed. Both the bull moose Progressives and the Republicans met in Chicago. The Progressives uproariously renominated Theodore Roosevelt, but the Rough Rider, who loathed Wilson and all his works, had no stomach for splitting the Republicans again and ensuring the reelection of his hated rival. In refusing to run, he sounded the death knell of the Progressive party. Roosevelt’s Republican admirers also clamored for “Teddy,” but the Old Guard detested the renegade who had ruptured the party in 1912. Instead they drafted Supreme Court justice Charles Evans Hughes, a cold intellectual who had achieved a solid liberal record when he was governor of New York. The Republican platform condemned the Democratic tariff, assaults on the trusts, and Wilson’s wishy-washiness in dealing with Mexico and Germany. The thick-whiskered Hughes (“an animated feather duster”) left the bench for the campaign stump, where he was not at home. In anti-German areas of the country, he assailed Wilson for not standing up to the kaiser, whereas in isolationist areas he took a softer line. This fence-straddling operation led to the jeer “Charles Evasive Hughes.” Hughes was further plagued by Roosevelt, who was delivering a series of skin-’em-alive speeches against “that damned Presbyterian hypocrite Wilson.” Frothing for war, TR privately scoffed at Hughes as a “whiskered Wilson”; the only difference between the two, he said, was “a shave.” Wilson, nominated by acclamation at the Democratic convention in St. Louis, ignored Hughes on the theory that one should not try to murder a man who is committing suicide. His campaign was built on the slogan “He Kept Us Out of War.” Democratic orators warned that by electing Charles Evans Hughes, the nation would be electing a ﬁght— with a certain frustrated Rough Rider leading the charge. A Democratic advertisement appealing to the American working people read, You are Working; —Not Fighting! Alive and Happy; —Not Cannon Fodder! Wilson and Peace with Honor? or Hughes with Roosevelt and War?



The Campaign of 1916


 On election day Hughes swept the East and looked like a sureﬁ re winner. Wilson went to bed that night prepared to accept defeat, while the New York newspapers displayed huge portraits of “The PresidentElect—Charles Evans Hughes.” But the rest of the country turned the tide. Midwesterners and westerners, attracted by Wilson’s progressive reforms and antiwar policies, ﬂocked to the polls for the president. The ﬁ nal result, in doubt for several days, hinged on Cal i fornia, which Wilson carried by some 3,800 votes out of about a million cast. Wilson barely squeaked through, with a ﬁ nal vote of 277 to 254 in the Electoral College, and 9,127,695 to 8,533,507 in the popular column (see Map 29.4). The pro-labor Wilson received strong support from the working class and from renegade bull moosers, whom Republicans failed to lure back into their camp. Wilson

WA MT

OR ID NV CA

ND WY

 SD

 CO

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 AZ

 MN

KS OK

 NM

 TX

 IL

MI IN

MO TN

AR LA

 OH 24 WV R-7/ D-1 KY

 MS

 AL

 GA

ME VT 4 NH MA NY 4 18 RI PA NJ CT 5 14 7 VA NC

DE MD

 SC

 FL

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Wilson (Democrat)




52.2%


Popular Vote
9,127,695


51.7%


Hughes (Republican)




47.8%


8,533,507


48.3%


 Map 29.4 Presidential Election of 1916 (with electoral vote by state) Wilson was so worried about being a lame duck president in a time of great international tensions that he drew up a plan whereby Hughes, if victorious, would be appointed secretary of state, Wilson and the vice president would resign, and Hughes would thus succeed immediately to the presidency.

Interactive Map


 had not speciﬁcally promised to keep the country out of war, but probably enough voters relied on such implicit assurances to ensure his victory. Their hopeful expectations were soon rudely shattered.

 During the 1916 campaign, J. A. O’Leary, the head of a pro-German and pro-Irish organization, sent a scorching telegram to Wilson condemning him for having been pro-British in approving war loans and ammunition trafﬁc. Wilson shot back an answer:

“
 Theodore Roosevelt, War Hawk The former president clamored for American intervention in the European war, but the country preferred peace in 1916. Ironically, Roosevelt’s archrival, Woodrow Wilson, would take the country into the war just months after the 1916 election.

 Your telegram received. I would feel deeply mortiﬁed to have you or anybody like you vote for me. Since you have access to many disloyal Americans and I have not, I will ask you to convey this message to them.

”


 President Wilson’s devastating and somewhat insulting response probably won him more votes than it lost.



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


 CHRONOLOGY

 Wilson defeats Taft and Roosevelt for presidency



Underwood Tariff Act
 Sixteenth Amendment (income tax) Federal Reserve Act Huerta takes power in Mexico Seventeenth Amendment (direct election of senators)



Clayton Anti-Trust Act
 Federal Trade Commission established U.S. seizes port of Veracruz, Mexico World War I begins in Europe





 Sussex ultimatum and pledge U.S. exports to European belligerents skyrocket Workingmen’s Compensation Act Federal Farm Loan Act Warehouse Act Adamson Act Pancho Villa raids New Mexico Brandeis appointed to Supreme Court Jones Act U.S. Marines sent to Dominican Republic Wilson defeats Hughes for presidency



 United States buys Virgin Islands from Denmark

 La Follette Seaman’s Act Lusitania torpedoed and sunk by German U-boat U.S. Marines sent to Haiti Germany declares submarine war area around British Isles

KEY TERMS
New Freedom (729) New Nationalism (729) Underwood Tariff (732) Federal Reserve Act (733) Federal Trade Commission Act (733) Clayton Anti-Trust Act (733) holding companies (733) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Workingmen’s Compensation Act (734) Adamson Act (734) Jones Act (734) Tampico Incident (737) Central Powers (738) Allies (738) U-boats (740) Lusitania (740) 
Herbert Croly
Louis D. Brandeis
Victoriano Huerta
Venustiano Carranza
Francisco (“Pancho”)
Villa


John (“Black Jack”)
Pershing
Charles Evans Hughes


Who Were the Progressives?


D


 ebate about progressivism has revolved mainly around a question that is simple to ask but devilishly difﬁcult to answer: who were the progressives? It was once taken for granted that progressive reformers were simply the heirs of the Jeffersonian-JacksonianPopulist reform crusades; they were the oppressed

 and downtrodden common folk who ﬁ nally erupted in wrath and demanded their due. But in his inﬂuential Age of Reform (1955), Richard Hofstadter astutely challenged that view. Progressive leaders, he argued, were not drawn from the ranks of society’s poor and marginalized. Rather, they were

To Learn More


 middle-class people threatened from above by the emerging power of new corporate elites and from below by a restless working class. It was not economic deprivation, but “status anxiety,” Hofstadter insisted, that prompted these people to become reformers. Their psychological motivation, Hofstadter concluded, rendered many of their reform efforts quirky and ineffectual. By contrast, “New Left” historians, notably Gabriel Kolko, argued that progressivism was dominated by established business leaders who successfully directed “reform” to their own conser vative ends. In this view government regulation (as embodied in new agencies like the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Tariff Commission, and in legislation like the Meat Inspection Act) simply accomplished what two generations of private efforts had failed to do: dampen cutthroat competition, stabilize markets, and make America safe for monopoly capitalism. Still other scholars, notably Robert H. Wiebe and Samuel P. Hays, argued that the progressives were neither the psychologically or economically disadvantaged nor the old capitalist elite, but were, rather, members of a rapidly emerging, self-conﬁdent social class possessed of the new techniques of scientiﬁc management, technological ex per tise, and orga ni zational know-how. This “orga ni zational school” of historians did not see progressivism as a struggle of the “people” against the “interests,” as a confused and nostalgic campaign by status-threatened reformers,



 or as a conser vative coup d’état. The progressive movement, in this view, was by and large an effort to rationalize and modernize many social institutions by introducing the wise and impartial hand of government regulation. This view had much to recommend it. Yet despite its widespread acceptance among historians, it could not adequately account for the titanic political struggles of the progressive era over the very reforms that the “orga ni zational school” regarded as simple adjustments to modernity. It also brushed over the deep philosophical differences that divided progressives themselves—such as between Roosevelt’s New Nationalism and Wilson’s New Freedom. In addition, the orga ni zational approach did not account for the important role of women in advocating progressive reforms, as demonstrated by Robyn Muncy, Linda Gordon, and Theda Skocpol. Building the American welfare state in the early twentieth century, they have argued, was fundamentally a gendered activity inspired by a “female dominion” of social workers and “social feminists.” Scholars such as Daniel T. Rodgers have added that essential inspiration also came from across the Atlantic. In European countries vibrant labor movements sought a welfare state to beneﬁt the working class, whereas in the United States the strength of female reformers promoted welfare programs aimed at protecting women and children. All the same, American programs frequently were modeled after policies adopted in London, Paris, and Berlin.

To Learn More
Michael C. Adams, The Great Adventure: Male Desire and
 the Coming of World War I (1990) John W. Chambers, The Tyranny of Change: America in the Progressive Era, 1900–1917 (rev. ed., 2000) John M. Cooper, The Warrior and the Priest: Woodrow Wilson and Theodore Roosevelt (1983) Alexander L. George and Juliette L. George, Woodrow Wilson and Colonel House (1956) Henry May, The End of American Innocence: A Study of the First Years of Our Time (1959) Frank A. Ninkovich, The Wilsonian Century: U.S. Foreign Policy Since 1900 (1999) Mary Renda, Taking Haiti: Military Occupation and the Culture of U.S. Imperialism, 1915–1940 (2001)

Edward Stettner, Shaping Modern Liberalism: Herbert Croly
 and Progressive Thought (1993) Philippa Strum, Brandeis: Justice for the People (1985) Eileen Welsome, The General and the Jaguar: Pershing’s Hunt for Pancho Villa (2006)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The War to End War





1917–1918
 The world must be made safe for democracy. Its peace must be planted upon the tested foundations of political liberty. We have no selﬁsh ends to serve. We desire no conquest, no dominion. We seek no indemnities for ourselves, no material compensation for the sacriﬁces we shall freely make.

D


 estiny dealt cruelly with Woodrow Wilson. The lover of peace, as fate would have it, was forced to lead a hesitant and peace-loving nation into war. As the last days of 1916 slipped through the hourglass, the president made one ﬁ nal, futile attempt to mediate between the embattled belligerents. On January 22, 1917, he delivered one of his most moving addresses, restating America’s commitment to neutral rights and declaring that only a negotiated “peace without victory” would prove durable. Germany’s warlords responded with a blow of the mailed ﬁst. On January 31, 1917, they announced to an astonished world their decision to wage unrestricted submarine warfare, sinking all ships, including America’s, in the war zone. Why this rash act? War with America was the last thing Germany wanted. But after three ghastly years in the trenches, Germany’s leaders decided the distinction between combatants and noncombatants was a

 luxury they could no longer afford. Thus they jerked on the string they had attached to their Sussex pledge in 1916, desperately hoping to bring Britain to its knees before the United States entered the war. Wilson, his bluff called, broke diplomatic relations with Germany but refused to move closer to war unless the Germans undertook “overt” acts against American lives.

War by Act of Germany
 To defend American interests short of war, the president asked Congress for authority to arm American merchant ships. When a band of midwestern senators launched a ﬁ libuster to block the mea sure, Wilson denounced them as a “little group of willful men” who were rendering a great nation “helpless and contemptible.” But their obstruction was a powerful reminder of the continuing strength of American isolationism.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



A
War for Ideals 



WAR!
Attacks by German submarines ﬁnally forced Wilson’s hand, and he asked Congress for a declaration of war on April 2, 1917. Four days later, after considerable debate and with ﬁfty-six dissenting votes, Congress obliged the president. 
 Meanwhile, the sensational Zimmermann note was intercepted and published on March 1, 1917, infuriating Americans, especially westerners. German foreign secretary Arthur Zimmermann had secretly proposed a German-Mexican alliance, tempting antiYankee Mexico with veiled promises of recovering Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona. On the heels of this provocation came the longdreaded “overt” acts in the Atlantic, where German U-boats sank four unarmed American merchant vessels in the ﬁ rst two weeks of March. As one Philadelphia newspaper observed, “The difference between war and what we have now is that now we aren’t ﬁghting back.” Simultaneously came the rousing news that a revolution in Russia had toppled the cruel regime of the tsars. America could now ﬁght foursquare for democracy on the side of the Allies, without the black sheep of Russian despotism in the Allied fold. Subdued and solemn, Wilson at last stood before a hushed joint session of Congress on the evening of April 2, 1917, and asked for a declaration of war. He had lost his gamble that America could pursue the profits of neutral trade without being sucked into the ghastly maelstrom. A myth developed in later years that America was dragged unwittingly into war by munitions makers and Wall Street bankers, desperate to protect their proﬁts and loans. Yet the weapons merchants and ﬁ nanciers were already thriving, unhampered by wartime government restrictions and heavy taxation. Their slogan might well have been “Neutrality Forever.” The simple truth is that British harassment of Amer ican commerce had been galling but endurable; Germany had resorted to the mass kill ing of civilians. The difference was like that between a gang of

 thieves and a gang of murderers. President Wilson had drawn a clear, if risky, line against the depredations of the submarine. The German high command, in a last desperate throw of the dice, chose to cross it. In a ﬁgurative sense, America’s war declaration of April 6, 1917, bore the unambiguous trademark “Made in Germany.”

Wilsonian Idealism
Enthroned
 “It is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war,” Wilson said in his war message. It was fearful indeed, not least of all because of the formidable challenge it posed to Wilson’s leadership skills. Ironically, it fell to the scholarly Wilson, deeply respectful of American traditions, to shatter one of the most sacred of those traditions by entangling America in a distant European war. How could the president arouse the American people to shoulder this unprecedented burden? For more than a century, they had prided themselves on their isolationism from the periodic outbursts of militarized violence that afﬂ icted the Old World. Since 1914 their pride had been reinforced by the bountiful proﬁts gained through neutrality. German U-boats had now roughly shoved a wavering America into the abyss, but ominously, no fewer than six senators and ﬁ fty representatives (including the ﬁ rst congresswoman, Jeannette Rankin of Montana) had voted against the war resolution. Wilson could whip up no enthusiasm, especially in the landlocked Midwest, by calling on the nation to ﬁght to make the world safe from the submarine.



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 To galvanize the country, Wilson would have to proclaim more gloriﬁed aims. Radiating the spiritual fervor of his Presbyterian ancestors, he declared the supremely ambitious goal of a crusade “to make the world safe for democracy.” Brandishing the sword of righteousness, Wilson virtually hypnotized the nation with his lofty ideals. He contrasted the selﬁsh war aims of the other belligerents, Allied and enemy alike, with America’s shining altruism. America, he preached, did not ﬁght for the sake of riches or territorial conquest. The Republic sought only to shape an international order in which democracy could ﬂourish without fear of power-crazed autocrats and militarists. In Wilsonian idealism the personality of the president and the necessities of history were perfectly matched. The high-minded Wilson genuinely believed in the principles he so eloquently intoned—especially that the modern world could not afford the kind of hyper-destructive war that advanced industrial states were now capable of waging. In this, Wilson’s vision was prophetic. In any case, probably no other appeal could have successfully converted the American people from their historic hostility to involvement in European squabbles. Americans, it seemed, could be either isolationists or crusaders, but nothing in between. Wilson’s appeal worked—perhaps too well. Holding aloft the torch of idealism, the president ﬁ red up the public mind to a fever pitch. “Force, force to the utmost, force without stint or limit,” he cried, while the country responded less elegantly with “Hang the kaiser.” Lost on the gale was Wilson’s earlier plea for “peace without victory.”

 Wilson’s Fourteen Potent Points Wilson quickly came to be recognized as the moral leader of the Allied cause. He scaled a summit of inspiring oratory on January 8, 1918, when he delivered his famed Fourteen Points Address to an enthusiastic Congress. Although one of his primary purposes was to keep reeling Russia in the war, Wilson’s vision inspired all the drooping Allies to make mightier efforts and demoralized the enemy governments by holding out alluring promises to their dissatisﬁed minorities. The ﬁ rst ﬁve of the Fourteen Points were broad in scope. (1) A proposal to abolish secret treaties pleased liberals of all countries. (2) Freedom of the seas appealed to the Germans, as well as to Americans who distrusted British sea power. (3) A removal of economic

 barriers among nations had long been the goal of liberal internationalists every where. (4) A reduction of armament burdens was gratifying to taxpayers in all countries. (5) An adjustment of colonial claims in the interests of both native peoples and the colonizers was reassuring to the anti-imperialists. Indeed Wilson’s pronouncement about colonies was potentially revolutionary. It helped to delegitimize the old empires and opened the road to eventual national independence for millions of “subject peoples.” Other points among the fourteen proved to be no less seductive. They held out the hope of independence (“self-determination”) to oppressed minority groups, such as the Poles, millions of whom lay under the heel of Germany and Austria-Hungary. The capstone point, number fourteen, foreshadowed the League of Nations—an international orga ni zation that Wilson dreamed would provide a system of collective security. Wilson earnestly prayed that this new scheme would effectively guarantee the political independence and territorial integrity of all countries, whether large or small. Yet Wilson’s appealing points, though raising hopes the world over, were not every where applauded. Certain leaders of the Allied nations, with an eye to territorial booty, were less than enthusiastic. Hard-nosed Republicans at home grumbled, and some of them openly mocked the “fourteen commandments” of “God Almighty Wilson.”

Creel Manipulates Minds
 Mobilizing people’s minds for war, both in America and abroad, was an urgent task facing the Washington authorities. For this purpose the Committee on Public Information was created. It was headed by a youngish journalist, George Creel, who, though outspoken and tactless, was gifted with zeal and imagination. His job was to sell America on the war and sell the world on Wilsonian war aims. The Creel orga ni zation, employing some 150,000 workers at home and overseas, proved that words were indeed weapons. It sent out an army of 75,000 “fourminute men”—often longer-winded than that—who delivered countless speeches containing much “patriotic pep.” Creel’s propaganda took varied forms. Posters were splashed on billboards in the “Battle of the Fences,” as artists “rallied to the colors.” Millions of leaﬂets and pamphlets, which contained the most pungent Wilson-

The War for the American Mind




 Anti-German Propaganda The government relied extensively on emotional appeals and hate propaganda to rally support for the First World War, which most Americans regarded as a distant “European” affair. This poster used gendered imagery to evoke the brutal German violation of Belgian neutrality in August 1914.

 Patriotic Persuasion Worried about the public’s enthusiasm for the war, the government employed all the arts of psychology and propaganda to sustain the martial spirit. The prewar song “I Didn’t Raise My Boy to Be a Soldier” was changed to “I Didn’t Raise My Boy to Be a Slacker,” which in turn inspired the cruel parody “I Didn’t Raise My Boy to Be a Sausage.”

 isms, were showered like confetti upon the world. Propaganda booklets with red-white-and-blue covers were printed by the millions. Hang-the-kaiser movies, carrying such titles as The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin and To Hell with the Kaiser, revealed the helmeted “Hun” at his bloodiest. Armwaving conductors by the thousands led huge audiences in songs that poured scorn on the enemy and gloriﬁed the “boys” in uniform. The entire nation, catching the frenzied spirit of a religious revival, burst into song. This was undoubtedly

 America’s singingest war. Most memorable was George M. Cohan’s spine-tingling “Over There”: Over there, over there Send the word, send the word over there, That the Yanks are coming, the Yanks are coming The drums rum-tumming ev’rywhere. Creel typiﬁed American war mobilization, which relied more on aroused passion and voluntary compliance than on formal laws. But he oversold the ideals of Wilson and led the world to expect too much. When



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 the president proved to be a mortal and not a god, the resulting disillusionment both at home and abroad was disastrous.

Enforcing Loyalty and
 Stiﬂing Dissent German Americans numbered over 8 million, counting those with at least one parent foreign-born, out of a total population of 100 million. On the whole they proved to be dependably loyal to the United States. Yet rumormongers were quick to spread tales of spying and sabotage; even triﬂ ing epidemics of diarrhea were blamed on German agents. A few German Americans were tarred, feathered, and beaten; in one extreme case a German Socialist in Illinois was lynched by a drunken mob. As emotion mounted, hysterical hatred of Germans and things Germanic swept the nation. Orchestras found it unsafe to present German-composed music, like that of Wagner or Beethoven. German books were removed from library shelves, and German classes were canceled in high schools and colleges. Sauerkraut became “liberty cabbage,” hamburger “liberty steak.” Even beer became suspect, as patriotic Americans fretted over the loyalty of breweries with names like Schlitz and Pabst. Both the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918 reﬂected current fears about Germans and antiwar Americans. Especially visible among the nineteen

Socialist Leader Eugene V. Debs
Addresses an Antiwar Rally in
 1918 For his denunciation of World War I, Debs was convicted under the Espionage Act of 1917 and sent to federal prison. In his courtroom speech defending himself against charges of disloyalty, he passionately declared, “While there is a lower class, I am in it; while there is a criminal element, I am of it; while there is a soul in prison, I am not free.” He ran as a presidential candidate in 1920 while still incarcerated in his cell and received nearly a million votes.

 hundred prosecutions pursued under these laws were antiwar Socialists and members of the radical Industrial Workers of the World (IWW). Kingpin Socialist Eugene V. Debs was convicted under the Espionage Act in 1918 and sentenced to ten years in a federal penitentiary. IWW leader William D. (“Big Bill”) Haywood and ninety-nine associates were similarly convicted. Virtually any criticism of the government could be censored and punished. Some critics claimed the new laws were bending, if not breaking, the First Amendment. But in Schenck v. United States (1919), the Supreme Court afﬁ rmed their legality, arguing that freedom of speech could be revoked when such speech posed a “clear and present danger” to the nation. These prosecutions form an ugly chapter in the history of American civil liberty. With the dawn of peace, presidential pardons were rather freely granted, including President Harding’s to Eugene Debs in 1921. Yet a few victims lingered behind bars into the 1930s.

 The Nation’s Factories Go to War Victory was no foregone conclusion, especially since the Republic, despite ample warning, was caught ﬂatfootedly unready for its leap into global war. The paciﬁstic Wilson had only belatedly backed some mild preparedness mea sures beginning in 1915, including the creation of a civilian Council of National Defense to study problems of economic mobilization. He had

Wartime Workers


 also launched a shipbuilding program (as much to capture the belligerents’ war-disrupted foreign trade as to anticipate America’s possible entry into the war) and endorsed a modest beeﬁ ng-up of the army, which with 100,000 regulars then ranked about ﬁ fteenth among the armies of the world, in the same category with Persia’s. It would take a herculean effort to marshal America’s daunting but disorga nized resources and throw them into the ﬁeld quickly enough to bolster the Allied war effort. Towering obstacles confronted economic mobilizers. Sheer ignorance was among the biggest roadblocks. No one knew precisely how much steel or explosive powder the country was capable of producing. Old ideas also proved to be liabilities, as traditional fears of big government hamstrung efforts to orchestrate the economy from Washington. States’ rights Democrats and businesspeople alike balked at federal economic controls, even though the embattled nation could ill afford the freewheeling, hit-or-miss chaos of the peacetime economy. Late in the war, and after some bruising political battles, Wilson succeeded in imposing some order on this economic confusion. In March 1918 he appointed lone-eagle stock speculator Bernard Baruch to head the War Industries Board. Although the War Industries Board had only feeble formal powers, it set a precedent for the federal government to take a central role in economic planning in moments of crisis. It was disbanded just days after the armistice, and Americans returned to their preference for laissez-faire and a weak central government. But in the midst of the Great Depression of the 1930s, policymakers would look back to World War I agencies like this one as models.

Workers in Wartime
 Spurred by the slogan “Labor Will Win the War,” American workers sweated their way to victory. In part they were driven by the War Department’s “work or ﬁght” rule of 1918, which threatened any unemployed male with being immediately drafted—a powerful discouragement to go on strike. But for the most part, government tried to treat labor fairly. The National War Labor Board, chaired by former president Taft, exerted itself to head off labor disputes that might hamper the war effort. While pressing employers to grant concessions to labor, including high wages and the eight-hour day, the board stopped short of supporting labor’s most im-



Suppressing the Steel Strike: Pittsburgh, 1919
 The big steel producers ferociously resisted the unionization of their industry. In Pittsburgh compliant local ofﬁcials bent to the steel makers’ will and issued an order banning all outdoor meetings of strikers. This mounted policeman enforced the order with a ﬂailing billy club. The steelworkers’ strike eventually failed, leaving the steel industry un-unionized until the New Deal championed labor’s cause in the depression decade of the 1930s.

 portant demand: a government guarantee of the right to organize into unions. Fortunately for the Allied cause, Samuel Gompers and his American Federation of Labor (AF of L) loyally supported the war, though some smaller and more radical labor orga ni zations, including the Industrial Workers of the World, did not. The IWW, known as the “Wobblies” and sometimes derided as the “I Won’t Works,” engineered some of the most damaging industrial sabotage, and not without reason. As transient laborers in such industries as fruit and lumber, the Wobblies were victims of some of the shabbiest working conditions in the country. When they protested, many were viciously beaten, arrested, or run out of town. Mainstream labor’s loyalty was rewarded. At war’s end, the AF of L had more than doubled its membership, to over 3 million, and in the most heavily unionized sectors—coal mining, manufacturing, and



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 American strikebreakers to keep the mills running. After bitter confrontations that left more than a dozen workers dead, the steel strike collapsed, a grievous setback that crippled the union movement for more than a decade. The black workers who entered the steel mills in 1919 were but a fraction of the tens of thousands of southern blacks drawn to the North in wartime by the magnet of war-industry employment. These migrants made up the small-scale beginnings of a great northward African American trek that would eventually grow to massive proportions. Their sudden appearance in previously all-white areas sometimes sparked interracial violence. An explosive riot in East St. Louis, Missouri, in July 1917 left nine whites and at least forty blacks dead. An equally gruesome race riot ripped through Chicago. The wartime Windy City was taut with racial tension as a growing black population expanded into white working-class neighborhoods and as African Americans found jobs as strikebreakers in meatpacking plants. Triggered by an incident at a bathing beach in July 1919, a reign of terror descended on the city for nearly two weeks. Black and white gangs roamed Chicago’s streets, eventually kill ing ﬁ fteen whites and twenty-three blacks. Chicago Race Riot, 1919 The policeman apparently arrived too late to spare this victim from being pelted by stones from an angry mob.

 transportation—real wages (after adjusting for inﬂation) had risen more than 20 percent over prewar levels. A new day seemed to be dawning for the longstruggling union movement. Yet labor harbored grievances. Recognition of the right to organize still eluded labor’s grasp. Wartime inﬂation—prices more than doubled between 1914 and 1920—threatened to eclipse wage gains. Not even the call of patriotism and Wilsonian idealism could defuse all labor disputes. Some six thousand strikes, several stained by blood, broke out in the war years. In 1919 the greatest strike in American history rocked the steel industry. More than a quarter of a million steelworkers walked off their jobs in a bid to force their employers to recognize their right to organize and bargain collectively. The steel companies resisted mercilessly. They refused to negotiate with union representatives and brought in thirty thousand African

Suffering Until Suffrage
 Women also heeded the call of patriotism and opportunity. Thousands of female workers ﬂooded into factories and ﬁelds, taking up jobs vacated by men who left the assembly line for the frontline. But the war split the women’s movement deeply. Many progressive-era feminists were paciﬁsts, inclined to oppose the participation both of America in the war and women in the war effort. This group found a voice in the National Woman’s party, led by Quaker activist Alice Paul, which demonstrated against “Kaiser Wilson” with marches and hunger strikes. But the larger part of the suffrage movement, represented by the National American Woman Suffrage Association, supported Wilson’s war. Leaders echoed Wilson’s justiﬁcation for ﬁghting by arguing that women must take part in the war effort to earn a role in shaping the peace. The ﬁght for democracy abroad was women’s best hope for winning true democracy at home. War mobilization gave new momentum to the suffrage ﬁght. Impressed by women’s war work, President

Suffrage for Women


 Wilson endorsed woman suffrage as “a vitally necessary war mea sure.” In 1917 New York voted for suffrage at the state level; Michigan, Oklahoma, and South Dakota followed. The next year, governments in Great Britain, Austria, Hungary, and Germany extended the suffrage to women. Not long after, the United States followed suit. In 1920, more than seventy years after the ﬁ rst calls for suffrage at Seneca Falls, the Nineteenth Amendment was ratiﬁed, giving all American women the right to vote. (See the Appendix and Table 30.1.) Despite political victory, women’s wartime economic gains proved ﬂeeting. Although a permanent Women’s Bureau did emerge after the war in the Department of Labor to protect women in the workplace, most women workers soon gave up their war jobs. Meanwhile, Congress afﬁ rmed its support for women in their traditional role as mothers when it passed the Sheppard-Towner Maternity Act of 1921, providing federally ﬁ nanced instruction in maternal and infant



 In an open address to Congress in 1917, suffragist Carrie Chapman Catt (1859–1947) capitalized on the idealism of the day and invoked the founding principles of American democracy in arguing the case for women’s right to vote:

“


 How can our nation escape the logic it has never failed to follow, when its last unenfranchised class calls for the vote? Behold our Uncle Sam ﬂoating the banner with one hand, ‘Taxation without representation is tyranny,’ and with the other seizing the billions of dollars paid in taxes by women to whom he refuses ‘representation.’ . . . Is there a single man who can justify such inequality of treatment, such outrageous discrimination? Not one.

 In the Trenches U.S. Army nurses worked on the frontlines in France in 1918. The war also opened many opportunities for women’s work on the home front, but the conﬂict ended too soon for many women to secure a permanent foothold in occupations traditionally dominated by men.

”




Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


Suffragists Picket the White House, 1917
 Militant feminists sometimes handcuffed themselves to the White House fence to dramatize their appeal for the vote to the president.

 Table 30.1 A Chronology of Women’s Right to Vote in National Elections in Selected Nations



New Zealand
 Australia (white women only until Aborigines included in 1962) Finland Denmark, Iceland Austria, Canada (women of British and French extraction only until 1950), Germany, Hungary, Poland, Russian Federation, United Kingdom (only women who were married, householders, or university graduates age 30 or over until 1928) Netherlands, Sweden United States, Czechoslovakia Mongolia South Africa (whites only until 1994), Turkey Spain (but women lost the vote under the dictator Francisco Franco, 1936–1976) Brazil, Cuba France Italy, Japan Yugoslavia Argentina, Mexico, Pakistan Israel, South Korea China, Syrian Arab Republic Haiti, India Greece, Lebanon Egypt Iran Afghanistan (revoked under Taliban rule, 1996–2001) Switzerland Jordan Kuwait

 [Sources: Caroline Daley and Melanie Nolan, eds., Suffrage and Beyond: International Feminist Perspectives (1994); http://www.ipu.org/english/ issues/wmndocs/suffrage.htm; About.com, Women’s History, International Woman Suffrage Timeline, http://womenshistory.about .com/od/suffrage/a/intl_timeline.htm.]

 health care. In doing so, it also expanded the responsibility of the federal government for family welfare. Feminists continued to ﬂex their political muscle in the postwar decade, pressing for more laws to protect women in the workplace and prohibit child labor. Complete success often eluded them in those crusades, but the developments of the World War I era nevertheless foreshadowed a future when women’s wage-labor and political power would reshape the American way of life.

Forging a War Economy
 Mobilization relied as much on the heated emotions of patriotism as on the cool majesty of the laws. The largely voluntary character of economic war orga ni zation testiﬁed to ocean-insulated America’s safe distance from the ﬁghting—as well as to the still-modest scale of government powers in the progressive-era Republic. But as the war wore on, government took greater command of the nation’s resources to secure an Allied victory. As the larder of democracy, America had to feed itself and its allies. By a happy inspiration, the man chosen to head the Food Administration was the Quaker-humanitarian Herbert C. Hoover. He was already considered a hero because he had successfully led a massive charitable drive to feed the starving people of war-racked Belgium. In common with other American war administrators, Hoover preferred to rely on voluntary compliance rather than on compulsory edicts. He deliberately rejected issuing ration cards, a practice used in Europe. Instead he waged a whirlwind propaganda campaign through posters, billboards, newspapers, pulpits, and

Doughboys in France


 movies. To save food for export, Hoover proclaimed wheatless Wednesdays and meatless Tuesdays—all on a voluntary basis. Even children, when eating apples, were urged to be “patriotic to the core.” The country soon broke out in a rash of vegetable “victory gardens,” as perspiring patriots hoed their way to victory in backyards and vacant lots. Congress severely restricted the use of foodstuffs for manufacturing alcoholic beverages, and the war-spawned spirit of self-denial helped accelerate the wave of prohibition that was sweeping the country. Many leading brewers were German-descended, and this taint made the drive against alcohol all the more popular. The reformers’ dream of a saloonless nation was ﬁ nally



 achieved—temporarily—in 1919 with the passage of the Eighteenth Amendment, prohibiting all alcoholic drinks. Thanks to the fervent patriotic wartime spirit, Hoover’s voluntary approach worked. Farm production increased by one-fourth, and food exports to the Allies tripled in volume. Hoover’s methods were widely imitated in other war agencies. The Fuel Administration exhorted Americans to save fuel with “heat less Mondays,” “lightless nights,” and “gasless Sundays.” The Treasury Department sponsored huge parades and invoked slogans like “Halt the Hun” to promote four great Liberty Loan drives, followed by a Victory Loan campaign in 1919. Together these efforts netted the then-fantastic sum of about $21 billion, or twothirds of the current cost of the war to the United States. The remainder was raised by increased taxes, which, unlike the loan subscriptions, were obligatory. (The ultimate bill, including interest and veterans’ beneﬁts, mounted to some $112 billion.) Pressures of various kinds, patriotic and otherwise, were used to sell bonds. The unfortunate German American who could not display a Liberty Bond button might ﬁ nd his or her house bedaubed with yellow paint. A number of reluctant investors in war bonds were roughly handled. In at least one instance, a man signed for a bond with a rope around his neck. Despite the Wilson administration’s preference for voluntary means of mobilizing the economy, over the course of the war it expanded the federal government in size and power. The War Industries Board issued production quotas, allocated raw materials, and set prices for government purchases. Following indescribable trafﬁc snarls in late 1917, Washington took over the railroads. Time itself came under Uncle Sam’s control when the entire country was ordered to observe daylight saving time to extend the workday and save on fuel.

Making Plowboys
 into Doughboys

 Food for Thought Wartime agencies ﬂooded the country with posters like this in 1917–1918, exhorting women on the home front to “grow their own” and thus ease the pressure on food supplies.

 Most citizens, at the outset, did not dream of sending a mighty force to France. As far as ﬁghting went, America would use its navy to uphold freedom of the seas. It would continue to ship war materials to the Allies and supply them with loans, which ﬁ nally totaled nearly $10 billion. But in April and May of 1917, the European associates laid their cards on the table. They confessed that they were scraping the bottom not only of their money chests but, more ominously, of



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 their manpower barrels. A huge American army would have to be raised, trained, and transported, or the whole western front would collapse. Conscription was the only answer to the need for raising an immense army with all possible speed. Wilson disliked a draft, as did many other Americans with Civil War memories, but he eventually accepted and eloquently supported conscription as a disagreeable and temporary necessity. The proposed draft bill immediately ran into a barrage of criticism in Congress. A congressman from Missouri, deploring compulsion, cried out in protest that there was “precious little difference between a conscript and a convict.” Prophets of doom predicted that on draft-registration day, the streets would run red with blood. At length Congress—six weeks after declaring war—grudgingly got around to passing conscription. The draft act required the registration of all males between the ages of eighteen and forty-ﬁve. No “draft dodger” could purchase his exemption or hire a substitute, as in the days of the Civil War, though the law exempted men in key industries, such as shipbuilding.

 Ignoring grisly tales of the agonies of trench warfare, many young American men saw an opportunity for adventure and seized it. Author John Dos Passos (1896–1970) recollected how he felt going off to war in 1917:

“


 We had spent our boyhood in the afterglow of the peaceful nineteenth century. . . . What was war like? We wanted to see with our own eyes. We ﬂocked into the volunteer services. I respected the conscientious objectors, and occasionally felt I should take that course myself, but hell, I wanted to see the show.

”


 The draft machinery, on the whole, worked effectively. Registration day proved to be a day of patriotic pilgrimages to ﬂag-draped registration centers, and the sign-up saw no shedding of blood, as some had gloomily predicted. Despite precautions, some 337,000 “slackers” escaped the draft, and about 4,000 conscientious objectors were excused. Within a few frantic months, the army grew to over 4 million men. For the ﬁ rst time, women were admitted to the armed forces; some 11,000 to the navy and 269 to the marines. African Americans also served in the armed forces, though in strictly segregated units and usually under white ofﬁcers. Reﬂecting racial attitudes of the time, military authorities hesitated to train black men for combat, and the majority of black soldiers were assigned to “construction battalions” or put to work unloading ships. Recruits were supposed to receive six months of training in America and two more months overseas. But so great was the urgency that many doughboys were swept swiftly into battle scarcely knowing how to handle a riﬂe, much less a bayonet.

Fighting in France—Belatedly


Miracles in Shipbuilding


 Russia’s collapse underscored the need for haste. The communistic Bolsheviks, after seizing power late in 1917, ultimately withdrew their beaten country from the “capitalistic” war early in 1918. This sudden defection released hundreds of thousands of battle-tested Germans from the eastern front facing Russia for the western front in France, where, for the ﬁ rst time in the



Stopping the German Juggernaut


 war, they were developing a dangerous superiority in manpower. Berlin’s calculations as to American tardiness were surprisingly accurate. Germany had counted on knocking out Britain six months after the declaration of unlimited submarine warfare, long before America could get into the struggle. No really effective American ﬁghting force reached France until about a year after Congress declared war. Berlin had also reckoned on the inability of the Americans to transport their army, assuming that they were able to raise one. Here again the German predictions were not far from the mark, as shipping shortages plagued the Allies. Nevertheless, France gradually began to bustle with American doughboys (see Map 30.1). The ﬁ rst trainees to reach the front were used as replacements in the Allied armies and were generally deployed in quiet sectors with the British and French. The newcomers soon made friends with the French girls—or tried to—and one of the most sung-about women in history was the fabled “Mademoiselle from Armentières.” One of the printable stanzas ran, She was true to me, she was true to you, She was true to the whole damn army, too.

 Battling Venereal Disease The American military waged a half-hearted war on rampant venereal disease. 0º

Interactive Map


 ver

 FLA

 ND

E


 s Ly

Ypres


 ra

N ETH .


 tR eld Brussels Sch .

Do


 it

 of

RS R

.


Dover


St


B ELGI U M

.
 se R M eu

So
 m m

 eR

.


Somme
Offensive


Amiens
Cantigny
May 28, 1918
 in e

Central Powers
 Neutral nations German spring offensive, 1918

Aisne-Marne
Offensive


GE R M A N Y

 ne R. Ais

Verdun
Feb. 21–Dec. 18, 1916


Belleau Wood


R.
June 6–25, 1918 

Versailles


Allied Powers


 se Mo

 LUX .

Sedan


Paris
M


 e R. ar n

 Château-Thierry May 31– June 4, 1918

 LO

Meuse-Argonne
Sept. 26–
Nov. 11, 1918
Second Battle
 of the Marne July 18– Aug. 6, 1918 F R ANCE

 RR

AI N

E


St. Mihiel
Sept. 12–16, 1918


A L S AC E


50Nº


 lle

Eng lis h
Cha n n el


R.


Lys
Offensive


Se


Map 30.1 Major U.S.
Operations in France, 1918
 One doughboy recorded in his diary his baptism of ﬁre at St. Mihiel: “Hiked through dark woods. No lights allowed, guided by holding on the pack of the man ahead. Stumbled through underbrush for about half mile into an open ﬁeld where we waited in soaking rain until about 10:00 P.M. We then started on our hike to the St. Mihiel front, arriving on the crest of a hill at 1:00 A.M. I saw a sight which I shall never forget. It was the zero hour and in one instant the entire front as far as the eye could reach in either direction was a sheet of ﬂame, while the heavy artillery made the earth quake.”

5Eº


GR EAT B R I TA I N

N


 American offensive

 Stabilized front, 1914–1917

Armistice Line, Nov. 11, 1918


Farthest German
 advance, July 18, 1918

 Deadlocked battle

 Allied victory





100 Km.


S WIT Z .




100 Mi.




Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 Not surprisingly, American soldiers suffered from high rates of venereal disease, which the army only contributed to by avoiding the subject. American operations were not conﬁ ned solely to France; small detachments fought in Belgium, Italy, and notably Russia. The United States, hoping to keep stores of munitions from falling into German hands when Bolshevik Russia quit ﬁghting, contributed some 5,000 troops to an Allied invasion of northern Russia at Archangel. Wilson likewise sent nearly 10,000 troops to Siberia as part of an Allied expedition, which included more than 70,000 Japa nese. Major American purposes were to prevent Japan from getting a stranglehold on Siberia, to rescue some 45,000 marooned Czechoslovak troops, and to snatch military supplies from Bolshevik control. Sharp ﬁghting at Archangel and in Siberia involved casualties on both sides, including several hundred Americans. The Bolsheviks long resented these “capitalistic” interventions, which they regarded as high-handed efforts to suffocate their infant communist revolution in its cradle.

America Helps Hammer
 the “Hun” The dreaded German drive on the western front exploded in the spring of 1918. Spearheaded by about half a million troops, the enemy rolled forward with terrifying momentum. So dire was the peril that the

 Allied nations for the ﬁ rst time united under a supreme commander, the quiet French marshal Foch, whose axiom was “To make war is to attack.” Until then the Allies had been ﬁghting imperfectly coordinated actions. At last the ill-trained “Yanks” were coming—and not a moment too soon. Late in May 1918, the German juggernaut, smashing to within forty miles of Paris, threatened to knock out France. Newly arrived American troops, numbering fewer than thirty thousand, were thrown into the breach at Château-Thierry, right in the teeth of the German advance. This was a historic moment—the ﬁ rst signiﬁcant engagement of American troops in a European war. Battle-fatigued French soldiers watched incredulously as the roads ﬁ lled with endless truckloads of American doughboys, singing New World songs at the top of their voices, a seemingly inexhaustible ﬂood of fresh and gleaming youth. With their arrival it was clear that a new American giant had arisen in the West to replace the dying Russian titan in the East. American weight in the scales was now being felt on both sides of the conﬂ ict (see Figure 30.1). By July 1918 the awesome German drive had spent its force, and keyed-up American men participated in a Foch counteroffensive in the Second Battle of the Marne. This engagement marked the beginning of a German withdrawal that was never effectively reversed. In September 1918 nine American divisions (about 243,000 men) joined four French divisions to push the Germans

 Gassed, by John Singer Sargent The noted artist captures the horror of trench warfare in World War I. The enemy was often distant and unseen, and death came impersonally from gas or artillery ﬁre. American troops, entering the line only in the war’s ﬁnal days, were only brieﬂy exposed to this kind of brutal ﬁghting.

 “Mademoiselle from Armentières” ome familiar songs, such as Julia Ward Howe’s stirring Civil War–era melody “Battle Hymn of the Republic,” were penned by known composers and have well-established scores and lyrics. But many ballads have no speciﬁc author. Songwriters may ﬁt new verses to known tunes, but the songs essentially grow out of the soil of popular culture and take on a life of their own. “Yankee Doodle Dandy,” for example, originated during the seventeenthcentury Eng lish Civil War, was adapted by the American revolutionaries more than a century later, and was parodied by Southerners during the American Civil War:

S


 Yankee Doodle had a mind To whip the Southern “traitors,” Because they didn’t choose to live On codﬁsh and potaters. “Stagger Lee,” or “Stagolee,” a blues ballad supposedly based on a murder in Memphis in the 1930s, has been played in countless renditions, with its homicidal subject variously portrayed as a ruthless badman or a civil rights hero. This process of accretion and adaptation can furnish valuable clues to historians about changing sentiments and sensibilities, just as the ballads themselves give expression to feelings not always evident in the of ﬁcial record. Folklorist Alan Lomax spent a lifetime tracking down American ballads, documenting layers of life and experience not usually excavated by traditional scholars. In the case of the First World War’s most notorious song, “Mademoiselle from Armentières” (or “Hinky Dinky, Parley-Voo?”), he compiled from various sources more than six hundred soldier-authored stanzas, some of which are reproduced here (others he delicately described as “not mailable”). What fresh—and irreverent—perspectives do they reveal about the soldier’seye view of military life?

 Mademoiselle from Armentières, She hadn’t been kissed in forty years. She might have been young for all we knew, When Napoleon ﬂopped at Waterloo. . . . You’ll never get your Croix de Guerre, If you never wash your underwear. . . . The French, they are a funny race, They ﬁght with their feet and save their face. The cootie [louse] is the national bug of France. The cootie’s found all over France, No matter where you hang your pants. . . . Oh, the seventy-seventh went over the top, A sous lieutenant, a Jew, and a Wop. . . . The ofﬁcers get all the steak, And all we get is the belly-ache. The general got a Croix de Guerre, The son-of-a-gun was never there. . . . There’s many and many a married man, Wants to go back to France again. ’Twas a hell of a war as we recall, But still ’twas better than none at all.

 Source: Excerpt from John A. Lomax and Alan Lomax, American Ballads and Folk Songs, pp. 560. Courtesy of the Alan Lomax Archive





Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 upon their crumbling lines from balloons, shells, and rockets.

MEN KILLED IN BATTLE
Russia 
1,700,000


Germany


1,600,000


France


1,385,000


British Empire


900,000


Austria


800,000
462,000
53,000


Italy
United States


Figure 30.1 Approximate Comparative Losses in
World War I


 from the St. Mihiel salient, a German dagger in France’s ﬂank. The Americans, dissatisﬁed with merely bolstering the British and French, had meanwhile been demanding a separate army. General John J. (“Black Jack”) Pershing was ﬁ nally assigned a front of eighty-ﬁve miles, stretching northwestward from the Swiss border to meet the French lines. As part of the last mighty Allied assault, involving several million men, Pershing’s army undertook the Meuse-Argonne offensive, from September 26 to November 11, 1918. One objective was to cut the German railroad lines feeding the western front. This battle, the most gargantuan thus far in American history, lasted forty-seven days and engaged 1.2 million American troops. With especially heavy ﬁghting in the rugged Argonne Forest, the killed and wounded mounted to 120,000, or 10 percent of the Americans involved. The slow progress and severe losses from machine guns resulted in part from inadequate training, in part from dashing open-ﬁeld tactics, with the bayonet liberally employed. Tennessee-bred Alvin C. York, a member of an antiwar religious sect, became a hero when he single-handedly killed 20 Germans and captured 132 more. Victory was in sight—and fortunately so. The slowly advancing American armies in France were eating up their supplies so rapidly that they were in grave danger of running short. But the battered Germans were ready to stagger out of the trenches and cry “Kamerad” (Comrade). Their allies were deserting them, the British blockade was causing critical food shortages, and the sledgehammer blows of the Allies pummeled them relentlessly. Propaganda leaﬂets, containing seductive Wilsonian promises, rained down

The Fourteen Points
Disarm Germany
 Berlin was now ready to hoist the white ﬂag. Warned of imminent defeat by the generals, it turned to the presumably softhearted Wilson in October 1918, seeking a peace based on the Fourteen Points. In stern responses the president made it clear that the kaiser must be thrown overboard before an armistice could be negotiated. War-weary Germans, whom Wilson had been trying to turn against their “military masters,” took the hint. The kaiser was forced to ﬂee to Holland, where he lived out his remaining twenty-three years, “unwept, unhonored, and unhung.” The exhausted Germans were through. They laid down their arms at eleven o’clock on the eleventh day of the eleventh month of 1918, and an eerie, numbing silence fell over the western front. War-taut America burst into a delirium of around-the-clock rejoicing, as the war to end wars had ended. But the costs exceeded comprehension: nearly 9 million soldiers had died, and

 German “Repentance,” 1918 A prophetic reﬂection of the view that the failure to smash Germany completely would lead to another world war.

Wilson the Peacemaker


 Theodore Roosevelt (1858–1919) favored the Germans’ unconditional surrender. Referring to Wilson’s practice of drafting diplomatic notes on his own typewriter, Roosevelt telegraphed several senators (October 24, 1918),

“


 Let us dictate peace by the hammering guns and not chat about peace to the accompaniment of clicking typewriters. The language of the fourteen points and the subsequent statements explaining or qualifying them are thoroughly mischievous.

”


 more than 20 million had suffered grievous wounds. To make matters worse, some 30 million people perished in a worldwide inﬂuenza pandemic in 1918–1919. Over 550,000 Americans—more than ten times the number of U.S. combat casualties—died from the ﬂu. The United States’ main contributions to the ultimate victory had been foodstuffs, munitions, credits, oil for this ﬁ rst mechanized war, and manpower—but not battleﬁeld victories. The Yanks fought only two ma-



 jor battles, at St. Mihiel and the Meuse-Argonne, both in the last two months of the four-year war, and they were still grinding away in the Meuse-Argonne, well short of their objectives, when the war ended. It was the prospect of endless U.S. troop reserves, rather than America’s actual military per for mance, that eventually demoralized the Germans. Ironically enough, General Pershing in some ways depended more on the Allies than they depended on him. His army purchased more of its supplies in Europe than it shipped from the United States. Fewer than ﬁve hundred of Pershing’s artillery pieces were of American manufacture. Virtually all of his aircraft were provided by the British and French. Britain and France transported a majority of the doughboys to Europe. The United States, in short, was no arsenal of democracy in this war; that role awaited it in the next global conﬂ ict, two decades later.

Wilson Steps Down
 from Olympus Woodrow Wilson had helped to win the war. What part would he now play in shaping the peace? Expectations ran extravagantly high. As the ﬁghting in Europe crashed to a close, the American president towered at the peak of his popularity and power. In lonely huts in the mountains of Italy, candles burned before posterportraits of the revered American prophet. In Poland starry-eyed university students would meet in the streets, clasp hands, and utter only one word: “Wilson.” No other man had ever occupied so dizzy a pinnacle as moral leader of the world. Wilson also had behind him the prestige of victory and the economic resources of the mightiest nation on earth. But at this

 Home from the War, 1919 Most black troops in World War I were denied combat duty and served as laborers and stevedores, but this wounded veteran had seen some tough ﬁghting—though in a segregated unit, the 369th Colored Infantry Regiment, also known as the “Hellﬁghters of Harlem.” Segregation followed black servicemen even into death. When Congress appropriated money in 1930 to send “Gold Star Mothers” to visit the graves of their slain soldier-sons in France, it provided for separate ships, hotels, and trains for African American women. Several black mothers, preferring “to remain at home and retain our honor and self-respect,” reluctantly refused to make the trip.



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 fateful moment, his sureness of touch deserted him, and he began to make a series of tragic fumbles. Under the slogan “Politics Is Adjourned,” partisan political strife had been kept below the surface during the war crisis. Hoping to strengthen his hand at the Paris peace table, Wilson broke the truce by personally appealing for a Democratic victory in the congressional elections of November 1918. But the maneuver backﬁ red when voters instead returned a narrow Republican majority to Congress. Having staked his reputation on the outcome, Wilson went to Paris as a diminished leader. Unlike all the parliamentary statesmen at the table, he did not command a legislative majority at home. Wilson’s decision to go in person to Paris to help make the peace infuriated Republicans. At that time no president had traveled to Europe, and Wilson’s journey looked to his critics like ﬂamboyant grandstanding. He further rufﬂed Republican feathers when he snubbed the Senate in assembling his peace delegation and neglected to include a single Republican senator in his ofﬁcial party. The logical choice was the new chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, slender and aristocratically bewhiskered Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, a Harvard Ph.D. But including Lodge would have been problematic for the president. The senator’s mind, quipped one critic, was like the soil of his native New Eng land: “naturally barren but highly cultivated.” Wilson loathed him, and the feeling was hotly reciprocated. An accomplished author, Lodge had been known as the “scholar in poli-

Wilson in Dover, England,
 1919 Hailed by many Europeans in early 1919 as the savior of the Western world, Wilson was a fallen idol only a few months later, when Americans repudiated the peace treaty he had helped to craft.

 tics” until Wilson came on the scene. The two men were at daggers drawn, personally and politically.

An Idealist Amid
 the Imperialists Woodrow Wilson, the great prophet arisen in the West, received tumultuous welcomes from the masses of France, Eng land, and Italy late in 1918 and early in 1919. They saw in his idealism the promise of a better world. But the statesmen of France and Italy were careful to keep the new messiah at arm’s length from worshipful crowds. He might so arouse the people as to prompt them to overthrow their leaders and upset ﬁ nespun imperialistic plans. The Paris Conference of great and small nations fell into the hands of an inner clique, known as the Big Four. Wilson, representing the richest and freshest great power, more or less occupied the driver’s seat. He was joined by genial Premier Vittorio Orlando of Italy and brilliant Prime Minister David Lloyd George of Britain. Perhaps the most realistic of the quartet was cynical, hard-bitten Premier Georges Clemenceau of France, the seventy-eight-year-old “organizer of victory” known as “the Tiger.” Speed was urgent when the conference opened on January 18, 1919. Europe seemed to be slipping into anarchy; the red tide of communism was licking westward from Bolshevist Russia.

The Treaty of Versailles




 The English science ﬁction writer H. G. Wells (1866– 1946), soon a strong proponent of the League of Nations, spoke for many Europeans when he praised Woodrow Wilson in 1917:

“


 In all the world there is no outstanding ﬁgure to which the world will listen, there is no man audible in all the world, in Japan as well as Germany and Rome as well as Boston—except the President of the United States.

”


 Wilson’s ultimate goal was a world parliament to be known as the League of Nations, but he ﬁ rst bent his energies to preventing any vengeful parceling out of the former colonies and protectorates of the vanquished powers. (He was less attentive to the fate of colonies belonging to the victorious French and English.) Wilson tried to force through a compromise between naked imperialism and Wilsonian idealism. The victors would not take possession of the conquered territory outright, but would receive it as trustees of the League of Nations. Strategic Syria, for example, was awarded to France, and oil-rich Iraq went to Britain. In practice this half-loaf solution was little more than the old prewar colonialism, thinly disguised, although in the decades to come, anticolonial independence movements would wield the Wilsonian ideal of selfdetermination against their imperial occupiers. Meanwhile, Wilson had been serving as midwife for the League of Nations, which he envisioned as containing an assembly with seats for all nations and a council to be controlled by the great powers. He gained a signal victory over the skeptical Old World diplomats in February 1919, when they agreed to make the League Covenant, Wilson’s brainchild, an integral part of the ﬁ nal peace treaty. At one point he spoke with such ardor for his plan that even the hard-boiled newspaper reporters forgot to take notes.

Hammering Out the Treaty
 Domestic duties now required Wilson to make a quick trip to America, where ugly storms were brewing in the Senate. Certain Republican senators, Lodge in the lead, were sharpening their knives for Wilson. To them the League was either a useless “sewing circle” or

Pilgrim Landing in America, 1919


 an overpotent “super-state.” Their hard core was composed of a dozen or so militant isolationists, led by Senators William Borah of Idaho and Hiram Johnson of Cal i fornia, who were known as irreconcilables or “the Battalion of Death.” Thirty-nine Republican senators or senatorselect—enough to defeat the treaty—proclaimed that the Senate would not approve the League of Nations in its existing imperfect form. These difﬁculties delighted Wilson’s Allied adversaries in Paris. They were now in a stronger bargaining position because Wilson would have to beg them for changes in the covenant that would safeguard the Monroe Doctrine and other American interests dear to the senators. As soon as Wilson was back in Paris, the hardheaded Clemenceau pressed French demands for the German-inhabited Rhineland and the Saar Valley, a rich coal area. Faced with ﬁerce Wilsonian opposition to this violation of self-determination, France settled for a compromise whereby the Saar basin would remain under the League of Nations for ﬁ fteen years, and



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 then a popular vote would determine its fate.* In exchange for dropping its demands for the Rhineland, France got the Security Treaty, in which both Britain and America pledged to come to its aid in the event of another German invasion. The French later felt betrayed when this pact was quickly pigeonholed by the U.S. Senate, which shied away from all entangling alliances. Wilson’s next battle was with Italy over Fiume, a valuable seaport inhabited by both Italians and Yugoslavs. When Italy demanded Fiume, Wilson insisted that the seaport go to Yugoslavia and appealed over the heads of Italy’s leaders to the country’s masses. The maneuver fell ﬂat. The Italian delegates went home in a huff, while the Italian masses turned savagely against Wilson. Another crucial struggle was with Japan over China’s Shandong (Shantung) Peninsula and the German islands in the Paciﬁc, which the Japa nese had seized during the war. Japan was conceded the strategic Paciﬁc islands under a League of Nations mandate,† but Wilson staunchly opposed Japa nese control of Shandong as a violation of self-determination for its 30 million Chinese residents. But when the Japa nese threatened to walk out, Wilson reluctantly accepted a compromise whereby Japan kept Germany’s economic holdings in Shandong and pledged to return the peninsula to China at a later date. The Chinese were outraged by this imperialistic solution, while Clemenceau jeered that Wilson “talked like Jesus Christ and acted like Lloyd George.”

The Peace Treaty That
Bred a New War
 A completed Treaty of Versailles, after more weeks of wrangling, was handed to the Germans in June 1919— almost literally on the point of a bayonet. Excluded from the settlement negotiations at Paris, Germany had capitulated in the hope that it would be granted a peace based on the Fourteen Points. A careful analysis of the treaty shows that only about four of the twenty-three original Wilsonian points and subse-

 *The Saar population voted overwhelmingly to rejoin Germany in 1935. †In due time the Japa nese illegally fortiﬁed these islands—the Marshalls, Marianas, and Carolines—and used them as bases against the United States in World War II.

 quent principles were fully honored. Vengeance, not reconciliation, was the treaty’s dominant tone. Loud and bitter cries of betrayal burst from German throats—charges that Adolf Hitler would soon reiterate during his meteoric rise to power. Wilson, of course, was guilty of no conscious betrayal. But the Allied powers were torn by conﬂ icting aims, many of them sanctioned by secret treaties. There had to be compromise at Paris, or there would be no agreement. Faced with hard realities, Wilson was forced to compromise away some of his less cherished Fourteen Points in order to salvage the more precious League of Nations. He was much like the mother who had to throw her sickly younger children to the pursuing wolves to save her sturdy ﬁ rstborn. A troubled Wilson was not happy with the results. Greeted a few months earlier with frenzied acclaim in Europe, he was now a fallen idol, condemned alike by disillusioned liberals and frustrated imperialists. He was keenly aware of some of the injustices that had been forced into the treaty. But he was hoping that the League of Nations—a potent League with America as a leader—would iron out the inequities. Yet the loudly condemned treaty had much to commend it. Not least among its merits was its liberation of millions of minority peoples, such as the Poles, from the yoke of imperial dynasties. Wilson’s disappointments and his critics to the contrary, the settlement was almost certainly a fairer one because he had gone to Paris.

The Domestic Parade
 of Prejudice Returning for the second and ﬁ nal time to America, Wilson sailed straight into a political typhoon. Isolationists raised a whirlwind of protest against the treaty, especially against Wilson’s commitment to usher the United States into his newfangled League of Nations. Invoking the revered advice of Washington and Jefferson, they wanted no part of any “entangling alliance.” Nor were the isolationists Wilson’s only problem. Critics showered the Treaty of Versailles with abuse from all sides. Rabid Hun-haters, regarding the pact as not harsh enough, voiced their discontent. Principled liberals, like the editors of the New York Nation, thought it too harsh—and a gross betrayal to boot. German Americans, Italian Americans, and others whom Wilson termed “hyphenated Americans” were aroused be-

 The Defeat of Wilson's Treaty

 Contentious Nuptials Woodrow Wilson’s visionary effort to end more than a century of American aloofness from world affairs met vigorous opposition from traditional isolationists, especially in the U.S. Senate. Senators eventually refused to ratify the Versailles Treaty, shattering Wilson’s dream of making the United States a more engaged international actor.

 cause the peace settlement was not sufﬁciently favorable to their native lands. Irish Americans, traditional twisters of the British lion’s tail, also denounced the League. They felt that with the additional votes of the ﬁve overseas British dominions, it gave Britain undue inﬂuence, and they feared that it could be used to force the United States to crush any rising for Irish independence. Crowds of Irish American zealots hissed and booed Wilson’s name.

 Wilson’s Tour and Collapse (1919) Despite mounting discontent, the president had reason to feel optimistic. When he brought home the treaty, with the “Wilson League” ﬁ rmly riveted in as



 Part I, a strong majority of the people still seemed favorable. At this time—early July 1919—Senator Lodge had no real hope of defeating the Treaty of Versailles. His strategy was merely to amend it in such a way as to “Americanize,” “Republicanize,” or “senatorialize” it. The Republicans could then claim political credit for the changes. Lodge effectively used delay to muddle and divide public opinion. He read the entire 264-page treaty aloud in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and held protracted hearings in which people of various nationalities aired their grievances. Wilson fretted increasingly as the hot summer of 1919 wore on. The bulky pact was bogged down in the Senate, while the nation was drifting into confusion and apathy. He therefore decided to take his case to the country in a spectacular speechmaking tour. He would appeal over the heads of the Senate to the sovereign people—as he often had in the past. The strenuous barnstorming campaign was undertaken in the face of protests by physicians and friends. Wilson had never been robust; he had entered the White House nearly seven years before with a stomach pump and with headache pills for his neuritis. His frail body had begun to sag under the strain of partisan strife, a global war, and a stressful peace conference. But he declared that he was willing to die, like the soldiers he had sent into battle, for the sake of the new world order. The presidential tour, begun in September 1919, got off to a rather lame start. The Midwest received Wilson lukewarmly, partly because of strong German American inﬂuence. Trailing after him like bloodhounds came two “irreconcilable” senators, Borah and Johnson, who spoke in the same cities a few days later. Hat-tossing crowds answered their attacks on Wilson, crying, “Impeach him, impeach him!” But the reception was different in the Rocky Mountain region and on the Paciﬁc Coast. These areas, which had elected Wilson in 1916, welcomed him with heartwarming outbursts. The high point—and the breaking point—of the return trip was at Pueblo, Colorado, September 25, 1919. Wilson, with tears coursing down his cheeks, pleaded for the League of Nations as the only real hope of preventing future wars. That night he collapsed from physical and ner vous exhaustion. Wilson was whisked back in the “funeral train” to Washington, where several days later a stroke paralyzed one side of his body. During the next few weeks, he lay in a darkened room in the White House, as much a victim of the war as the unknown soldier



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 buried at Arlington. For more than seven months, he did not meet with his cabinet.

Defeat Through Deadlock
 Senator Lodge, coldly calculating, was now at the helm. After failing to amend the treaty outright, he ﬁ nally came up with fourteen formal reservations to it—a sardonic slap at Wilson’s Fourteen Points. These safeguards reserved the rights of the United States under the Monroe Doctrine and the Constitution and otherwise sought to protect American sovereignty. Senator Lodge and other critics were especially alarmed by Article X of the League because it morally bound the United States to aid any member victimized by external aggression. A jealous Congress wanted to reserve for itself the constitutional war-declaring power. Wilson, hating Lodge, saw red at the mere suggestion of the Lodge reservations. He was quite willing to accept somewhat similar reservations sponsored by his faithful Democratic followers, but he insisted that the Lodge reservations “emasculated” the entire pact. Although too feeble to lead, Wilson was still strong enough to obstruct. When the day ﬁ nally came for the voting in the Senate, he sent word to all true Democrats to vote against the treaty with the odious Lodge reservations attached. Wilson hoped that when these were cleared away, the path would be open for ratiﬁcation without reservations or with only some mild Democratic ones. Loyal Democrats in the Senate, on November 19, 1919, blindly did Wilson’s bidding. Combining with the “irreconcilables,” mostly Republicans, they rejected the treaty with the Lodge reservations appended, 55 to 39. The nation was too deeply shocked to accept the verdict as ﬁ nal. About four-ﬁ fths of the senators professed to favor the treaty, with or without reservations, yet a simple majority could not agree on a single proposition. So strong was public indignation that the Senate was forced to act a second time. In March 1920 the treaty was brought up again, with the Lodge reservations tacked on. There was only one possible path to success. Unless the Senate approved the pact with the reservations, the entire document would be rejected. But the sickly Wilson, still sheltered behind drawn curtains and blind to disagreeable realities, again sent word to all loyal Democrats to vote down the treaty with the

 obnoxious reservations. He thus signed the death warrant of the treaty as far as America was concerned. On March 19, 1920, the treaty netted a simple majority but failed to get the necessary two-thirds majority by a count of 49 yeas to 35 nays. Who defeated the treaty? The Lodge-Wilson personal feud, traditionalism, isolationism, disillusionment, and partisanship all contributed to the confused picture. But Wilson himself must bear a substantial share of the responsibility. He asked for all or nothing—and got nothing. One Democratic senator angrily charged that the president had strangled his own brainchild with his own palsied hands rather than let the Senate straighten its crooked limbs.

The “Solemn Referendum”
 of 1920 Wilson had his own pet solution for the deadlock, and this partly explains why he refused to compromise on Lodge’s terms. He proposed to settle the treaty issue in the forthcoming presidential campaign of 1920 by appealing to the people for a “solemn referendum.” This was sheer folly, for a true mandate on the League in the noisy arena of politics was clearly an impossibility. Jubilant Republicans gathered in Chicago in June 1920 with wayward bull moosers back in the corral (after Theodore Roosevelt’s death in 1919) and the senatorial Old Guard back in the saddle. The convention devised a masterfully ambiguous platform that could appeal to both pro-League and anti-League sentiment in the party. The nominee would run on a teeter-totter rather than a platform. As the leading presidential contestants jousted with one another, the political weathervane began to veer toward genial Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio. A group of Senate bosses, meeting rather casually in the historic “smoke-ﬁ lled” Room 404 of the Hotel Blackstone, informally decided on the affable and malleable Ohioan. Their fair-haired boy was a prosperous, backslapping, small-town newspaper editor of the “folksy” type, quite the opposite of Wilson, who had earlier noted the senator’s “disturbingly dull” mind. For vice president the party nominated frugal, grimfaced Governor Calvin (“Silent Cal”) Coolidge of Massachusetts, who had attracted conser vative support by breaking a police strike in Boston. Meeting in San Francisco, Democrats nominated earnest Governor James M. Cox of Ohio, who strongly

A
Crippled League of Nations 

 supported the League. His running mate was Assistant Navy Secretary Franklin D. Roosevelt, a young, handsome, vibrant New Yorker. Democratic attempts to make the campaign a referendum on the League were thwarted by Senator Harding, who issued muddled and contradictory statements on the issue from his front porch. Pro-League and anti-League Republicans both claimed that Harding’s election would advance their cause, while the candidate suggested that if elected he would work for a vague Association of Nations—a league but not the League. With newly enfranchised women swelling the vote totals, Harding was swept into power with a prodigious plurality of over 7 million votes—16,143,407 to 9,130,328 for Cox, the largest victory margin to that date in a presidential election. The electoral count was 404 to 127. Eugene V. Debs, federal prisoner number 9653 at the Atlanta Penitentiary, rolled up the largest vote ever for the left-wing Socialist party—919,799. Public desire for a change found vent in a resounding repudiation of “high-and-mighty” Wilsonism. People were tired of professional highbrowism, star-reaching idealism, bothersome do-goodism, moral overstrain, and constant self-sacriﬁce. Eager to lapse back into “normalcy,” they were willing to accept a second-rate president—and they got a third-rate one. Although the election could not be considered a true referendum, Republican isolationists successfully turned Harding’s victory into a death sentence for the League. Politicians increasingly shunned the League as they would a leper. When the legendary Wilson died in 1924, admirers knelt in the snow outside his Washington home. His “great vision” of a league for peace had perished long before.

The Betrayal of
Great Expectations
 America’s spurning of the League was tragically shortsighted. The Republic had helped to win a costly war, but it foolishly kicked the fruits of victory under the



 table. Whether a strong international orga ni zation would have averted World War II in 1939 will always be a matter of dispute. But there can be no doubt that the orphaned League of Nations was undercut at the start by the refusal of the mightiest power on the globe to join it. The Allies themselves were largely to blame for the new world conﬂagration that ﬂared up in 1939, but they found a convenient justiﬁcation for their own shortcomings by pointing an accusing ﬁ nger at Uncle Sam. The ultimate collapse of the Treaty of Versailles must be laid, at least in some degree, at America’s doorstep. This complicated pact, tied in with the four other peace treaties through the League Covenant, was a top-heavy structure designed to rest on a four-legged table. The fourth leg, the United States, was never put into place. This rickety structure teetered for over a decade and then crashed in ruins—a debacle that played into the hands of the German demagogue Adolf Hitler. No less ominous events were set in motion when the Senate spurned the Security Treaty with France. The French, fearing that a new generation of Germans would follow in their fathers’ goose steps, undertook to build up a powerful military force. Predictably resenting the presence of strong French armies, Germany began to rearm illegally. The seething cauldron of uncertainty and suspicion brewed an intoxicant that helped inﬂame the fanatical following of Hitler. The United States, as the tragic sequel proved, hurt its own cause when it buried its head in the sand. Granted that the conduct of its Allies had been disillusioning, it had its own ends to serve by carrying through the Wilsonian program. It would have been well advised if it had forthrightly assumed its warborn responsibilities and had resolutely embraced the role of global leader proffered by the hand of destiny. In the interests of its own security, if for no other reason, the United States should have used its enormous strength to shape world-shaking events. Instead it permitted itself blithely to drift toward the abyss of a second and even more bloody international disaster.



Chapter 30 The War to End War, 1917–1918


 CHRONOLOGY

 Council of National Defense established



 Germany resumes unrestricted submarine warfare Zimmermann note Railroads placed under federal control United States enters World War I Espionage Act of 1917 Wilson calls for “peace without victory” Bolshevik Revolution



 Wilson proposes Fourteen Points Sedition Act of 1918 Battle of Château-Thierry Second Battle of the Marne Meuse-Argonne offensive

KEY TERMS
Zimmermann note (747) Fourteen Points (748) Committee on Public Information (748) Espionage Act (750) Schenck v. United States (750) War Industries Board (751) National War Labor Board (751) Industrial Workers of the World (751) 
1918–


 Armistice ends World War I Worldwide inﬂuenza pandemic



Paris Peace Conference and Treaty of
Versailles
 Wilson’s pro-League tour and collapse Eighteenth Amendment (prohibition of alcohol) passed First Senate defeat of Versailles Treaty



 Final Senate defeat of Versailles Treaty after reconsideration Nineteenth Amendment (woman suffrage) passed Harding defeats Cox for presidency

PEOPLE TO KNOW
Nineteenth Amendment (753) Sheppard-Towner Maternity Act (753) Château-Thierry, Battle of (758) Meuse-Argonne offensive (760) League of Nations (763) irreconcilables (763) Versailles, Treaty of (764) 
Arthur Zimmermann
George Creel
Eugene V. Debs
William D. (“Big Bill”)
Haywood


Bernard Baruch
Herbert C. Hoover
Henry Cabot Lodge
David Lloyd George


Woodrow Wilson: Realist or Idealist?


A


 s the ﬁ rst president to take the United States into a foreign war, Woodrow Wilson was obliged to make a systematic case to the American people to justify his unprecedented European intervention. His ideas have largely deﬁ ned the character of American foreign policy ever since—for better or worse. “Wilsonianism” comprised three closely related

 principles: (1) the era of American isolation from world affairs had irretrievably ended; (2) the United States must infuse its own founding political and economic ideas—including democracy, the rule of law, free trade, and national self-determination (or anticolonialism)—into the international order; and (3) American inﬂuence could eventually steer the world

To Learn More


 away from rivalry and warfare and toward a cooperative and peaceful international system, maintained by the League of Nations or, later, the United Nations. Whether that Wilsonian vision constituted hardnosed realism or starry-eyed idealism has excited scholarly debate for nearly a century. “Realists,” such as George F. Kennan and Henry Kissinger, insist that Wilson was anything but a realist. They criticize the president as a naive, impractical dreamer who failed to understand that the international order was, and always will be, an anarchic, unruly arena, outside the rule of law, where only military force can effectively protect the nation’s security. In a sharp critique in his 1950 study, American Diplomacy, Kennan condemned Wilson’s vision as “moralism-legalism.” In this view Wilson dangerously threatened to sacriﬁce American self-interests on the altar of his admirable but ultimately unworkable ideas. Wilson’s defenders, including his biographers Arthur S. Link and Thomas J. Knock, argue that Wilson’s idealism was in fact a kind of higher realism, recognizing as it did that armed conﬂ ict on the scale of World War I could never again be tolerated and that some framework of peaceful international relations simply had to be found. The development of nuclear weapons in a later generation gave this argument more force. This “liberal” defense of Wilsonianism derives from the centuries-old liberal faith that, given sufﬁcient intelligence and willpower, the world can be made a better place. Realists reject this notion of moral and political progress as hopelessly innocent, especially as applied to international affairs. Some leftist scholars, such as William Appleman Williams, have argued that Wilson was in fact a realist of another kind: a subtle and wily imperialist whose stirring rhetoric cloaked a grasping ambition to make



 the United States the world’s dominant economic power. Sometimes called “the imperialism of free trade,” this strategy allegedly sought not to decolonialize the world and open up international commerce for the good of peoples elsewhere, but to create a system in which American economic might would irresistibly prevail. Wilson’s defenders, however, would claim that in a Wilsonian world, all parties would be better off because of free trade and international competition. Still other scholars, especially John Milton Cooper, Jr., have emphasized the absence of economic factors in shaping Wilson’s diplomacy. Isolationism, so this argument goes, held such sway over American thinking precisely because the United States had such a puny ﬁ nancial stake abroad—no hard American economic interests were mortally threatened in 1917, nor for a long time thereafter. In these circumstances Wilson—and the Wilsonians who came after him, such as Franklin D. Roosevelt—had no choice but to appeal to abstract ideals and high principles. The “idealistic” Wilsonian strain in American diplomacy, in this view, may have been an unavoidable heritage of America’s historically isolated situation. If so, it was Wilson’s genius to make practical use of those ideas in his bid for popular support of his diplomacy. Finally , a new generation of scholars has begun to explore the inﬂuence of Wilsonian ideals on social movements outside the United States and Europe. Erez Manela has argued that emerging anticolonial and nationalist movements appropriated Wilsonian ideals and adapted them to their own political ends, challenging forms of colonialism that Wilson himself failed to criticize. In this view the legacy of Wilsonian foreign policy may have been felt most strongly outside the United States.

To Learn More
John W. Chambers, To Raise an Army: The Draft Comes
 to Modern America (1987) Alan Dawley, Changing the World: American Progressives in War and Revolution (2003) Paul Fussell, The Great War and Modern Memory (1975) Maurine W. Greenwald, Women, War, and Work (1980) Ellis Hawley, The Great War and the Search for Modern Order (rev. ed., 1997) Jennifer Keene, Doughboys, the Great War, and the Remaking of America (2001) David M. Kennedy, Over Here: The First World War and American Society (rev. ed., 2005)

Thomas J. Knock, To End All Wars: Woodrow Wilson and
 the Quest for a New World Order (1992) Erez Manela, The Wilsonian Moment: Self-Determination and the International Origins of Anticolonial Nationalism (2007) Paul L. Murphy, World War I and the Origin of Civil Liberties in the United States (1979) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

American Life in the
“Roaring Twenties”





1919–1929
 America’s present need is not heroics but healing; not nostrums but normalcy; not revolution but restoration; . . . not surgery but serenity.

B


 loodied by the war and disillusioned by the peace, Americans turned inward in the 1920s. Shunning diplomatic commitments to foreign countries, they also denounced “radical” foreign ideas, condemned “unAmerican” lifestyles, and clanged shut the immigration gates against foreign peoples. They partly sealed off the domestic economy from the rest of the world and plunged headlong into a dizzying decade of homegrown prosperity. The boom of the golden twenties showered genuine beneﬁts on Americans, as incomes and living standards rose for many. But there seemed to be something incredible about it all, even as people sang, My sister she works in the laundry, My father sells bootlegger gin, My mother she takes in the washing, My God! how the money rolls in! New technologies, new consumer products, and new forms of leisure and entertainment made the twen-

 ties roar. Yet just beneath the surface lurked widespread anxieties about the future and fears that America was losing sight of its traditional ways.

Seeing Red
 Hysterical fears of red Russia continued to color American thinking for several years after the Communists came to power in the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, which spawned a tiny Communist party in America. Tensions were heightened by an epidemic of strikes that convulsed the Republic at war’s end, many of them the result of high prices and frustrated unionorganizing drives. Upstanding Americans jumped to the conclusion that labor troubles were fomented by bomb-and-whisker Bolsheviks. A general strike in Seattle in 1919, though modest in its demands and orderly in its methods, prompted a call from the mayor for federal troops to head off “the anarchy of Russia.” Fire-

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Red Scare


 and-brimstone evangelist Billy Sunday struck a responsive chord when he described a Bolshevik as “a guy with a face like a porcupine and a breath that would scare a pole cat. . . . If I had my way, I’d ﬁ ll the jails so full of them that their feet would stick out the window.” The big red scare of 1919–1920 resulted in a nationwide crusade against left-wingers whose Americanism was suspect. Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer, who “saw red” too easily, earned the title of the “Fighting Quaker” by his excess of zeal in rounding up suspects. They ultimately totaled about six thousand. This drive to root out radicals was redoubled in June 1919, when a bomb shattered both the nerves and the Washington home of Palmer. The “Fighting Quaker” was thereupon dubbed the “Quaking Fighter.” Other events highlighted the red scare. Late in December 1919, a shipload of 249 alleged alien radicals was deported on the Buford (the “Soviet Ark”) to the

 Radicals on the Run, 1919 In the aftermath of the war, the American Legion, superpatriotic voice of veterans, joined the anti-Bolshevik chorus zealously attacking political leftists in the United States as “enemy reds.”



 An author-soldier (Arthur Guy Empey, 1883-1963) applauded the “deportation delirium” when he wrote,

“


 I believe we should place them [the reds] all on a ship of stone, with sails of lead, and that their ﬁrst stopping place should be hell.

”


 “workers’ paradise” of Russia. One zealot cried, “My motto for the Reds is S.O.S.—ship or shoot.” Hysteria was temporarily revived in September 1920, when a stillunexplained bomb blast on Wall Street killed thirtyeight people and wounded several hundred others. Various states joined the pack in the outcry against radicals. In 1919–1920 a number of legislatures, reﬂecting the anxiety of “solid” citizens, passed criminal syndicalism laws. These anti-red statutes, some of which were born of the war, made unlawful the mere advocacy of violence to secure social change. Critics protested that mere words were not criminal deeds, that there was a great gulf between throwing ﬁts and throwing bombs, and that “free screech” was for the nasty as well as the nice. Violence was done to traditional American concepts of free speech as IWW members and other radicals were vigorously prosecuted. The hysteria went so far that in 1920 ﬁve members of the New York legislature, all lawfully elected, were denied their seats simply because they were Socialists. The red scare was a godsend to conser vative businesspeople, who used it to break the backs of the ﬂedgling unions. Labor’s call for the “closed,” or all-union, shop was denounced as “Sovietism in disguise.” Employers, in turn, hailed their own antiunion campaign for the “open” shop as the American plan. Anti-redism and antiforeignism were reﬂected in a notorious case regarded by liberals as a “judicial lynching.” Nicola Sacco, a shoe-factory worker, and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, a ﬁsh peddler, were convicted in 1921 of the murder of a Massachusetts paymaster and his guard. The jury and judge were prejudiced in some degree against the defendants because they were Italians, atheists, anarchists, and draft dodgers. Liberals and radicals the world over rallied to the defense of the two aliens doomed to die. The case dragged on for six years until 1927, when the condemned men were electrocuted. Communists and other radicals were thus presented with two martyrs in the



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 “class struggle,” while many American liberals hung their heads. The evidence against the accused, though damaging, betrayed serious weaknesses. If the trial had been held in an at mosphere less charged with antiredism, the outcome might well have been only a prison term.

Hooded Hoodlums
 of the KKK A new Ku Klux Klan, spawned by the postwar reaction, mushroomed fearsomely in the early 1920s. Despite the familiar sheets and hoods, it more closely resembled the antiforeign “nativist” movements of the 1850s than the antiblack nightriders of the 1860s. It was antiforeign, anti-Catholic, antiblack, anti-Jewish, antipaciﬁst, anti-Communist, anti-internationalist, antievolutionist, antibootlegger, antigambling, antiadultery, and anti–birth control. It was also pro–Anglo-

 Saxon, pro–“native” American, and pro-Protestant. In short, the besheeted Klan betokened an extremist, ultraconser vative uprising against many of the forces of diversity and modernity that were transforming American culture. As reconstituted, the Klan spread with astonishing rapidity, especially in the Midwest and the Bible Belt South where Protestant Fundamentalism thrived. At its peak in the mid-1920s, it claimed about 5 million dues-paying members and wielded potent political inﬂuence. It capitalized on the typically American love of on-the-edge adventure and in-group camaraderie, to say nothing of the adolescent ardor for secret ritual. The “Knights of the Invisible Empire” included among their ofﬁcials Imperial Wizards, Grand Goblins, King Kleagles, and other horrendous “kreatures.” The most impressive displays were “konclaves” and huge ﬂag-waving parades. The chief warning was the blazing cross. The principal weapon was the bloodied lash, supplemented by tar and feathers. Rallying songs were

 Klanswomen on Parade, 1928 Founded in the Reconstruction era, the Ku Klux Klan enjoyed a remarkable resurgence in the 1920s. Here women members, unmasked and unapologetic, march down Pennsylvania Avenue under the shadow of the Capitol dome.

Immigration Restriction


 Hiram Wesley Evans (1881–1966), imperial wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, in 1926 poignantly described the cultural grievances that fueled the Klan and lay behind much of the Fundamentalist revolt against “Modernism”:

“


 Nordic Americans for the last generation have found themselves increasingly uncomfortable and ﬁnally deeply distressed. . . . One by one all our traditional moral standards went by the boards, or were so disregarded that they ceased to be binding. The sacredness of our Sabbath, of our homes, of chastity, and ﬁnally even of our right to teach our own children in our own schools fundamental facts and truths were torn away from us. Those who maintained the old standards did so only in the face of constant ridicule. . . . We found our great cities and the control of much of our industry and commerce taken over by strangers. . . . We are a movement of the plain people, very weak in the matter of culture, intellectual support, and trained leadership. . . . This is undoubtedly a weakness. It lays us open to the charge of being ‘hicks’ and ‘rubes’ and ‘ drivers of second-hand Fords.’

”


“The Fiery Cross on High,” “One Hundred Percent
American,” and “The Ku Klux Klan and the Pope”
 (against kissing the Pope’s toe). One brutal slogan was “Kill the Kikes, Koons, and Katholics.” This reign of hooded horror, so repulsive to the best American ideals, collapsed rather suddenly in the late 1920s. Decent people at last recoiled from the orgy of ribboned ﬂesh and terrorism, while scandalous embezzling by Klan ofﬁcials launched a congressional investigation. The bubble was punctured when the movement was exposed as a vicious racket based on a $10 initiation fee, $4 of which was kicked back to lcal organizers as an incentive to recruit. The KKK was an alarming manifestation of the intolerance and prejudice plaguing people anxious about the dizzying pace of social change in the 1920s. Despite the Klan’s decline, civil rights activists fought in vain for legislation making lynching a federal crime, as lawmakers feared alienating southern white voters.



Stemming the Foreign Flood
 Isolationist America of the 1920s, ingrown and provincial, had little use for the immigrants who began to ﬂood into the country again as peace settled soothingly on the war-torn world. Some 800,000 stepped ashore in 1920–1921, about two-thirds of them from southern and eastern Europe. The “one-hundred-percent Americans,” recoiling at the sight of this resumed “New Immigration,” once again cried that the famed poem at the base of the Statue of Liberty was all too literally true: they claimed that a sickly Europe was indeed vomiting on America “the wretched refuse of its teeming shore.” Congress temporarily plugged the breach with the Emergency Quota Act of 1921. Newcomers from Europe were restricted in any given year to a deﬁ nite quota, which was set at 3 percent of the people of their nationality who had been living in the United States in 1910.

 The Only Way to Handle It Isolationists and nativists succeeded in damming up the ﬂow of immigrants to the United States in the early 1920s. The Immigration Act of 1924 placed strict quotas on European immigrants and completely shut out the Japanese.



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


176,983


 Average annual inflow, 1907–1914

685,531
198,082


 Quotas under Act of 1921

 Quotas under Act of 1924 Quotas under NationalOrigins Provision of 1929 Quotas under McCarranWalter Act of 1952

158,367
140,999
21,847
132,323
20,251
125,165
29,492


 Immigrants from Northern and Western Europe Immigrants from other countries, principally Southern and Eastern Europe

 Figure 31.1 Annual Immigration and the Quota Laws The national-origins quota system was abolished in 1965. Legislation in that year capped the level of immigration at 170,000 per year but made exceptions for children, spouses, and parents of persons already arrived. It also restricted immigration from any single country to 20,000 people per year. The immigration laws were again signiﬁcantly revised in 1986, and changed twice more in 1990 and 1996. In the twenty-ﬁrst century, immigration laws remain highly controversial. (See pp. 987 and 1094.)

 This national-origins system was relatively favorable to the immigrants from southern and eastern Europe, for by 1910 immense numbers of them had already arrived. This stopgap legislation of 1921 was replaced by the Immigration Act of 1924. Quotas for foreigners were cut from 3 percent to 2 percent. The national-origins base was shifted from the census of 1910 to that of 1890, by which time comparatively few southern Europeans had arrived.* Great Britain and Northern Ireland, for example, could send 65,721 a year as against 5,802 for Italy. Southern Europeans bitterly denounced the device as unfair and discriminatory—a triumph for the “nativist” belief that blue-eyed and fair-haired northern Europeans were of better blood. The purpose was clearly to freeze America’s existing racial composition, which was largely northern European. A ﬂagrantly discriminatory section of the Immigration Act of 1924 slammed the door absolutely against Japa nese immigrants. Mass “Hate America” rallies erupted in Japan, and one Japa nese superpatriot expressed his outrage by committing suicide near the American embassy in

 *Five years later the Immigration Act of 1929, using 1920 as the quota base, virtually cut immigration in half by limiting the total to 152,574 a year. In 1965 Congress abolished the national-origins quota system.

 Tokyo. Exempt from the quota system were Canadians and Latin Americans, whose proximity made them easy to attract for jobs when times were good and just as easy to send back home when they were not. The quota system effected a pivotal departure in American policy. It claimed that the nation was ﬁ lling up and that a “No Vacancy” sign was needed. Immigration henceforth dwindled to a mere trickle. By 1931, probably for the ﬁ rst time in the American experience, more foreigners left than arrived. Quotas thus caused America to sacriﬁce something of its tradition of freedom and opportunity, as well as its future ethnic diversity (see Figure 31.1). The Immigration Act of 1924 marked the end of an era—a period of virtually unrestricted immigration that in the preceding century had brought some 35 million newcomers to the United States, mostly from Europe. The immigrant tide was now cut off, but it left on American shores by the 1920s a patchwork of ethnic communities separated from each other and from the larger society by language, religion, and customs. Many of the most recent arrivals, including the Italians, Jews, and Poles, lived in isolated enclaves with their own houses of worship, newspapers, and theaters (see “Makers of America: The Poles,” pp. 776– 777). Efforts to organize labor unions repeatedly foundered on the rocks of ethnic differences. Immigrant workers on the same shop ﬂoor might share a common

Prohibition


 interest in wages and working conditions, but they often had no common language with which to forge common cause. Indeed cynical employers often played upon ethnic rivalries to keep their workers divided and powerless. Ethnic variety thus undermined class and political solidarity. It was an old American story, but one that some reformers hoped would not go on forever. Immigration restriction did not appeal to all reformers. Particularly opposed was the chorus of “cultural pluralists” who had long criticized the idea that an American “melting pot” would eliminate ethnic differences. Two intellectuals, the philosopher Horace Kallen and the critic Randolph Bourne, championed alternative conceptions of the immigrant role in American society. At a time when war hysteria demanded the “one-hundred-percent Americanization” of German and Austrian immigrants, Kallen defended the newcomers’ right to practice their ancestral customs. In Kallen’s vision the United States should provide a protective canopy for ethnic and racial groups to preserve their cultural uniqueness. Like instruments in a symphony orchestra, each immigrant community would harmonize with the others while retaining its own singular identity. If Kallen stressed the preservation of identity, Bourne advocated greater cross-fertilization among immigrants. Cosmopolitan interchange, Bourne believed, was destined to make America “not a nationality but a trans-nationality, a weaving back and forth, with the other lands, of many threads of all sizes and colors.” In this view the United States should serve as the vanguard of a more international and multicultural age. Kallen’s pluralism and Bourne’s cosmopolitanism attracted a handful of other intellectuals to the defense of ethnic diversity, including progressives like John Dewey, Jane Addams, and Louis Brandeis. Vastly outnumbered in the debate over immigration restriction in the 1920s, these early proponents of “cultural pluralism” planted the seeds for the blooming of “multiculturalism” in the last quarter of the twentieth century.



 the Volstead Act passed by Congress later that year. Together these laws made the world “safe for hypocrisy.” The legal abolition of alcohol was especially popular in the South and West. Southern whites were eager to keep stimulants out of the hands of blacks, lest they burst out of “their place.” In the West prohibition represented an attack on all the vices associated with the ubiquitous western saloon: public drunkenness, prostitution, corruption, and crime. But despite the overwhelming ratiﬁcation of the “dry” amendment, strong opposition persisted in the larger eastern cities. For many “wet” foreign-born people, Old World styles of sociability were built around drinking in beer gardens and corner taverns. Yet most Americans now assumed that prohibition had come to stay. Everywhere carousers indulged in last wild ﬂ ings, as the nation prepared to enter upon a permanent “alcoholiday.” But prohibitionists were naive in the extreme. They overlooked the tenacious American tradition of strong drink and of weak control by the central government,

The Prohibition “Experiment”
 One of the last peculiar spasms of the progressive reform movement was prohibition, loudly supported by crusading churches and by many women. The arid new order was authorized in 1919 by the Eighteenth Amendment (see the Appendix), as implemented by

Texas Guinan, Queen of the Nightclubs Guinan is
 shown here in one of the “speakeasies” she operated in New York City during prohibition.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Poles American Migration 
T


 he Poles were among the largest immigrant groups to respond to industrializing America’s call for badly needed labor after the Civil War. Between 1870 and World War I, some 2 million Polish-speaking peasants boarded steamships bound for the United States. By the 1920s, when antiforeign feeling led to restrictive legislation that choked the immigrant stream to a trickle, Polish immigrants and their American-born children began to develop new identities as Polish Americans. The ﬁ rst Poles to arrive in the New World had landed in Jamestown in 1608 and helped to develop that colony’s timber industry. Over the ensuing two and a half centuries, scattered religious dissenters and revolutionary nationalists also made their way from Poland to America. During the Revolution about one hundred Poles, including two ofﬁcers recruited by Benjamin Franklin, served in the Continental Army. But the Polish hopefuls who poured into the United States in the late nineteenth century came primarily to stave off starvation and to earn money to buy land. Known in their homeland as za chlebem (for bread) emigrants, they belonged to the mass of central and eastern European peasants who had been forced off their farms by growing competition from the large-scale, mechanized agriculture of western Europe and the United States. An exceptionally high birthrate among the Catholic Poles compounded this economic pressure, creating an army of the land-poor and landless, who left their homes seasonally or permanently in search of work. In 1891 farmworkers and unskilled laborers in the United States earned about $1 a day, more than eight times as much as agricultural workers in the Polish province of Galicia. Such a magnet was irresistible. These Polish-speaking newcomers emigrated not from a uniﬁed nation, but from a weakened country that had been partitioned in the eighteenth century by three great European powers: Prussia (later Germany), Austria-Hungary, and Russia. The Prussian Poles, driven from their homeland in part by the antiCatholic policies that the German imperial government pursued in the 1870s, arrived in America ﬁ rst. Fleeing religious persecution as well as economic turmoil, many of these early immigrants came to the United



 States intending to stay. By contrast, most of those who came later from Austrian and Russian Poland simply hoped to earn enough American dollars to return home and buy land. Some of the Polish peasants learned of America from propaganda spread throughout Europe by agents for U.S. railroad and steamship lines. But many more were lured by glowing letters from friends and relatives already living in the United States. The ﬁ rst wave of Polish immigrants had established a thriving network of self-help and fraternal associations orga nized around Polish Catholic parishes. Often Polish American entrepreneurs helped their European compatriots

 Polish Coal Miners, ca. 1905 It was common practice in American mines to segregate mining crews by ethnicity and race.

 Solidarity Still, 1981 Many Polish Americans continue to take a keen interest in the fate of their ancestral land. In the 1980s many of them supported a challenge to the communist government led by a renegade trade union federation called Solidarity. Thousands rallied in Chicago, the home of the largest Polish community in the United States, to protest against Polish prime minister General Wojciech Jaruzelski (mocked here leashed to Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev), who had imposed martial law and ordered the mass arrest of Solidarity activists.

 make travel arrangements or ﬁ nd jobs in the United States. One of the most successful of these, the energetic Chicago grocer Anton Schermann, is credited with “bringing over” 100,000 Poles and causing the Windy City to earn the nickname the “American Warsaw.” Most of the Poles arriving in the United States in the late nineteenth century headed for booming industrial cities such as Buffalo, Pittsburgh, Detroit, Milwaukee, and Chicago. In 1907 four-ﬁ fths of the men toiled as unskilled laborers in coal mines, meatpacking factories, textile and steel mills, oil reﬁ neries, and garment-making shops. Although married women usually stayed home and contributed to the family’s earnings by taking in laundry and boarders, children and single girls often joined their fathers and brothers on the job. By putting the whole family to work, America’s Polish immigrants saved tidy sums. By 1901 about onethird of all Poles in the United States owned real estate,

 and they sent so much money to relatives in Austria and Russia that American and European authorities fretted about the consequences: in 1907 a nativist U.S. immigration commission groused that the huge outﬂow of funds to eastern Europe was weakening the U.S. economy. When an independent Poland was created after World War I, few Poles chose to return to their Old World homeland. Instead, like other immigrant groups in the 1920s, they redoubled their efforts to integrate into American society. Polish institutions like churches and fraternal orga ni zations, which had served to perpetuate a distinctive Polish culture in the New World, now facilitated the transformation of Poles into Polish Americans. When Poland was absorbed into the communist bloc after World War II, Polish Americans clung still more tightly to their American identity, pushing for landmarks like Chicago’s Pulaski Road to memorialize their culture in the New World.



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 No More Moonshine Federal agents gloat over a captured still in Dayton, Ohio, in 1930. “Moonshiners,” or makers of illegal liquor, enjoyed a boom during prohibition, though zealous G-men (government agents) put the owner of this makeshift distillery out of business—at least temporarily.

 especially over private lives. They forgot that the federal authorities had never satisfactorily enforced a law where the majority of the people—or a strong minority—were hostile to it. They ignored the fact that one cannot make a crime overnight out of something that millions of people have never regarded as a crime. Lawmakers could not legislate away a thirst. Peculiar conditions hampered the enforcement of prohibition. Profound disillusionment over the aftermath of the war raised serious questions as to the wisdom of further self-denial. Slaking thirst became a cherished personal liberty, and many ardent wets believed that the way to bring about repeal was to violate the law on a large enough scale. Hypocritical, hipﬂasked legislators spoke or voted dry while privately drinking wet. (“Let us strike a blow for liberty” was an ironic toast.) Frustrated soldiers, returning from France, complained that prohibition had been “put over” on them while they were “over there.” Grimy workers bemoaned the loss of their cheap beer, while pointing out that the idle rich could buy all the illicit alcohol they wanted. Flaming youth of the jazz age thought it “smart” to swill bootleg liquor—“liquid ton-

 sillectomies.” Millions of older citizens likewise found forbidden fruit fascinating, as they engaged in “bar hunts.” Prohibition might have started off on a better foot if there had been a larger army of enforcement ofﬁcials.

 Automaker Henry Ford (1863–1947), an ardent prohibitionist, posted this notice in his Detroit factory in 1922:

“


 From now on it will cost a man his job . . . to have the odor of beer, wine or liquor on his breath, or to have any of these intoxicants on his person or in his home. The Eighteenth Amendment is a part of the fundamental laws of this country. It was meant to be enforced. Politics has interfered with the enforcement of this law, but so far as our organization is concerned, it is going to be enforced to the letter.

”


Organized Crime


 But the state and federal agencies were understaffed, and their snoopers, susceptible to bribery, were underpaid. The public was increasingly distressed as scores of people, including innocent bystanders, were killed by quick-triggered dry agents. Prohibition simply did not prohibit. The old-time “men only” corner saloons were replaced by thousands of “speakeasies,” each with its tiny grilled window through which the thirsty spoke softly before the barred door was opened. Hard liquor, especially the cocktail, was drunk in staggering volume by both men and women. Largely because of the difﬁculties of transporting and concealing bottles, beverages of high alcoholic content were popular. Foreign rumrunners, often from the West Indies, had their inning, and countless cases of liquor leaked down from Canada. The zeal of American prohibition agents on occasion strained diplomatic relations with Uncle Sam’s northern neighbor. “Home brew” and “bathtub gin” became popular, as law-evading adults engaged in “alky cooking” with toy stills. The worst of the homemade “rotgut” produced blindness, even death. The affable bootlegger worked in silent partnership with the friendly undertaker. Yet the “noble experiment” was not entirely a failure. Bank savings increased, and absenteeism in industry decreased, presumably because of the newly sober ways of formerly soused barﬂ ies. On the whole, probably less alcohol was consumed than in the days before prohibition, though strong drink continued to be available. As the legendary tippler remarked, prohibition was “a darn sight better than no liquor at all.”

The Golden Age
 of Gangsterism Prohibition spawned shocking crimes. The lush profits of illegal alcohol led to bribery of the police, many of whom were induced to see and smell no evil. Violent wars broke out in the big cities between rival gangs—often rooted in immigrant neighborhoods— who sought to corner the rich market in booze. Rival triggermen used their sawed-off shotguns and chattering “typewriters” (machine guns) to “erase” bootlegging competitors who were trying to “muscle in” on their “racket.” In the gang wars of the 1920s in Chicago, about ﬁve hundred mobsters were murdered. Arrests were few and convictions were even fewer, as the button-lipped gangsters covered for one another with the underworld’s code of silence. Chicago was by far the most spectacular example



Gangster Al Capone Fishing in Florida Capone may
 have looked like any Chicago businessman on vacation, but his business was bigger and nastier than most, as he often eliminated his competition by murder. He was reported as saying, “Everybody calls me a racketeer. I call myself a businessman. When I sell liquor, it’s bootlegging. When my patrons serve it on a silver tray on Lake Shore Drive, it’s hospitality.” He was ﬁnally jailed in 1932 for falsifying his incometax returns.

 of lawlessness. In 1925 “Scarface” Al Capone, a grasping and murderous booze distributor, began six years of gang warfare that netted him millions of bloodspattered dollars. He zoomed through the streets in an armor-plated car with bulletproof windows. A Brooklyn newspaper quipped, And the pistols’ red glare, Bombs bursting in air Give proof through the night That Chicago’s still there. Capone, though branded “Public Enemy Number One,” could not be convicted of the cold-blooded massacre, on St. Valentine’s Day in 1929, of seven disarmed members of a rival gang. But after serving most of an eleven-year sentence in a federal penitentiary for income-tax evasion, he was released as a syphilitic wreck.



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 Gangsters rapidly moved into other proﬁtable and illicit activities: prostitution, gambling, and narcotics. Honest merchants were forced to pay “protection money” to the orga nized thugs; otherwise their windows would be smashed, their trucks overturned, or their employees or themselves beaten up. Racketeers even invaded the ranks of local labor unions as organizers and promoters. Organized crime had come to be one of the nation’s most gigantic businesses. By 1930 the annual “take” of the underworld was estimated to be from $12 billion to $18 billion—several times the income of the Washington government. Criminal callousness sank to new depths in 1932 with the kidnapping for ransom, and eventual murder, of the infant son of aviator-hero Charles A. Lindbergh. The entire nation was inexpressibly shocked and saddened, causing Congress in 1932 to pass the so-called Lindbergh Law, making interstate abduction in certain circumstances a death-penalty offense.

Monkey Business
 in Tennessee Education in the 1920s continued to make giant bootstrides. More and more states were requiring young people to remain in school until age sixteen or eigh-

 The Battle over Evolution Opponents of Darwin’s theories set up shop at the opening of the famed “Monkey Trial” in Dayton, Tennessee, in 1925. The trial was an early battle in an American “culture war” that is still being waged more than seventy-ﬁve years later.

 The bombastic Fundamentalist evangelist W. A. (Billy) Sunday (1862–1935) declared in 1925,

“


 If a minister believes and teaches evolution, he is a stinking skunk, a hypocrite, and a liar.

”


 teen, or until graduation from high school. The proportion of seventeen-year-olds who ﬁ nished high school almost doubled in the 1920s, to more than one in four. The most revolutionary contribution to educational theory during these yeasty years was made by mild-mannered Professor John Dewey, who served on the faculty of Columbia University from 1904 to 1930. By common consent one of America’s few front-rank philosophers, he set forth the principles of “learning by doing” that formed the foundation of so-called progressive education, with its greater “permissiveness.” He believed that the workbench was as essential as the blackboard, and that “education for life” should be a primary goal of the teacher. (For more on Dewey, see “Makers of America: Pioneering Pragmatists,” pp. 618–619.)

Science and Fundamentalism


 Science also scored wondrous advances in these years. A massive public-health program, launched by the Rockefeller Foundation in the South in 1909, had virtually wiped out the ancient afﬂ iction of hookworm by the 1920s. Better nutrition and health care helped to increase the life expectancy of a newborn infant from ﬁ fty years in 1901 to ﬁ fty-nine years in 1929. Yet both science and progressive education in the 1920s were subjected to unfriendly ﬁ re from the newly orga nized Fundamentalists. These devoted religionists charged that the teaching of Darwinian evolution was destroying faith in God and the Bible, while contributing to the moral breakdown of youth in the jazz age. Numerous attempts were made to secure laws prohibiting the teaching of evolution, “the bestial hypothesis,” in the public schools, and three southern states adopted such shackling mea sures. The trio of states included Tennessee, in the heart of the so-called Bible Belt South, where the spirit of evangelical religion was still robust. The stage was set for the memorable “Monkey Trial” at the hamlet of Dayton, in eastern Tennessee, in 1925. A likable high-school biology teacher, John T. Scopes, was indicted for teaching evolution. Batteries of newspaper reporters, armed with notebooks and cameras, descended upon the quiet town to witness the spectacle. Scopes was defended by nationally known attorneys, while former presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan, an ardent Presbyterian Fundamentalist, joined the prosecution. Taking the stand as an expert on the Bible, Bryan was made to appear foolish by the famed criminal lawyer Clarence Darrow. Five days after the trial was over, Bryan died of a stroke, no doubt brought on by the wilting heat and witnessstand strain. This historic clash between theology and biology proved inconclusive. Scopes, the forgotten man of the drama, was found guilty and ﬁ ned $100. But the supreme court of Tennessee, while upholding the law, set aside the ﬁ ne on a technicality.* The Fundamentalists at best won only a hollow victory, for the absurdities of the trial cast ridicule on their cause. Yet even though increasing numbers of Christians were coming to reconcile the revelations of religion with the ﬁ ndings of modern science, Fundamentalism, with its emphasis on a literal reading of the Bible, remained a vibrant force in American spiritual life. It was espe-

 *The Tennessee law was not formally repealed until 1967.



 cially strong in the Baptist Church and in the rapidly growing Churches of Christ, orga nized in 1906.

The Mass-Consumption
Economy
 Prosperity—real, sustained, and widely shared—put much of the “roar” into the twenties. The economy kicked off its war harness in 1919, faltered a few steps in the recession of 1920–1921, and then sprinted forward for nearly seven years. Both the recent war and Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon’s tax policies favored the rapid expansion of capital investment. Ingenious machines, powered by relatively cheap energy from newly tapped oil ﬁelds, dramatically increased the productivity of the laborer. Assembly-line production reached such perfection in Henry Ford’s famed Rouge River plant near Detroit that a ﬁ nished automobile emerged every ten seconds. Great new industries suddenly sprouted forth. Supplying electrical power for the humming new machines became a giant business in the 1920s. Above all, the automobile, once the horseless chariot of the rich, now became the carriage of the common citizen. By 1930 Americans owned almost 30 million cars. The nation’s deepening “love affair” with the automobile headlined a momentous shift in the character of the economy. American manufacturers seemed to have mastered the problems of production; their worries now focused on consumption. Could they ﬁ nd the mass markets for the goods they had contrived to spew forth in such profusion? Responding to this need, a new arm of American commerce came into being: advertising. By persuasion and ploy, seduction and sexual suggestion, advertisers sought to make Americans chronically discontented with their paltry possessions and want more, more, more. A founder of this new “profession” was Bruce Barton, prominent New York partner in a Madison Avenue ﬁ rm. In 1925 Barton published a best seller, The Man Nobody Knows, setting forth the provocative thesis that Jesus Christ was the greatest adman of all time. “Every advertising man ought to study the parables of Jesus,” Barton preached. “They are marvelously condensed, as all good advertising should be.” Barton even had a good word to say for Christ’s executive ability: “He picked up twelve men from the bottom ranks of business and forged them into an orga ni zation that conquered the world.”



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 debt, and the economy became increasingly vulnerable to disruptions of the credit structure.

Putting America on
Rubber Tires


Babe Ruth: The “Sultan of Swat”


 Sports became big business in the consumer economy of the 1920s. Ballyhooed by the “image makers,” home-run heroes like George H. (“Babe”) Ruth were far better known than most statesmen. The fans bought tickets in such numbers that Babe’s hometown park, Yankee Stadium, became known as “the house that Ruth built.” In 1921 the slugging heavyweight champion, Jack Dempsey, knocked out the dapper French light heavyweight Georges Carpentier. The Jersey City crowd in attendance had paid more than a million dollars—the ﬁ rst in a series of million-dollar “gates” in the golden 1920s. Buying on credit was another innovative feature of the postwar economy. “Possess today and pay tomorrow” was the message directed at buyers. Once-frugal descendants of Puritans went ever deeper into debt to own all kinds of newfangled marvels—refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, and especially cars and radios—now. Prosperity thus accumulated an overhanging cloud of

 A new industrial revolution slipped into high gear in America in the 1920s. Thrusting out steel tentacles, it changed the daily life of the people in unprecedented ways. Machinery was the new messiah—and the automobile was its principal prophet. Of all the inventions of the era, the automobile cut the deepest track. It heralded an amazing new industrial system based on assembly-line methods and massproduction techniques. Americans adapted rather than invented the gasoline engine; Europeans can claim the original honor. By the 1890s a few daring American inventors and promoters, including Henry Ford and Ransom E. Olds (Oldsmobile), were developing the infant automotive industry. By 1910 sixty-nine car companies rolled out a total annual production of 181,000 units. The early contraptions were neither speedy nor reliable. Many a stalled motorist, profanely cranking a balky automobile, had to endure the jeer “Get a horse” from the occupants of a passing dobbin-drawn carriage. An enormous industry sprang into being, as Detroit became the motorcar capital of America. The mechanized colossus owed much to the stopwatch efﬁciency techniques of Frederick W. Taylor, a prominent inventor, engineer, and tennis player, who sought to elim inate wasted motion. His epitaph reads “Father of Scientiﬁc Management.” Best known of the new crop of industrial wizards was Henry Ford, who more than any other individual put America on rubber tires. His high and hideous Model T (“Tin Lizzie”) was cheap, rugged, and reasonably reliable, though rough and clattering. The parts of Ford’s “ﬂ ivver” were highly standardized, but the behavior of this rattling good car was so eccentric that it became the butt of numberless jokes. Lean and silent Henry Ford, who was said to have wheels in his head, erected an immense personal empire on the cornerstone of his mechanical genius, though his associates provided much of the orga ni zational talent. Ill-educated, this multimillionaire mechanic was socially and culturally narrow. “History is bunk,” he once testiﬁed. But he dedicated himself with one-track devotion to the gospel of standardization. After two early failures, he grasped and applied fully the technique of the moving assembly line—

The Automobile Age


 Fordism. He is supposed to have remarked that the purchaser could have his automobile in any color he desired—just as long as it was black. So economical were his methods that in the mid-1920s he was selling the Ford roadster for $260—well within the purse of a thrifty worker (see Figure 31.2). Before long, Fordism caught ﬁ re outside the United States. German engineers were particularly enamored, though their workers resented those “American methods.” The ﬂood of Fords was phenomenal. In 1914 the “Automobile Wizard” turned out his 500,000th Model T. By 1930 his total had risen to 20 million, or, on a bumper-to-bumper basis, more than enough to encircle the globe. A national newspaper and magazine poll conducted in 1923 revealed Ford to be the people’s choice for the presidential nomination in 1924. By 1929, when the great bull market collapsed, 26 million motor



 vehicles were registered in the United States. This ﬁgure, averaging 1 for every 4.9 Americans, represented far more automobiles than existed in all the rest of the world (see Figure 31.3).

Months
















(Model T
 introduced)

Figure 31.2 The Cost of a Model T Ford, 1908–
 1924 Henry Ford’s mass-production techniques cut the costs of production dramatically and put the automobile within reach of the workingperson’s purse. (Cost is shown in months of labor for an employee at the average national wage.)

 Total number of cars (in millions)



United States


France


Germany




Japan
Britain


















Year


Henry Ford in His First Car, Built in 1896 Ford has
 been called the “Father of the Trafﬁc Jam.”

Figure 31.3 International Comparison of Number
 of Automobiles



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


The Advent of
 the Gasoline Age The impact of the self-propelled carriage on various aspects of American life was tremendous. A gigantic new industry emerged, dependent on steel but displacing steel from its kingpin role. Employing directly or indirectly about 6 million people by 1930, it was a major wellspring of the nation’s prosperity. Thousands of new jobs, moreover, were created by supporting industries. The lengthening list would include rubber, glass, and fabrics, to say nothing of highway construction and thousands of ser vice stations and garages. America’s standard of living, responding to this infectious vitality, rose to an enviable level. New industries boomed lustily; older ones grew sickly. The petroleum business experienced an explosive development. Hundreds of oil derricks shot up in Cal i fornia, Texas, and Oklahoma, as these states expanded wondrously and the wilderness frontier became an industrial frontier. The once-feared railroad octopus, on the other hand, was hard hit by the competition of passenger cars, buses, and trucks. An ageold story was repeated: one industry’s gains were another industry’s pains. Other effects were widely felt. Speedy marketing of perishable foodstuffs, such as fresh fruits, was accel-

 Gas Station, 1923 Gas stations like this one began to appear about 1913. Before that the nation’s handful of automobile owners bought fuel from their local oil companies and stored it in tanks in their own yards.

 erated. A new prosperity enriched outlying farms, as city dwellers were provided with produce at attractive prices. Countless new roads ribboned out to meet the demand of the American motorist for smoother and faster highways, often paid for by taxes on gasoline. The era of mud ended as the nation made haste to construct the ﬁ nest network of hard-surfaced roadways in the world. Lured by sophisticated advertising, and encouraged by tempting installment-plan buying, countless Americans with shallow purses acquired the habit of riding as they paid. Zooming motorcars were agents of social change. At ﬁ rst a luxury, they rapidly became a necessity. Essentially devices for needed transportation, they soon developed into a badge of freedom and equality—a necessary prop for self-respect. To some, ostentation seemed more important than transportation. Leisure hours could now be spent more pleasurably, as tens of thousands of cooped-up souls responded to the call of the open road on joyriding vacations. Women were further freed from clinging-vine dependence on men. Isolation among the sections was broken down, and the less attractive states lost population at an alarming rate. By the late 1920s, Americans owned more automobiles than bathtubs. “I can’t go to town in a bathtub,” one homemaker explained. Other social by-products of the automobile were visible. Autobuses made possible the consolidation of

The Impact of the Automobile


 schools and to some extent of churches. The sprawling suburbs spread out still farther from the urban core, as America became a nation of commuters. The demon machine, on the other hand, exacted a terrible toll by catering to the American mania for speed. Citizens were becoming statistics. Not counting the hundreds of thousands of injured and crippled, the one millionth American had died in a motor vehicle accident by 1951—more than all those killed on all the battleﬁelds of all the nation’s wars to that date. “The public be rammed” seemed to be the motto of the new age. Virtuous home life partially broke down as joyriders of all ages forsook the parlor for the highway. The morals of ﬂaming youth sagged correspondingly— at least in the judgment of their elders. What might



 A lifelong resident of Muncie, Indiana, disguised as “Middletown” in Robert and Helen Lynd’s exhaustive investigation of American life in a typical medium-size community during the 1920s, pooh-poohed their scientiﬁc sociological methods:

“


 Why on earth do you need to study what’s changing this country? I can tell you what’s happening in just four letters: A-U-T-O!

”


 young people get up to in the privacy of a closed-top Model T? An Indiana juvenile court judge voiced parents’ worst fears when he condemned the automobile as “a house of prostitution on wheels.” Even the celebrated crime waves of the 1920s and 1930s were aided and abetted by the motorcar, for gangsters could now make quick getaways. Yet no sane American would plead for a return of the old horse and buggy, complete with ﬂy-breeding manure. The automobile contributed notably to improved air and environmental quality, despite its later notoriety as a polluter. Life might be cut short on the highways, and smog might poison the air, but the automobile brought more convenience, plea sure, and excitement into more people’s lives than almost any other single invention.

Humans Develop Wings


 The Modern Woman in the Driver’s Seat As part of its effort to sell to a mass market, the Ford Motor Company used advertising to convey that driving an automobile was respectable for women. A woman who drove was not only modern, but she also better fulﬁlled her traditional duties as a household manager.

 Gasoline engines also provided the power that enabled humans to fulﬁ ll the age-old dream of sprouting wings. After near-successful experiments by others with heavier-than-air craft, the Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur, performed “the miracle at Kitty Hawk,” North Carolina. On a historic day—December 17, 1903—Orville Wright took aloft a feebly engined plane that stayed airborne for 12 seconds and 120 feet. Thus the air age was launched by two obscure bicycle repairmen. As aviation gradually got off the ground, the world slowly shrank. The public was made increasingly airminded by unsung heroes—often martyrs—who appeared as stunt ﬂ iers at fairs and other public gatherings. Airplanes—“ﬂying cofﬁ ns”—were used with marked success for various purposes during the Great War of 1914–1918. Shortly thereafter private companies began to operate passenger lines with airmail



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


Lucky Lindy Charles A.
 Lindbergh (1902–1974), stands in front of the aircraft that made him famous. The ﬁrst person to ﬂy solo across the Atlantic, Lindbergh became an acclaimed celebrity— perhaps the ﬁrst mediamade “hero” of the twentieth century. His shining reputation later lost some of its luster when he voiced antiSemitic sentiments and opposed American entry into World War II, though he went on to ﬂy several combat missions in the war against Japan.

 contracts, which were in effect a subsidy from Washington. The ﬁ rst transcontinental airmail route was established from New York to San Francisco in 1920. In 1927 modest and skillful Charles A. Lindbergh, the so-called Flyin’ Fool, electriﬁed the world with the ﬁ rst solo west-to-east conquest of the Atlantic. Seeking a prize of $25,000, the lanky stunt ﬂ ier courageously piloted his single-engine plane, the Spirit of St. Louis, from New York to Paris in a grueling thirtythree hours and thirty-nine minutes. Lindbergh’s exploit swept Americans off their feet. Fed up with the cynicism and debunking of the jazz age, they found in this wholesome and handsome youth a genuine hero. They clasped the soaring “Lone Eagle” to their hearts much more warmly than the bashful young man desired. “Lucky Lindy” received an uproarious welcome in the “hero canyon” of lower Broadway, as eighteen hundred tons of ticker tape and other improvised confetti showered upon him. Lindbergh’s achievement—it was more than a “stunt”—did much to dramatize and popularize ﬂying, while giving a strong boost to the infant aviation industry. The impact of the airship was tremendous. It provided the restless American spirit with yet another dimension. At the same time, it gave birth to a giant new industry. Unfortunately, the accident rate in the pioneer stages of aviation was high, though hardly more

 so than on the early railroads. But by the 1930s and 1940s, travel by air on regularly scheduled airlines was signiﬁcantly safer than on many overcrowded highways. Humanity’s new wings also increased the tempo of an already breathless civilization. The ﬂoundering railroad received another setback through the loss of passengers and mail. A lethal new weapon was given to the gods of war, and with the coming of city-busting aerial bombs, people could well debate whether the conquest of the air was a blessing or a curse. The Atlantic Ocean was shriveling to about the size of the Aegean Sea in the days of Socrates, while isolation behind ocean moats was becoming a bygone dream.

The Radio Revolution
 The speed of the airplane was far eclipsed by the speed of radio waves. Guglielmo Marconi, an Italian, invented wireless telegraphy in the 1890s, and his brainchild was used for long-range communication during World War I. Next came the voice-carrying radio, a triumph of many minds. A red-letter day was posted in November 1920, when the Pittsburgh radio station KDKA broadcast the news of the Harding landslide. Later miracles

Airplanes and Radio


Family “Listening In” to the Radio, 1922
 The Lacambanne family of San Francisco gathered in their parlor to listen to a concert broadcast over the radio. In the early years, when only a handful of households could afford a radio, listening brought family and neighbors together to share a common experience.

 were achieved in transatlantic wireless phonographs, radiotelephones, and television. The earliest radio programs reached only local audiences. But by the late 1920s, technological improvements made long-distance broadcasting possible, and national commercial networks drowned out much local programming. Meanwhile, advertising “commercials” made radio another vehicle for American free enterprise, as contrasted with the government-owned systems of Europe. While other marvels of the era—like the automobile—were luring Americans away from home, the radio was drawing them back. For much of the decade,

 Radio came in with a bang in the winter of 1921– 1922. A San Francisco newspaper reported a discovery that countless citizens were making:

“


 There is radio music in the air, every night, everywhere. Anybody can hear it at home on a receiving set, which any boy can put up in an hour.

”




 family and neighbors gathered around a household’s sole radio as they once had around the toasty hearth. Radio knitted the nation together. Various regions heard voices with standardized accents, and countless millions “tuned in” to perennial comedy favorites like “Amos ’n’ Andy.” Programs sponsored by manufacturers and distributors of brand-name products, like the “A&P Gypsies” and the “Eveready Hour,” helped to make radio-touted labels household words and purchases. Educationally and culturally, the radio made a signiﬁcant contribution. Sports were further stimulated. Politicians had to adjust their speaking techniques to the new medium, and millions rather than thousands of voters heard their promises and pleas. A host of listeners swallowed the gospel of their favorite newscaster or were even ringside participants in world-shaking events. Finally, the music of famous artists and symphony orchestras was beamed into countless homes.

 Hollywood’s Filmland Fantasies The ﬂ ickering movie was the fruit of numerous geniuses, including Thomas A. Edison. As early as the 1890s, this novel contraption, though still in crude form, had attained some popularity in the naughty peep-show penny arcades. The real birth of the movie came in 1903, when the ﬁ rst story sequence reached the screen. This breathless melodrama, The Great Train Robbery, was featured in the ﬁve-cent theaters, popularly called “nickelodeons.” Spectacular among the ﬁ rst full-length classics was D. W. Grifﬁth’s Birth of a Nation (1915), which gloriﬁed the Ku Klux Klan of Reconstruction days and defamed both blacks and Northern carpetbaggers. White southerners reputedly ﬁred guns at the screen during the attempted “rape” scene. African Americans were outraged at the ﬁ lm and angrily orga nized protest marches, petition campaigns, and public hearings. A fascinating industry was thus launched. Hollywood, in southern Cal i fornia, quickly became the movie capital of the world, for it enjoyed a maximum of sunshine and other advantages. Early producers featured nudity and heavy-lidded female vampires (“vamps”), and an offended public forced the screen magnates to set up their own rigorous code of censorship. The motion picture really arrived during World War I, when it was used as an engine of anti-German propaganda. Specially prepared “hang the kaiser” ﬁ lms



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 In the face of protests against sex in the movies, the industry appointed a “movie czar,” Will H. Hays (1879–1954), who issued the famous “Hays Code” in 1934. As he stated in a speech,

“


 This industry must have toward that sacred thing, the mind of a child, toward that clean virgin thing, that unmarked slate, the same responsibility, the same care about the impressions made upon it, that the best clergyman or the most inspired teacher of youth would have.

”


 aided powerfully in selling war bonds and in boosting morale. A new era began in 1927 with the success of the ﬁ rst “talkie”—The Jazz Singer, starring the white performer Al Jolson in blackface. The age of the “silents” was ushered out as theaters every where were “wired for sound.” At about the same time, reasonably satisfactory color ﬁ lms were being produced. Movies eclipsed all other new forms of amusement in the phenomenal growth of their popularity. Movie “stars” of the ﬁ rst pulchritude commanded much larger salaries than the president of the United States, in some cases as much as $100,000 for a single picture. Many actors and actresses were far more widely known than the nation’s political leaders. Critics bemoaned the vulgarization of popular tastes wrought by the new technologies of radio and motion pictures. But the effects of the new mass media were not all negative. The insularity of ethnic communities eroded as the immigrants’ children, especially, forsook the neighborhood vaudeville theater for the downtown movie palace or turned away from Grandma’s Yiddish storytelling to tune in “Amos ’n’ Andy.” If some of the rich diversity of the immigrants’ Old Country cultures was lost, the standardization of tastes and of language hastened entry into the American mainstream—and set the stage for the emergence of a working-class political coalition that, for a time, would overcome the divisive ethnic differences of the past.

The Dynamic Decade
 Far-reaching changes in lifestyles and values paralleled the dramatic upsurge of the economy. The census of 1920 revealed that for the ﬁ rst time most Americans no

Margaret Sanger (1879–1966) in Boston, 1929
 Forbidden to speak on the inﬂammatory topic of birth control, a deﬁant Sanger covered her mouth and “lectured” in Boston by writing on a blackboard. Since 1912 Sanger had devoted herself to promoting birth control and establishing contraceptive clinics throughout the United States.

 longer lived in the countryside but in urban areas. Women continued to ﬁ nd opportunities for employment in the cities, though they tended to cluster in a few low-paying jobs (such as retail clerking and ofﬁce typing) that became classiﬁed as “women’s work.” An orga nized birth-control movement, led by the ﬁery feminist Margaret Sanger, openly championed the use of contraceptives. Alice Paul’s National Woman’s party began in 1923 to campaign for an Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution. (The campaign was still stalled short of success seven decades later.) To some defenders of traditional ways, it seemed that the world had suddenly gone mad. Even the churches were affected. The Fundamentalist champions of the old-time religion lost ground to the Modernists, who liked to think that God was a “good guy” and the universe a pretty chummy place. Some churches tried to ﬁght the Devil with worldly weapons. Competing with joyriding automobiles and golf links, they turned to quality entertainment of their own, including wholesome moving pictures for young

The Jazz Singer, 1927
 he Jazz Singer was the ﬁ rst feature-length “talkie,” a motion picture in which the characters actually spoke, and its arrival spelled the end for “silent” ﬁ lms, where the audience read subtitles with live or recorded music as background. Although moviegoers ﬂocked to The Jazz Singer to hear recorded sound, when they got there they found a movie concerned with themes of great interest to the urban, ﬁ rst- or second-generation immigrant audiences who were Hollywood’s major patrons. The Jazz Singer told the story of a poor, assimilating Jewish immigrant torn between following his father’s wish that he train as an Orthodox cantor and his own ambition to make a success of himself as a jazz singer, performing in the popular blackface style. The movie’s star, Al Jolson, was himself an immigrant Jew who had made his name as a blackface performer.

T


 White actors had gradually taken over the southern black minstrel show during the nineteenth century. By the early twentieth century, Jewish entertainers had entirely monopolized these roles. Jolson, like other Jewish blackface performers, used his ability to impersonate a black person to force his acceptance into mainstream white American society. This use of blackface seems ironic, since black Americans in the 1920s were struggling with their own real-life battles against Jim Crow–era segregation, a blatant form of exclusion from American society. Besides the novelty of being a “talkie,” what may have made The Jazz Singer a box ofﬁce hit in 1927? How might different types of viewers in the audience have responded to the story? What does the popularity of blackface reveal about racial attitudes at the time?





Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 The Flapper New dance styles, like the “Charleston,” ﬂamboyantly displayed the new social freedom of the “ﬂapper,” whose dress and antics frequently ﬂummoxed the guardians of respectability.

 people. One uptown house of the Lord in New York advertised on a billboard, “Come to Church: Christian Worship Increases Your Efﬁciency.” Even before the war, one observer thought the chimes had “struck sex o’clock in America,” and the 1920s witnessed what many old-timers regarded as a veritable erotic eruption. Advertisers exploited sexual allure to sell every thing from soap to car tires. Oncemodest maidens now proclaimed their new freedom as “ﬂappers” in bobbed tresses and dresses. Young women appeared with hemlines elevated, stockings rolled, breasts taped ﬂat, cheeks rouged, and lips a “crimson gash” that held a dangling cigarette. Thus did the “ﬂapper” symbolize a yearned-for and devilmay-care independence (some said wild abandon) in some American women. Still more adventuresome females shocked their elders when they sported the new one-piece bathing suits. Justiﬁcation for this new sexual frankness could be found in the recently translated writings of Dr. Sigmund Freud. This Viennese physician appeared to argue that sexual repression was responsible for a variety of nervous and emotional ills. Thus not pleasure alone but also health demanded sexual gratiﬁcation and liberation. Many taboos ﬂew out the window as sex-conscious Americans let themselves go. As unknowing Freudians, teenagers pioneered the sexual frontiers. Glued together in rhythmic embrace, they danced to jazz music squeaking from phonographs. In an earlier day, a kiss had been the equivalent of a proposal of marriage. But in the new era, exploratory young folk sat in darkened movie houses or took to the highways and byways in

 automobiles. There the youthful “neckers” and “petters” poached upon the forbidden territory of each other’s bodies. If the ﬂapper was the goddess of the “era of wonderful nonsense,” jazz was its sacred music. With its virtuoso wanderings and tricky syncopation, jazz moved up from New Orleans along with the migrating The Guardian of Morality Women’s new one-piece bathing suits were a sensation in the 1920s. Here a check is carefully made to ensure that not too much leg is showing.

Dynamic Harlem




 Richard Müller-Freienfels (1882–1949), a German psychologist who was highly critical of the American obsession with mass production, extended his condemnation to the American people in 1929:

“


 Even the people impress one as having been standardized. All these clean-shaven men, all these girls, . . . seem to have been produced somewhere in a Ford factory, not by the dozen but by the thousand. In no other country are the individuals reduced to such a dead-level as in the United States.

”


 blacks during World War I. Tunes like W. C. Handy’s “St. Louis Blues” became instant classics, as the wailing saxophone became the trumpet of the new era. Blacks such as Handy, “Jelly Roll” Morton, and Joseph (“Joe”) King Oliver gave birth to jazz, but the entertainment industry soon spawned all-white bands—notably Paul Whiteman’s. Caucasian impresarios cornered the profits, though not the creative soul, of America’s most native music. A new racial pride also blossomed in the northern black communities that burgeoned during and after the war. Harlem in New York City, counting some 100,000 African American residents in the 1920s, was one of the largest black communities in the world. Harlem sustained a vibrant, creative culture that nourished poets like Langston Hughes, whose ﬁ rst volume

Marcus Garvey (1887–1940) In 1920 Garvey, the
 Jamaican-born founder of the United Negro Improvement Association, advocated a constitution to protect the rights of black Americans. By that year his nationalist self-help organization boasted eleven hundred branches in forty countries in the Americas and Africa. Most of those branches were located in the United States, his base of operations until 1927.

 King Oliver’s Creole Jazz Band, Early 1920s Joseph (“Joe”) King Oliver arrived in Chicago from New Orleans in 1918. His band became the ﬁrst important black jazz ensemble and made Chicago’s Royal Garden Café a magnet for jazz lovers. Left to right: Honoré Dutrey, trombone; Baby Dodds, drums; King Oliver, cornet; Lil Hardin, piano; Bill Johnson, banjo; and Johnny Dodds, clarinet. Kneeling in the foreground is the young Louis Armstrong.



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 of verses, The Weary Blues, appeared in 1926. Harlem in the 1920s also spawned a charismatic political leader, Marcus Garvey. The Jamaican-born Garvey founded the United Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) to promote the resettlement of American blacks in their own “African homeland.” Within the United States, the UNIA sponsored stores and other businesses, like the Black Star Line Steamship Company, to keep blacks’ dollars in black pockets. Most of Garvey’s enterprises failed ﬁ nancially, and Garvey himself was convicted in 1927 for alleged mail fraud and deported by a nervous U.S. government. But the race pride that Garvey inspired among the 4 million blacks who counted themselves UNIA followers at the movement’s height helped these newcomers to northern cities gain selfconﬁdence and self-reliance. And his example proved important to the later founding of the Nation of Islam (Black Muslim) movement.

Cultural Liberation
 Likewise in literature, an older era seemed to have ground to a halt with the recent war. By the dawn of the 1920s, most of the custodians of an aging genteel culture had died—Henry James in 1916, Henry Adams in 1918, and William Dean Howells (“the Dean of American literature”) in 1920. A few novelists who had been popular in the previous decades continued to thrive, notably the well-to-do, cosmopolitan New Yorker Edith Wharton and the Virginia-born Willa Cather, esteemed for her stark but sympathetic portrayals of pioneering on the prairies. But in the decade after the war, a new generation of writers burst upon the scene. Many of them hailed from ethnic and regional backgrounds different from that of the Protestant New Eng landers who traditionally had dominated American cultural life. The newcomers exhibited the energy of youth, the ambition of excluded outsiders, and in many cases the smoldering resentment of ideals betrayed. They bestowed on American literature a new vitality, imaginativeness, and artistic quality. A patron saint of many young authors was H. L. Mencken, the “Bad Boy of Baltimore.” Little escaped his acidic wit. In the pages of his green-covered monthly American Mercury, he wielded a slashing rapier as much as a pen. He assailed marriage, patriotism, democracy, prohibition, Rotarians, and the middle-class American “booboisie.” The South he contemptuously dismissed as “the Sahara of the Bozart”

F.
Scott Fitzgerald and His Wife, Zelda  The Fitzgeralds are shown here in the happy, early days of their stormy marriage.

 (a bastardization of beaux arts, French for the “ﬁ ne arts”), and he scathingly attacked do-gooders as “Puritans.” Puritanism, he jibed, was “the haunting fear that someone, somewhere, might be happy.” The war had jolted many young writers out of their complacency about traditional values and literary standards. With their pens they probed for new codes of morals and understanding, as well as fresh forms of expression. F. Scott Fitzgerald, a handsome Minnesota-born Princetonian then only twenty-four years old, became an overnight celebrity when he published This Side of Paradise in 1920. The book became a kind of Bible for the young. It was eagerly devoured by aspiring ﬂappers and their ardent wooers, many of whom affected an air of bewildered abandon toward life. Catching the spirit of the hour (often about 4 a.m.), Fitzgerald found “all gods dead, all wars

The Flowering of Literature


 fought, all faiths in man shaken.” He followed this melancholy success with The Great Gatsby (1925), a brilliant commentary on the illusory American ideal of the self-made man. Midwesterner James Gatz reinvented himself as tycoon Jay Gatsby, only to be destroyed by the power of those with established wealth and social standing. Theodore Dreiser’s masterpiece of 1925, An American Tragedy, similarly explored the pitfalls of social striving, as it dealt with the murder of a pregnant working girl by her socially ambitious young lover. Ernest Hemingway, who had seen action on the Italian front in 1917, was among the writers most affected by the war. He responded to pernicious propaganda and the overblown appeal to patriotism by devising his own lean, word-sparing but word-perfect style. In The Sun Also Rises (1926), he told of disillusioned, spiritually numb American expatriates in Europe. In A Farewell to Arms (1929), he crafted one of the ﬁ nest novels in any language about the war experience. A troubled soul, he ﬁ nally blew out his brains with a shotgun blast in 1961. Other writers turned to a caustic probing of American small-town life. Sherwood Anderson dissected various ﬁctional personalities in Winesburg, Ohio (1919), ﬁ nding them all in some way warped by their cramped psychological surroundings. Sinclair Lewis, a hotheaded, heavy-drinking journalist from Sauk Centre, Minnesota, sprang into prominence in 1920 with Main Street, the story of one woman’s unsuccessful war against provincialism. In Babbitt (1922) he affectionately pilloried George F. Babbitt, a prosperous, vulgar, middle-class real estate broker who slavishly conforms to the respectable materialism of his group. The word Babbittry was quickly coined to describe his all-too-familiar lifestyle. Hemingway, Anderson, and many other writers and painters found shelter and inspiration in the Paris salon of Gertrude Stein, an expatriate American. A literary innovator in her own right, Stein wrote experimental poetry and prose, including Three Lives (1909), Tender Buttons (1914), and, most famously, The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas (1933), named for her lifelong partner. William Faulkner, a dark-eyed, pensive Mississippian, turned his attention to a ﬁctional chronicle of an imaginary, history-rich Deep South county he named “Yoknapatawpha.” In powerful books like The Sound and the Fury (1929) and As I Lay Dying (1930), Faulkner peeled back layers of time and consciousness from the constricted souls of his ingrown southern characters. His extended meditation on “the rag-tag



 and bob-ends of old tales and talkings” culminated in what some readers consider his greatest work, Absalom, Absalom! (1936). Nowhere was innovation in the 1920s more obvious than in poetry. Ezra Pound, a brilliantly erratic Idahoan who deserted America for Europe, rejected what he called “an old bitch civilization, gone in the teeth” and proclaimed his doctrine: “Make It New.” Pound strongly inﬂuenced the Missouri-born and Harvard-educated T. S. Eliot, who took up residence in Eng land. In “The Waste Land” (1922), Eliot produced one of the most impenetrable but inﬂuential poems of the century. Robert Frost, a San Francisco–born poet, wrote hauntingly about his adopted New Eng land. The most daringly innovative of all was e.e. cummings, who relied on unorthodox diction and peculiar typesetting to produce startling poetical effects.

Langston Hughes (1902–1967) Raised in the Midwest,
 Hughes arrived in New York City in 1921 to attend Columbia University. He spent most of his life in Harlem, making it so much the center of his proliﬁc and versatile literary career that he was often introduced as “the Poet Laureate of Harlem.”



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 Langston Hughes (1902–1967) celebrated Harlem’s role in energizing a generation of artists and writers in his poem “Esthete in Harlem” (1930):

“


Strange,
 That in this nigger place I should meet life face to face; When, for years, I had been seeking Life in places gentler-speaking, Until I came to this vile street And found Life stepping on my feet!

”


*


 On the stage, Eugene O’Neill, a New York dramatist and Princeton dropout of globe-trotting background, laid bare Freudian notions of sex in plays like Strange Interlude (1928). A prodigious playwright, he authored more than a dozen productions in the 1920s and won the Nobel Prize in 1936. O’Neill arose from New York’s Greenwich Village, which before and after the war was a seething cauldron of writers, painters, musicians, actors, and other would-be artists. After the war a black cultural renaissance also took root uptown in Harlem, led by such gifted writers as Claude McKay, Langston Hughes, and Zora Neale Hurston, and by jazz artists like Louis Armstrong and Eubie Blake. In an outpouring of creative expression called the Harlem Renaissance, they proudly exulted in their black culture and argued for a “New Negro” who was a full citizen and a social equal to whites. Architecture also reinvented itself as modern—in diverse ways. At one extreme, Frank Lloyd Wright advanced the theory that buildings should grow from their sites, incorporate indigenous materials, and not slavishly imitate Greek and Roman importations. In a very different kind of paean to modern America, the machine age outdid itself in New York City when it thrust upward the cloud-brushing Empire State Building, 102 stories high. Dedicated in 1931, the “Empty State Building” towered partially vacant during the depressed 1930s.

 *“Esthete in Harlem,” from The Collected Poems of Langston Hughes by Langston Hughes, edited by Arnold Rampersad with David Roessel, Associate Editor. Copyright ©1994 by the Estate of Langston Hughes. Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc.

 Wall Street’s Big Bull Market Signals abounded that the economic joyride might end in a crash; even in the best years of the 1920s, several hundred banks failed annually. This something-fornothing craze was well illustrated by real estate speculation, especially the fantastic Florida boom that culminated in 1925. Numerous underwater lots were sold to eager purchasers for preposterous sums. The whole wildcat scheme collapsed when the peninsula was devastated by a West Indian hurricane, which belied advertisements of a “soothing tropical wind.” The stock exchange provided even greater sensations. Speculation ran wild, and an orgy of boomor-bust trading pushed the market up to dizzy peaks. “Never sell America short” and “Be a bull on America” were favorite catchwords, as Wall Street bulls gored one another and ﬂeeced greedy lambs. The stock market became a veritable gambling den. As the 1920s lurched forward, everybody seemed to be buying stocks “on margin”—that is, with a small down payment. Barbers, stenographers, and elevator operators cashed in on “hot tips” picked up while on duty. One valet was reported to have parlayed his wages into a quarter of a million dollars. “The cash register crashed the social register,” as rags-to-riches Americans reverently worshiped at the altar of the ticker-tape machine. So powerful was the intoxicant of quick proﬁts that few heeded the voices raised in certain quarters to warn that this kind of tinsel prosperity could not last forever. Little was done by Washington to curb moneymad speculators. In the wartime days of Wilson, the national debt had rocketed from the 1914 ﬁgure of $1,188,235,400 to the 1921 peak of $23,976,250,608. Conservative principles of money management pointed to a diversion of surplus funds to reduce this ﬁ nancial burden. A businesslike move toward economic sanity was made in 1921, when a Republican Congress created the Bureau of the Budget. The bureau’s director was to assist the president in preparing careful estimates of receipts and expenditures for submission to Congress as the annual budget. This new reform, long overdue, was designed in part to prevent haphazardly extravagant appropriations. The burdensome taxes inherited from the war were especially distasteful to Secretary of the Treasury Mellon, as well as to his fellow millionaires. Their theory

 Wall Street's Big Bull Market



 Calvin Coolidge Presides over the “Jazz Age” Coolidge’s hands-off policies were sweet music to big business.

 was that such high levies forced the rich to invest in tax-exempt securities rather than in the factories that provided prosperous payrolls. The Mellonites also argued, with considerable persuasiveness, that high taxes not only discouraged business but, in so doing, also brought a smaller net return to the Treasury than moderate taxes. Seeking to succor the “poor” rich people, Mellon helped engineer a series of tax reductions from 1921 to 1926. Congress followed his lead by repealing the excess-proﬁts tax, abolishing the gift tax, and reducing excise taxes, the surtax, the income tax, and estate taxes. In 1921 a wealthy person with an income of $1 million had paid $663,000 in income taxes; in 1926 the same person paid about $200,000. Secretary Mellon’s spare-the-rich policies thus shifted much of the

 tax burden from the wealthy to the middle-income groups. Mellon, lionized by conser vatives as the “greatest secretary of the Treasury since Hamilton,” remains a controversial ﬁgure. True, he reduced the national debt by $10 billion—from about $26 billion to $16 billion. But foes of the emaciated multimillionaire charged that he should have bitten an even larger chunk out of the debt, especially while the country was pulsating with prosperity. He was also accused of indirectly encouraging the bull market. If he had absorbed more of the national income in taxes, there would have been less money left for frenzied speculation. His refusal to do so typiﬁed the single-mindedly probusiness regime that dominated the political scene throughout the postwar decade.



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 CHRONOLOGY

 Wright brothers ﬂy ﬁ rst airplane First story-sequence motion picture



 Henry Ford introduces Model T



Bolshevik Revolution in Russia




 Eighteenth Amendment (prohibition) Volstead Act Seattle general strike Anderson publishes Winesburg, Ohio



 Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) proposed



Immigration Act of 1924




 Scopes trial Florida real estate boom Fitzgerald publishes The Great Gatsby Dreiser publishes An American Tragedy



 Hughes publishes The Weary Blues Hemingway publishes The Sun Also Rises

1919–


 “Red scare”





 Lindbergh ﬂ ies solo across Atlantic First talking motion picture, The Jazz Singer Sacco and Vanzetti executed

 Radio broadcasting begins Fitzgerald publishes This Side of Paradise Lewis publishes Main Street



 Faulkner publishes The Sound and the Fury Hemingway publishes A Farewell to Arms



 Al Capone imprisoned



 Sacco-Vanzetti trial Emergency Quota Act Bureau of the Budget created



 Lewis publishes Babbitt Eliot publishes “The Waste Land”

KEY TERMS
Bolshevik Revolution (770) red scare (771) criminal syndicalism laws (771) American plan (771) Ku Klux Klan (772) Bible Belt (772) Immigration Act of 1924 (774) Eighteenth Amendment (775) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Volstead Act (775) racketeers (780) Fundamentalism (781) Scientiﬁc Management (782) Fordism (783) United Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) (792) 
A.
Mitchell Palmer Nicola Sacco
Bartolomeo Vanzetti
Horace Kallen
Randolph Bourne
Al Capone


John T. Scopes
Frederick W. Taylor
Henry Ford
Charles A. Lindbergh
Sigmund Freud


To Learn More




To Learn More
Casey Nelson Blake, Beloved Community: The Cultural
Criticism of Randolph Bourne, Van Wyck Brooks, Waldo
Frank, and Lewis Mumford (1990)
Nancy Cott, The Grounding of Modern Feminism (1987)
Lynn Dumenil, The Modern Temper: America in the
Twenties (1995)
John Higham, Strangers in the Land: Patterns of American
Nativism, 1860–1925 (1955)
Edward J. Larsen, Summer for the Gods: The Scopes Trial
 and America’s Continuing Debate over Science and Religion (1997) William Leuchtenburg, The Perils of Prosperity, 1914–1932 (1958)

David Levering Lewis, When Harlem Was in Vogue (1981)
 Nancy MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry: The Making of the Second KKK (1993) Roland Marchand, Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for Modernity, 1920–1940 (1985) Mae M. Ngai, Impossible Subjects: Illegal Aliens and the Making of Modern America (2004) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Politics of
Boom and Bust





1920–1932
 We in America today are nearer to the ﬁnal triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land. We have not yet reached the goal—but . . . we shall soon, with the help of God, be in sight of the day when poverty will be banished from this nation. HERBERT HOOVER, 1928

T


 hree Republican presidents—Warren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert Hoover—steered the nation on the roller-coaster ride of the 1920s, a thrilling ascent from the depths of post–World War I recession to breathtaking heights of prosperity, followed by a terrifying crash into the Great Depression. In a retreat from progressive reform, Republicans sought to serve the public good less by direct government action and more through cooperation with big business. Some corrupt ofﬁcials served themselves as well, exploiting public resources for personal proﬁt. Meanwhile, the United States retreated from its brief internationalist ﬂ ing during World War I and resumed with a vengeance its traditional foreign policy of military unpreparedness and political isolationism.

The Republican
“Old Guard” Returns
 Warren G. Harding, inaugurated in 1921, looked presidential. With erect ﬁgure, broad shoulders, high forehead, bushy eyebrows, and graying hair, he was one of the best-liked men of his generation. An easygoing, warm-handed backslapper, he exuded graciousness and love of people. So kindly was his nature that he would brush off ants rather than crush them. Yet the charming, smiling exterior concealed a weak, inept interior. With a mediocre mind, Harding quickly found himself beyond his depth in the presidency. “God! What a job!” was his anguished cry on one occasion.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Harding Administration


 Harding, like Grant, was unable to detect moral halitosis in his evil associates, and he was soon surrounded by his poker-playing, shirt-sleeved cronies of the “Ohio Gang.” “A good guy,” Harding was “one of the boys.” He hated to hurt people’s feelings, especially those of his friends, by saying no, and designing political leeches capitalized on this weakness. The difference between George Washington and Warren Harding, ran a current quip, was that while Washington could not tell a lie, Harding could not tell a liar. He “was not a bad man,” said one Washington observer. “He was just a slob.” Candidate Harding, who admitted his scanty mental furnishings, had promised to gather about him the “best minds” of the party. Charles Evans Hughes— masterful, imperious, incisive, brilliant—brought to the position of secretary of state a dominating if somewhat conser vative leadership. The new secretary of the Treasury was a lean and elderly Pittsburgh aluminum king, Andrew W. Mellon, multimillionaire collector of the paintings that are now displayed in Washington as his gift to the nation. Chubby-faced Herbert Hoover, famed feeder of the Belgians and wartime food administrator, became secretary of commerce. An energetic businessman and engineer, he raised his second-rate cabinet post to ﬁ rst-rate importance, especially in drumming up foreign trade for U.S. manufacturers. But the “best minds” of the cabinet were largely offset by two of the worst. Senator Albert B. Fall of New Mexico, a scheming anticonservationist, was appointed secretary of the interior. As guardian of the nation’s natural resources, he resembled the wolf hired to protect the sheep. Harry M. Daugherty, a smalltown lawyer but a big-time crook in the “Ohio Gang,” was supposed to prosecute wrongdoers as attorney general.

GOP
Reaction at the Throttle Well-intentioned but weak-willed, Harding was a perfect “front” for enterprising industrialists. A McKinleystyle old order settled back into place with a heavy thud at war’s end, crushing the reform seedlings that had sprouted in the progressive era. A nest-feathering crowd moved into Washington and proceeded to hoodwink Harding, whom many regarded as an “amiable boob.” This new Old Guard hoped to improve on the old business doctrine of laissez-faire. Their plea was not simply for government to keep its hands off business, but for government to help guide business along the 


 path to proﬁts. They subtly and effectively achieved their ends by putting the courts and the administrative bureaus into the safekeeping of fellow stand-patters for the duration of the decade. The Supreme Court was a striking example of this trend. Harding lived less than three years as president, but he appointed four of the nine justices. Several of his choices were or became deep-dyed reactionaries, and they buttressed the dike against popular currents for nearly two decades. Harding’s fortunate choice for chief justice was ex-president Taft, who not only performed his duties ably but surprisingly was more liberal than some of his cautious associates. In the ﬁ rst years of the 1920s, the Supreme Court axed progressive legislation. It killed a federal childlabor law, stripped away many of labor’s hard-won gains, and rigidly restricted government intervention in the economy. In the landmark case of Adkins v. Children’s Hospital (1923), the Court reversed its own reasoning in Muller v. Oregon (see p. 711), which had declared women to be deserving of special protection in the workplace, and invalidated a minimum-wage law for women. Its strained ruling was that because women now had the vote (Nineteenth Amendment), they were the legal equals of men and could no longer be protected by special legislation. The contradictory premises of the Muller and Adkins cases framed a debate over gender differences that would continue for the rest of the century: were women sufﬁciently different from men that they merited special legal and social treatment, or were they effectively equal in the eyes of the law and therefore undeserving of special protections and preferences? (An analogous debate over racial differences haunted afﬁ rmative-action policies later in the century.) Corporations, under Harding, could once more relax and expand. Antitrust laws were often ignored, circumvented, or feebly enforced by friendly prosecutors in the attorney general’s ofﬁce. The Interstate

 Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes (1841–1935), wryly dissenting in the Adkins case, said,

“


 It would need more than the Nineteenth Amendment to convince me that there are no differences between men and women, or that legislation cannot take those differences into account.

”




Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


Government for Sale This 1924
 cartoon satirizing the corruption of the Harding administration shows the sale of the Capitol, the White House, and even the Washington Monument.

 Commerce Commission, to single out one agency, came to be dominated by men who were personally sympathetic to the managers of the railroads. Harding reactionaries might well have boasted, “We care not what laws the Democrats pass as long as we are permitted to administer them.” Big industrialists, striving to reduce the rigors of competition, now had a free hand to set up trade associations. Cement manufacturers, for example, would use these agencies to agree upon standardization of products, publicity campaigns, and a united front in dealing with the railroads and labor. Although many of these associations ran counter to the spirit of existing antitrust legislation, their formation was encouraged by Secretary Hoover. His sense of engineering efﬁciency led him to condemn the waste resulting from cutthroat competition, and his commitment to voluntary cooperation led him to urge businesses to regulate themselves rather than be regulated by big government.

The Aftermath of War
 Wartime government controls on the economy were swiftly dismantled. The War Industries Board disappeared with almost indecent haste. With its passing, progressive hopes for more government regulation of big business evaporated. Washington likewise returned the railroads to private management in 1920. Reformers had hoped that wartime government operation of the lines might lead

 to their permanent nationalization. Instead Congress passed the Esch-Cummins Transportation Act of 1920, which encouraged private consolidation of the railroads and pledged the Interstate Commerce Commission to guarantee their proﬁtability. The new philosophy was not to save the country from the railroads, as in the days of the Populists, but to save the railroads for the country. The federal government also tried to pull up anchor and get out of the shipping business. The Merchant Marine Act of 1920 authorized the Shipping Board, which controlled about ﬁ fteen hundred vessels, to dispose of much of the hastily built wartime ﬂeet at bargain-basement prices. The board operated the remaining vessels without conspicuous success. Under the La Follette Seaman’s Act of 1915, American shipping could not thrive in competition with foreigners, who all too often provided their crews with wretched food and starvation wages. Labor, suddenly deprived of its wartime crutch of friendly government support, limped along badly in the postwar decade. A bloody strike in the steel industry was ruthlessly broken in 1919, partly by exploiting ethnic and racial divisions among the steelworkers and partly by branding the strikers as dangerous “reds.” The Railway Labor Board, a successor body to the wartime labor boards, ordered a wage cut of 12 percent in 1922, provoking a two-month strike. It ended when Attorney General Daugherty, who fully shared Harding’s big-business bias, clamped on the strikers one of the most sweeping injunctions in American history. Unions wilted in this hostile political environ-

The Transition to Peace


 ment, and membership shriveled by nearly 30 percent between 1920 and 1930. Needy veterans were among the few nonbusiness groups to reap lasting gains from the war. Congress in 1921 generously created the Veterans Bureau, authorized to operate hospitals and provide vocational rehabilitation for the disabled. Veterans quickly orga nized into pressure groups. The American Legion had been founded in Paris in 1919 by Colonel Theodore Roosevelt, Jr. Legionnaires met periodically to renew old hardships and let off steam in good-natured horseplay. The legion soon became distinguished for its militant patriotism, rock-ribbed conservatism, and zealous antiradicalism. The legion also became notorious for its aggressive lobbying for veterans’ beneﬁts. The chief grievance of the former “doughboys” was monetary—they wanted their “dough.” The former ser vicemen demanded “adjusted compensation” to make up for the wages they had “lost” when they turned in their factory overalls for military uniforms during the Great War. Critics denounced this demand as a holdup “bonus,” but the millions of veterans deployed heavy political artillery. They browbeat Congress into passing a bonus bill in 1922, which Harding promptly vetoed. Re-forming their lines, the repulsed veterans gathered for a ﬁ nal attack. In 1924 Congress again hoisted the white ﬂag and passed the Adjusted Compensation Act. It gave every former soldier a paid-up insurance policy due in twenty years—adding about $3.5 billion to the total cost of the war. Penny-pinching Calvin Coolidge sternly vetoed the measure, but Congress overrode him, leaving the veterans with their loot.

 America Seeks Beneﬁts Without Burdens Making peace with the fallen foe was the most pressing problem left on Harding’s doorstep. The United States, having rejected the Treaty of Versailles, was still technically at war with Germany, Austria, and Hungary nearly three years after the armistice. Peace was ﬁ nally achieved by lone-wolf tactics. In July 1921 Congress passed a simple joint resolution that declared the war ofﬁcially ended. Isolation was enthroned in Washington. The Harding administration, with the Senate “irreconcilables” holding a hatchet over its head, continued to regard the League of Nations as a thing unclean. Harding at ﬁ rst refused even to support the League’s world health



 “I Sympathize Deeply with You, Madam, but I Cannot Associate with You,” 1923 President Harding’s secretary of state, Charles Evans Hughes, broke the news to a desperate, war-tattered Europe that America was going, and staying, home.

 program. But the new world body was much too important to be completely ignored. “Unofﬁcial observers” were sent to its seat in Geneva, Switzerland, to hang around like detectives shadowing a suspected criminal. Harding could not completely turn his back on the outside world, especially the Middle East, where a sharp rivalry developed between America and Britain for oil-drilling concessions. Remembering that the Allies had ﬂoated to victory on a ﬂood of oil, experts recognized that liquid “black gold” would be as necessary as blood in the battles of tomorrow. Secretary Hughes eventually secured for American oil companies the right to share in the exploitation of the sandy region’s oil riches. Disarmament was one international issue on which Harding, after much indecision, ﬁ nally seized the initiative. He was prodded by businesspeople unwilling to dig deeper into their pockets for money to ﬁ nance the ambitious naval building program started during the war. A deadly contest was shaping up with Britain and Japan, which watched with alarm as the



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


Battleships


Aircraft Carrier
Tonnage


Battleship Tonnage


U.S.




525,000


135,000


Britain




525,000


135,000


Japan




France




175,000


60,000


Italy




175,000


60,000


315,000


81,000


Figure 32.1 Limits Imposed by Washington Conference, 1921–1922
 The pledge of the British and Americans to refrain from fortifying their Far Eastern possessions, while Japan was allowed to fortify its possessions, was the key to the naval-limitation treaty. The United States and Great Britain thus won a temporary victory but later paid a horrendous price when they had to dislodge the well-entrenched Japanese from the Paciﬁc in World War II.

 oceans ﬁ lled with American vessels. Britain still commanded the world’s largest navy, but the clatter of American riveters proclaimed that the United States would soon overtake it. Public agitation in America, fed by these worries, brought about the headline-making Washington “Disarmament” Conference in 1921–1922. Invitations went to all the major naval powers—except Bolshevik Russia, whose government the United States refused ofﬁcially to recognize. The double agenda included naval disarmament and the situation in the Far East. At the outset Secretary Hughes startled the delegates, who were expecting the usual diplomatic fencestraddling, with a comprehensive, concrete plan for declaring a ten-year “holiday” on the construction of battleships and even for scrapping some of the huge dreadnoughts already built. He proposed that the scaled-down navies of America and Britain should enjoy parity in battleships and aircraft carriers, with Japan on the small end of a 5:5:3 ratio. This arrangement sounded to the sensitive Japa nese ambassador like “Rolls-Royce, Rolls-Royce, Ford.” Complex bargaining followed in the wake of Hughes’s proposals. The Five-Power Naval Treaty of 1922 embodied Hughes’s ideas on ship ratios, but only after face-saving compensation was offered to the insecure Japa nese (see Figure 32.1). The British and Americans both conceded that they would refrain from fortifying their Far Eastern possessions, including the Philippines. The Japa nese were not subjected to such restraints in their possessions. In addition, a Four-Power Treaty replaced the twenty-year-old Anglo-

 Japa nese alliance. The new pact bound Britain, Japan, France, and the United States to preserve the status quo in the Paciﬁc—another concession to the jumpy Japa nese. Finally, the Washington Conference gave chaotic China—“the Sick Man of the Far East”—a shot in the arm with the Nine-Power Treaty of 1922, whose signatories agreed to nail wide-open the Open Door in China. When the ﬁ nal gavel banged, the Hardingites boasted with much fanfare—and some justiﬁcation— of their globe-shaking achievement in disarmament. But their satisfaction was somewhat illusory. No restrictions had been placed on small warships, and the other powers churned ahead with the construction of cruisers, destroyers, and submarines, while pennypinching Uncle Sam lagged dangerously behind. Congress also pointedly declared that it was making no commitment to the use of armed force or any kind of joint action when it ratiﬁed the Four-Power Treaty. These reservations, in effect, rendered the treaty a dead letter. Ominously, the American people seemed content to rely for their security on words and wishful thinking rather than on weapons and hardheaded realism. A similar sentimentalism welled up later in the decade, when Americans clamored for the “outlawry of war.” The conviction spread that if quarreling nations would only take the pledge to foreswear war as an instrument of national policy, swords could be beaten into plowshares. Calvin Coolidge’s secretary of state, Frank B. Kellogg, who later won the Nobel Peace Prize for his role, was lukewarm about the idea.

Raising the Protective Tariff


 But after petitions bearing more than 2 million signatures cascaded into Washington, he signed with the French foreign minister in 1928 the famed KelloggBriand Pact. Ofﬁcially known as the Pact of Paris, it was ultimately ratiﬁed by sixty-two nations. This new parchment peace was delusory in the extreme. Defensive wars were still permitted, and what scheming aggressor could not cook up an excuse of self-defense? Lacking both muscles and teeth, the pact was a diplomatic derelict—and virtually useless in a showdown. Yet it accurately—and dangerously— reﬂected the American mind in the 1920s, which was all too willing to be lulled into a false sense of security. This mood took even deeper hold in the ostrichlike neutralism of the 1930s.

Hiking the Tariff Higher
 A comparable lack of realism afﬂicted foreign economic policy in the 1920s. Businesspeople, shortsightedly obsessed with the dazzling prospects in the prosperous home market, sought to keep that market to themselves by ﬂ inging up insurmountable tariff walls around the United States. They were spurred into action by their fear of a ﬂood of cheap goods from recovering Europe, especially during the brief but sharp recession of 1920–1921. In 1922 Congress passed the comprehensive Fordney-McCumber Tariff Law. Glib lobbyists once more descended upon Washington and helped boost schedules from the average of 27 percent under Wilson’s Underwood Tariff of 1913 to an average of 38.5 percent, which was almost as high as Taft’s Payne-Aldrich Tariff of 1909. (See the Appendix.) Duties on farm produce were increased, and the principle was proclaimed that the general rates were designed to equalize the cost of American and foreign production. A promising degree of ﬂexibility was introduced for the ﬁ rst time, when the president was authorized, with the advice of the fact-ﬁ nding Tariff Commission, to reduce or increase duties by as much as 50 percent. Presidents Harding and Coolidge, true to their bigindustry sympathies, were far more friendly to tariff increases than to reductions. In six years they authorized thirty-two upward changes, including on their list vital commodities like dairy products, chemicals, and pig iron. During the same period, the White House ordered only ﬁve reductions. These included mill feed and such triﬂ ing items as bobwhite quail, paintbrush handles, phenol, and cresylic acid.



 The high-tariff course thus charted by the Republican regimes set off an ominous chain reaction. European producers felt the squeeze, for the American tariff walls prolonged their postwar chaos. An impoverished Europe needed to sell its manufactured goods to the United States, particularly if it hoped to achieve economic recovery and to pay its huge war debt to Washington. America needed to give foreign nations a chance to make a proﬁt from it so that they could buy its manufactured articles and repay debts. International trade, Americans were slow to learn, is a twoway street. In general, they could not sell to others in quantity unless they bought from them in quantity— or lent them more U.S. dollars. Erecting tariff walls was a game that two could play. The American example spurred European nations, throughout the feverish 1920s, to pile up higher barriers themselves. These artiﬁcial obstacles were doubly bad: they hurt not only American-made goods but the products of European countries as well. The whole vicious circle further deepened the international economic distress, providing one more rung on the ladder by which Adolf Hitler scrambled to power.

The Stench of Scandal
 The loose morality and get-rich-quickism of the Harding era manifested themselves spectacularly in a series of scandals. Early in 1923 Colonel Charles R. Forbes, onetime deserter from the army, was caught with his hand in the till and resigned as head of the Veterans Bureau. An appointee of the gullible Harding, he and his accomplices looted the government to the tune of about $200 million, chieﬂy in connection with the building of veterans’ hospitals. He was sentenced to two years in a federal penitentiary. Most shocking of all was the Teapot Dome scandal, an affair that involved priceless naval oil reserves at Teapot Dome (Wyoming) and Elk Hills (Cal i fornia). In 1921 the slippery secretary of the interior, Albert B. Fall, induced his careless colleague, the secretary of the navy, to transfer these valuable properties to the Interior Department. Harding indiscreetly signed the secret order. Fall then quietly leased the lands to oilmen Harry F. Sinclair and Edward L. Doheny, but not until he had received a bribe (“loan”) of $100,000 from Doheny and about three times that amount in all from Sinclair.



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


 released after a jury twice failed to agree. During the trial Daugherty hid behind the trousers of the nowdead Harding by implying that persistent probing might uncover crookedness in the White House. Harding was mercifully spared the full revelation of these iniquities, though his worst suspicions were aroused. While news of the scandals was beginning to break, he embarked upon a speechmaking tour across the country all the way to Alaska. On the return trip, he died in San Francisco, on August 2, 1923, of pneumonia and thrombosis. His death may have been hastened by a broken heart resulting from the disloyalty of designing friends. Mourning millions, not yet fully aware of the graft in Washington, expressed genuine sorrow. The brutal fact is that Harding was not a strong enough man for the presidency—as he himself privately admitted. Such was his weakness that he tolerated people and conditions that subjected the Republic to its worst disgrace since the days of President Grant. Washington Ofﬁcials Trying to Outpace the Teapot Dome Scandal, ca. 1922

“Silent Cal” Coolidge
 Teapot Dome, no tempest in a teapot, ﬁ nally came to a whistling boil. Details of the crooked transaction gradually began to leak out in March 1923, two years after Harding took ofﬁce. Fall, Sinclair, and Doheny were indicted the next year, but the case dragged through the courts until 1929. Finally Fall was found guilty of taking a bribe and was sentenced to one year in jail. By a curious quirk of justice, the two bribe givers were acquitted while the bribe taker was convicted, although Sinclair served several months in jail for having “shadowed” jurors and for refusing to testify before a Senate committee. The oily smudge from Teapot Dome polluted the prestige of the Washington government. Right-thinking citizens wondered what was going on when public ofﬁcials could sell out the nation’s vital resources, especially those reserved for the U.S. Navy. The acquittal of Sinclair and Doheny undermined faith in the courts, while giving further currency to the cynical sayings “You can’t put a million dollars in jail” and “In America everyone is assumed guilty until proven rich.” Still more scandals erupted. Persistent reports as to the underhanded doings of Attorney General Daugherty prompted a Senate investigation in 1924 of the illegal sale of pardons and liquor permits. Forced to resign, the accused ofﬁcial was tried in 1927 but was

 News of Harding’s death was sped to Vice President Coolidge, then visiting at his father’s New Eng land farmhouse. By the light of two kerosene lamps, the elder Coolidge, a justice of the peace, used the old family Bible to administer the presidential oath to his son. This homespun setting was symbolic of Coolidge. Quite unlike Harding, the stern-faced Vermonter, with his thin nose and tightly set lips, embodied the New Eng land virtues of honesty, morality, industry, and frugality. As a youth, his father reported, he seemed to get more sap out of a maple tree than did any of the other boys. Practicing a rigid economy in both money and words, “Silent Cal” came to be known in Washington conversational circles for his brilliant ﬂashes of silence. His dour, serious visage prompted the acid observation that he had been “weaned on a pickle.” Coolidge seemed to be a crystallization of the commonplace. Painfully shy, he was blessed with only mediocre powers of leadership. He would occasionally display a dry wit in private, but his speeches, delivered in a nasal New Eng land twang, were invariably boring. A staunch apostle of the status quo, he was no knight in armor riding forth to tilt at wrongs. His only horse, in fact, was an electric-powered steed on which he took his exercise. True to Republican philosophy, he became the “high priest of the great god Business.”

“Cautious Cal” Coolidge




Calvin Coolidge, Gentleman
 Angler Coolidge “was a real conservative, a fundamentalist in religion, in the economic and social order, and in ﬁshing,” said his successor, Herbert Hoover, who had a ﬂy ﬁsherman’s disdain for Coolidge’s bait-ﬁshing tactics— and for his predecessor’s laissezfaire politics as well.

 Cash Register Chorus Business croons its appreciation of “Coolidge prosperity.”

 He believed that “the man who builds a factory builds a temple” and that “the man who works there worships there.” The hands-off temperament of “Cautious Cal” Coolidge suited the times perfectly. His thrifty nature caused him to sympathize fully with Secretary of the Treasury Mellon’s efforts to reduce both taxes and debts. No foe of industrial bigness, he let business have its head. “Coolidge luck” held during his ﬁve and a half prosperity-blessed years. Ever a proﬁ le in caution, Coolidge slowly gave the Harding regime a badly needed moral fumigation. Teapot Dome had scalded the Republican party badly, but so transparently honest was the vinegary Vermonter that the scandalous oil did not rub off on him. The public, though at ﬁ rst shocked by the scandal, quickly simmered down, and an alarming tendency developed in certain quarters to excuse some of the wrongdoers on the grounds that “they had gotten away with it.” Some critics even condemned the government prosecutors for continuing to rock the boat. America’s moral sensibility was evidently being dulled by prosperity.



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


Frustrated Farmers
 Sun-bronzed farmers were caught squarely in a boomor-bust cycle in the postwar decade. While the ﬁghting had raged, they had raked in money hand over gnarled ﬁst; by the spring of 1920, the price of wheat had shot up to an incredible $3 a bushel. But peace brought an end to government-guaranteed high prices and to massive purchases by other nations, as foreign production reentered the stream of world commerce. Machines also threatened to plow the farmers under an avalanche of their own overabundant crops. The gasoline-engine tractor was working a revolution on American farms. This steel mule was to cultivation and sowing what the McCormick reaper was to harvesting. Blue-denimed farmers no longer had to plod after the horse-drawn plow with high-footed gait. They could sit erect on their chugging mechanized chariots and turn under and harrow many acres in a single day. They could grow bigger crops on larger areas, using fewer horses and hired hands. The wartime boom had encouraged them to bring vast new tracts under cultivation, especially in the “wheat belt” of the upper Midwest. But such improved efﬁciency and expanded agricultural acreage helped to pile up more pricedampening surpluses. A withering depression swept through agricultural districts in the 1920s, when one farm in four was sold for debt or taxes. As a plaintive song of the period ran,

Mechanizing Agriculture
 Just as the automobile replaced the horse on city streets, so did the gas-engine tractor replace horses and mules on the nation’s farms in the 1920s. American farmers owned ten times more tractors in 1930 than they did in 1920. The smoke-belching tractors bolstered productivity but also increased the farmers’ debt burden, as the Great Depression made tragically clear.

 No use talkin’, any man’s beat, With ’leven-cent cotton and forty-cent meat. Schemes abounded for bringing relief to the hardpressed farmers. A bipartisan “farm bloc” from the agricultural states coalesced in Congress in 1921 and succeeded in driv ing through some helpful laws. Noteworthy was the Capper-Volstead Act, which exempted farmers’ marketing cooperatives from antitrust prosecution. The farm bloc’s favorite proposal was the McNary-Haugen Bill, pushed energetically from 1924 to 1928. It sought to keep agricultural prices high by authorizing the government to buy up surpluses and sell them abroad. Government losses were to be made up by a special tax on the farmers. Congress twice passed the bill, but frugal Coolidge twice vetoed it. Farm prices stayed down, and farmers’ political temperatures stayed high, reaching a fever pitch in the election of 1924.

A
Three-Way Race for  the White House in 1924 Self-satisﬁed Republicans, chanting “Keep Cool and Keep Coolidge,” nominated “Silent Cal” for the presidency at their convention in Cleveland in the simmering summer of 1924. Squabbling Democrats had more difﬁculty choosing a candidate when they met in New York’s sweltering Madison Square Garden. Reﬂecting



Farmers and Reformers


 many of the cultural tensions of the decade, the party was hopelessly split between “wets” and “drys,” urbanites and farmers, Fundamentalists and Modernists, northern liberals and southern stand-patters, immigrants and old-stock Americans. In one symptomatic spasm of discord, the conventioneers failed by just one vote to pass a resolution condemning the Ku Klux Klan. Deadlocked for an unprecedented 102 ballots, the convention at last turned wearily, sweatily, and unenthusiastically to John W. Davis. A wealthy corporation lawyer connected with the Wall Street banking house of J. P. Morgan and Company, the polished nominee was no less conservative than cautious Calvin Coolidge. The ﬁeld was now wide-open for a liberal candidate. The white-pompadoured Senator Robert (“Fighting Bob”) La Follette from Wisconsin, perennial aspirant to the presidency and now sixty-nine years of age, sprang forward to lead a new Progressive party. He gained the endorsement of the American Federation of Labor and

 enjoyed the support of the shrinking Socialist party, but his major constituency was made up of the pricepinched farmers. La Follette’s new Progressive party, ﬁelding only a presidential ticket, with no candidates for local ofﬁce, was a head without a body. It proved to be only a shadow of the robust Progressive coalition of prewar days. Its platform called for government ownership of railroads and relief for farmers, lashed out at monopoly and antilabor injunctions, and urged a constitutional amendment to limit the Supreme Court’s power to invalidate laws passed by Congress. La Follette turned in a respectable showing, polling nearly 5 million votes. But “Cautious Cal” and the oil-smeared Republicans slipped easily back into ofﬁce, overwhelming Davis, 15,718,211 to 8,385,283. The electoral count stood at 382 for Coolidge, 136 for Davis, and 13 for La Follette, all from his home state of Wisconsin (see Map 32.1). As the so-called conscience of the callous 1920s, La Follette injected a badly needed

 Map 32.1 Presidential Election of 1924 (showing popular vote by county) Note the concentration of La Follette’s votes in the old Populist strongholds of the Midwest and the mountain states. His ticket did especially well in the grainInteractive Map growing districts battered by the postwar slump in agricultural prices. WASH.

N.H.
VT. R-4

R-7


MONT. R-4

 ME.

R-4


N. DAK.

R-6


R-5


 OREGON

 MINN.

R-5


 MASS.

R-12


 IDAHO

S. DAK.

R-4


 WISC.

R-5


 WYO.

P-13


R-3


R-13


R-8


R-4


ILL. R-29

COLO. R-6

KANSAS R-10

ARIZ. R-3

R.I.
R-5


 IOWA

 NEBR.

R-13


MICH. PA.

 UTAH

 CALIF.

R-45


R-15


NEV. R-3

R-18


N.Y.


 OKLA.

N. MEX.

D-10


R-3


IND. R-15

R-38


 OHIO

MD. R-8

N.C.
D-12


D-12


S.C.


 ARK.

D-9


D-9


MISS. D-10

D-20


 VA.

D-12


R-13


 TENN.

 TEXAS

R-14
R-3


W.VA. KY.

R-18


N.J. R-7


 DEL.

R-24


R-8


 MO.

 CONN.

ALA. D-12

 GA.

D-14


 LA.

D-10


FLA. D-6

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Coolidge (Republican)




72%


15,718,211


54.0%


Davis (Democrat)




26%


8,385,283


28.8%




2%


4,831,289


16.6%


La Follette (Progressive)


 No returns, unsettled, etc.



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


 liberal tonic into a decade drugged on prosperity. But times were too good for too many for his reforming message to carry the day.

Foreign-Policy Flounderings
 Isolation continued to reign in the Coolidge era. Despite presidential proddings, the Senate proved unwilling to allow America to adhere to the World Court—the judicial arm of the still-suspect League of Nations. Coolidge only halfheartedly—and unsuccessfully— pursued further naval disarmament after the loudly trumpeted agreements worked out at the Washington Conference in 1922. A glaring exception to the United States’ inwardlooking indifference to the outside world was the armed interventionism in the Caribbean and Central America. American troops were withdrawn (after an eightyear stay) from the Dominican Republic in 1924, but they remained in Haiti from 1914 to 1934. President Coolidge in 1925 brieﬂy removed American bayonets from troubled Nicaragua, where they had glinted intermittently since 1909, but in 1926 he sent them back, ﬁve thousand strong, and they stayed until 1933. American oil companies clamored for a military expedition to Mexico in 1926 when the Mexican government began to assert its sovereignty over oil resources. Coolidge kept cool and defused the Mexican crisis with some skillful diplomatic negotiating. But his mailed-ﬁst tactics elsewhere bred sore resentments south of the Rio Grande, where angry critics loudly assailed “yanqui imperialism.”

 Overshadowing all other foreign-policy problems in the 1920s was the knotty issue of international debts, a complicated tangle of private loans, Allied war debts, and German reparations payments (see Figure 32.2). Almost overnight, World War I had reversed the international ﬁ nancial position of the United States. In 1914 America had been a debtor nation to the sum of about $4 billion; by 1922 it had become a creditor nation to the sum of about $16 billion. The almighty dollar rivaled the pound sterling as the ﬁ nancial giant of the world. American investors loaned some $10 billion to foreigners in the 1920s, though even this huge river of money could not fully reﬂoat the war-shelled world economy. Americans, bewitched by lucrative investment opportunities in their domestic economy, did not lend nearly so large a fraction of their national income overseas as had the British in the prewar period. The key knot in the debt tangle was the $10 billion that the U.S. Treasury had loaned to the Allies during and immediately after the war. Uncle Sam held their IOUs—and he wanted to be paid. The Allies, in turn, protested that the demand for repayment was grossly unfair. The French and the British pointed out, with much justice, that they had held up a wall of ﬂesh and bone against the common foe until America the Unready had ﬁ nally entered the fray. America, they argued, should write off its loans as war costs, just as the Allies had been tragically forced to write off the lives of millions of young men. The debtors also complained that the real effect of their borrowed dollars had been to fuel the boom in the already roaring wartime economy in America, where nearly all their purchases had been made. And the ﬁ nal straw, protested the Europe-

U.S. INVESTORS

Figure 32.2 Aspects of the
 Financial Merry-go-round, 1921–1933 Great Britain, with a debt of over $4 billion owed to the U.S. Treasury, had a huge stake in proposals for inter-Allied debt cancellation, but France’s stake was even larger. Less prosperous than Britain in the 1920s and more battered by the war, which had been fought on its soil, France owed nearly $3.5 billion to the United States and additional billions to Britain.

WALL STREET BANKERS

Private
 $ loans

 GERMANY

Reparations Reparations
Debt
 payments

U.S. TREASURY

Allied war
 debt payments

GREAT BRITAIN

 Allied war debt payments

 FRANCE

The War Debts Tangle




 ans, was that America’s postwar tariff walls made it almost impossible for them to sell their goods to earn the dollars to pay their debts.

Unraveling the Debt Knot
 America’s tightﬁsted insistence on getting its money back helped to harden the hearts of the Allies against conquered Germany. The French and the British demanded that the Germans make enormous reparations payments, totaling some $32 billion, as compensation for war-inﬂ icted damages. The Allies hoped to settle their debts to the United States with the money received from Germany. The French, seeking to extort lagging reparations payments, sent troops into Germany’s industrialized Ruhr Valley in 1923. Berlin responded by permitting its currency to inﬂate astronomically. At one point in October 1923, a loaf of bread cost 480 million marks, or about $120 million in preinﬂation money. German society teetered on the brink of mad anarchy, and the whole international house of ﬁ nancial cards threatened to ﬂutter down in colossal chaos. Sensible statesmen now urged that war debts and reparations alike be drastically scaled down or even canceled outright. But to Americans such proposals smacked of “welshing” on a debt. “We went across, but they won’t come across,” cried a prominent politician. Scroogelike, Calvin Coolidge turned aside suggestions of debt cancellation with a typically terse question: “They hired the money, didn’t they?” The Washington administration proved especially unrealistic in its dogged insistence that there was no connection whatever between debts and reparations. Reality ﬁ nally dawned in the Dawes Plan of 1924. Negotiated largely by Charles Dawes, about to be nominated as Coolidge’s running mate, it rescheduled German reparations payments and opened the way for further American private loans to Germany. The whole ﬁ nancial cycle now became still more complicated, as U.S. bankers loaned money to Germany, Germany paid reparations to France and Britain, and the former Allies paid war debts to the United States. Clearly the source of this monetary merry-go-round was the ﬂowing well of American credit. When that well dried up after the great crash in 1929, the jungle of international ﬁ nance quickly turned into a desert. President Herbert Hoover declared a one-year debt moratorium in 1931, and before long all the debtors had defaulted— except “honest little Finland,” which struggled along

Harmony in Europe, 1932


 making payments until the last of its debt was discharged in 1976. The United States never did get its money, but it harvested a bumper crop of ill will. Irate French crowds on occasion attacked American tourists, and throughout Europe Uncle Sam was caricatured as Uncle Shylock, greedily whetting his knife for the last pound of Allied ﬂesh. The bad taste left in American mouths by the whole sorry episode contributed powerfully to the storm-cellar neutrality legislation passed by Congress in the 1930s.

The Triumph of
Herbert Hoover, 1928
 Poker-faced Calvin Coolidge, the tight-lipped “Sphinx of the Potomac,” bowed out of the 1928 presidential race when he announced, “I do not choose to run.” His logical successor was super-Secretary (of Commerce) Herbert Hoover, unpopular with the political bosses but the much-admired darling of the masses, who asked, “Hoo but Hoover?” He was nominated on a platform that clucked contentedly over both prosperity and prohibition.



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


 Still-squabbling Democrats nominated Alfred E. Smith, four-time governor of New York and one of the most colorful personalities in American politics. He was a wisecracking, glad-handing liberal who suffered from several fatal political handicaps. “Al(cohol)” Smith was soakingly and drippingly “wet” at a time when the country was still devoted to the “noble experiment” of prohibition. To a nation that had only recently moved to the city, native New Yorker Smith seemed too abrasively urban. He was a Roman Catholic in an overwhelmingly Protestant—and unfortunately prejudiced—land. Many dry, rural, and Fundamentalist Democrats gagged on his candidacy, and they saddled the wet Smith with a dry running mate and a dry platform. Jauntily sporting a brown derby and a big cigar, Smith, “the Happy Warrior,” tried to carry alcohol on one shoulder and water on the other. But his effort was doomed from the start. Radio ﬁgured prominently in this campaign for the ﬁ rst time, and it helped Hoover more than Smith. The New Yorker had more personal sparkle, but he could not project it through the radio (which in his Lower East Side twang he pronounced “radd-dee-o,” grating on the ears of many listeners). Iowa-born Hoover, with his double-breasted dignity, came out of the microphone better than he went in. Decrying un-American “socialism” and preaching “rugged individualism,” he sounded both grassrootish and statesmanlike. Chubby-faced, ruddy-complexioned Herbert Hoover, with his painfully high starched collar, was a living example of the American success story and an intriguing mixture of two centuries. As a poor orphan boy who had worked his way through Stanford University, he had absorbed the nineteenth-century copybook maxims of industry, thrift, and self-reliance. As a fabulously successful mining engineer and a brilliant businessman, he had honed to a high degree the efﬁciency doctrines of the progressive era. A small-town boy from Iowa and Oregon, he had traveled and worked abroad extensively. Long years of self-imposed exile had deepened his determination, abundantly supported by national tradition, to avoid foreign entanglements. His experiences abroad had further strengthened his faith in American individualism, free enterprise, and small government. With his unshaken dignity and Quaker restraint, Hoover was a far cry from the typical backslapping politician. Though a citizen of the world and laden with international honors, he was quite shy, standofﬁsh, and stiff. Personally colorless in public, he had been accustomed during much of his life to giving orders to

 Herbert Hoover on the Road “Whistle-stop” campaigns, with candidates speaking from the rear platforms of trains, were a standard feature of American politics before the advent of television. Herbert Hoover here greets a crowd in Newark, New Jersey, during the 1928 campaign.

 subordinates and not to soliciting votes. Never before elected to public ofﬁce, he was thin-skinned in the face of criticism, and he did not adapt readily to the necessary give-and-take of political accommodation. His real power lay in his integrity, his humanitarianism, his passion for assembling the facts, his efﬁciency, his talents for administration, and his ability to inspire loyalty in close associates. They called him “the Chief.” As beﬁtted America’s newly mechanized civilization, Hoover was the ideal businessperson’s candidate. A self-made millionaire, he recoiled from anything suggesting socialism, paternalism, or “planned economy.” Yet as secretary of commerce, he had exhibited some progressive instincts. He endorsed labor unions and supported federal regulation of the new radio

Hoover Trounces Smith


 broadcasting industry. He even ﬂ irted for a time with the idea of government-owned radio, similar to the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). As bands blared Smith’s theme song, “The Sidewalks of New York,” the campaign sank into the sewers beneath the sidewalks. Despite the best efforts of Hoover and Smith, below-the-belt tactics were employed to a disgusting degree by lower-level campaigners. Religious bigotry raised its hideous head over Smith’s Catholicism. An irresponsible whispering campaign claimed that “A Vote for Al Smith Is a Vote for the Pope” and that the White House, under Smith, would become a branch of the Vatican—complete with “Rum, Romanism, and Ruin.” Hoover’s attempts to quash such rumors were in vain. The proverbially solid South—“100 percent American” and a stronghold of Protestant Ku Klux Klanism—shied away from “city slicker” Al Smith. It might have accepted a Catholic, or a wet, or the descendant of Irish grandparents, or an urbanite. But a concoction of Catholicism, wettism, foreignism, and liberal-

WA MT

OR ID NV CA

 ND

 WY

 SD

 CO

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 AZ

 MN

KS OK

 NM

 IL

 LA

 TX

MI IN

 MO

OH KY

 MS

 AL

 WV

VA NC

 TN

 AR

ME VT 4 NH MA NY 4 18 RI PA NJ CT 5 14 7

 GA

DE MD

 SC

 FL

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Hoover (Republican)




83.6%


21,391,381


58.7%




16.4%


15,016,443


41.2%


Smith (Democrat)


 Map 32.2 Presidential Election of 1928 (with electoral vote by state) Smith, despite his defeat, managed to poll almost as many votes as the victorious Coolidge had in 1924. By attracting to the party an immense urban or “sidewalk” vote, the breezy New Yorker foreshadowed Roosevelt’s New Deal victory in 1932, when the Democrats patched together the solid South and the urban North. A cruel joke had the Catholic Smith cabling the Pope a single word after the election: “Unpack.” Interactive Map



 ism brewed on the sidewalks of New York was too bitter a dose for southern stomachs. Smith’s theme song was a constant and rasping reminder that his upbringing had not been convincingly American. Hoover triumphed in a landslide. He bagged 21,391,993 popular votes to 15,016,169 for his embittered opponent, while rolling up an electoral count of 444 to 87. A huge Republican majority was returned to the House of Representatives. Tens of thousands of dry southern Democrats—“Hoovercrats”—rebelled against Al Smith, and Hoover proved to be the ﬁ rst Republican candidate in ﬁ fty-two years, except for Harding’s Tennessee victory in 1920, to carry a state that had seceded. He swept ﬁve states of the former Confederacy, as well as all of the Border States (see Map 32.2).

 President Hoover’s First Moves Prosperity in the late 1920s smiled broadly as the Hoover years began. Soaring stocks on the bull market continued to defy the laws of ﬁ nancial gravitation. But two immense groups of citizens were not getting their share of the riches ﬂowing from the national cornucopia: the unorga nized wage earners and especially the disorga nized farmers. Hoover’s administration, in line with its philosophy of promoting self-help, responded to the outcry of the wounded farmers with legislative aspirin. The Agricultural Marketing Act, passed by Congress in June 1929, was designed to help the farmers help themselves, largely through producers’ cooperatives. It set up the Federal Farm Board, with a revolving fund of half a billion dollars at its disposal. Money was lent generously to farm orga ni zations seeking to buy, sell, and store agricultural surpluses. In 1930 the Farm Board itself created both the Grain Stabilization Corporation and the Cotton Stabilization Corporation. The prime goal was to bolster sagging prices by buying up surpluses. But the two agencies were soon suffocated by an avalanche of farm produce, as wheat dropped to ﬁ fty-seven cents a bushel and cotton to ﬁve cents a pound. Farmers had meanwhile clutched at the tariff as a possible straw to help keep their heads above the waters of ﬁ nancial ruin. During the recent presidential campaign, Hoover, an amateur in politics, had been stampeded into a politically unwise pledge. He had promised to call Congress into special session to



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


 consider agricultural relief and, speciﬁcally, to bring about “limited” changes in the tariff. These hope-giving assurances no doubt won many votes for Hoover in the midwestern farm belt. The Hawley-Smoot Tariff of 1930 followed the wellworn pattern of Washington horse trading. It started out in the House as a fairly reasonable protective mea sure, designed to assist the farmers. But by the time the high-pressure lobbyists had pushed it through the Senate, it had acquired about a thousand amendments. It thus turned out to be the highest protective tariff in the nation’s peacetime history. The average duty on nonfree goods was raised from 38.5 percent, as established by the Fordney-McCumber Act of 1922, to nearly 60 percent. To angered foreigners, the Hawley-Smoot Tariff was a blow below the trade belt. It seemed like a declaration of economic warfare on the entire outside world. It reversed a promising worldwide trend toward reasonable tariffs and widened the yawning trade gaps. It plunged both America and other nations deeper into the terrible depression that had already begun. It increased international ﬁ nancial chaos and forced the United States further into the bog of economic isolationism. And economic isolationism, both at home and abroad, was playing directly into the hands of a hate-ﬁ lled German demagogue, Adolf Hitler.

Pride Goes Before a
 Fall The great crash of 1929 humbled many a high-ﬂying investor. The desperate curbside seller of this brandnew Chrysler Model 75 paid $1,550 for it just months before.

The Great Crash Ends
 the Golden Twenties When Herbert Hoover conﬁdently took the presidential oath on March 4, 1929, there were few black clouds on the economic horizon. The “long boom” seemed endless, with the painful exception of the debt-blanketed farm belt. America’s productive colossus—stimulated by the automobile, radio, movies, and other new industries—was roaring along at a dizzy speed that suggested a permanent plateau of prosperity. Few people sensed that it might smother its own ﬁ res by pouring out too much. The speculative bubble was actually near the bursting point. Prices on the stock exchange continued to spiral upward and create a fool’s paradise of paper profits, despite Hoover’s early but fruitless efforts to curb speculation through the Federal Reserve Board. A few prophets of disaster were bold enough to sound warnings but were drowned out by the mad chatter of the ticker-tape machine. A catastrophic crash came in October 1929. It was partially triggered by the British, who raised their interest rates in an effort to bring back capital lured abroad by American investments. Foreign investors and wary domestic speculators began to dump their

The Depression Descends






NEW DEAL RECOVERY















FDR'S ELECTION



 DEPRESSION

BULL MARKET



 CRASH







 “insecurities,” and an orgy of selling followed. Tension built up to the panicky Black Tuesday of October 29, 1929, when 16,410,030 shares of stocks were sold in a save-who-may scramble. Wall Street became a wailing wall as gloom and doom replaced boom, and suicides increased alarmingly. A “sick joke” of the time had hotel room clerks ask registrants, “For sleeping or jumping?” Losses, even in blue-chip securities, were unbelievable. By the end of 1929—two months after the ini-



Figure 32.3 Index of Common Stock Prices
(1926 = 100)


 tial crash—stockholders had lost $40 billion in paper values, or more than the total cost of World War I to the United States (see Figure 32.3). The stock-market collapse heralded a business depression, at home and abroad, that was the most prolonged and prostrating in American or world experience. No other industrialized nation suffered so severe a setback. By the end of 1930, more than 4 million workers in the United States were jobless; two years later the ﬁgure had about tripled. Hungry and

The Unemployed, by John Langley
 Howard, 1937 In this painting Howard soberly evokes the dispirited state of millions of unemployed Americans during the depression.



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


 despairing workers pounded pavements in search of nonexistent jobs (“We’re ﬁring, not hiring”). Where employees were not discharged, wages and salaries were often slashed. A current jingle ran, Mellon pulled the whistle, Hoover rang the bell Wall Street gave the signal And the country went to hell. The misery and gloom were incalculable, as forests of dead chimneys stood stark against the sky. Over ﬁve thousand banks collapsed in the ﬁ rst three years of the depression, carrying down with them the life savings of tens of thousands of ordinary citizens. Countless thousands of honest, hard-working people lost their homes and farms to the forecloser’s hammer. Breadlines formed, soup kitchens dispensed food, and apple sellers stood shivering on street corners trying to peddle their wares for ﬁve cents. Families felt the stress, as jobless fathers nursed their guilt and shame at not being able to provide for their households. Breadless breadwinners often blamed themselves for their plight, despite abundant evidence that the economic system, not individual initiative, had broken down. Mothers meanwhile nursed fewer babies, as hard times reached even into the nation’s bedrooms, precipitating a decade-long dearth of births. As cash registers gathered cobwebs, the song “My God, How the Money Rolls In” was replaced with “Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?”

Hooked on the
Horn of Plenty
 What caused the Great Depression? One basic explanation is overproduction by both farm and factory. Ironically, the depression of the 1930s was one of abundance, not want. It was the “great glut” or the “plague of plenty.” The nation’s ability to produce goods had clearly outrun its capacity to consume or pay for them. Too much money was going into the hands of a few wealthy people, who in turn invested it in factories and other agencies of production. Not enough was going into salaries and wages, where revitalizing purchasing power could be more quickly felt. Other maladies were at work. Overexpansion of credit through installment-plan buying overstimulated production. Paying on so-called easy terms caused many consumers to dive in beyond their depth. Normal technological unemployment, resulting from new

 The Depression spectacle of want in the shadow of surplus moved an observer to write in Current History (1932),

“


 We still pray to be given each day our daily bread. Yet there is too much bread, too much wheat and corn, meat and oil and almost every commodity required by man for his subsistence and material happiness. We are not able to purchase the abundance that modern methods of agriculture, mining and manufacture make available in such bountiful quantities. Why is mankind being asked to go hungry and cold and poverty stricken in the midst of plenty?

”


 laborsaving machines, also added its burden to the abnormal unemployment of the “threadbare thirties. This already bleak picture was further darkened by economic anemia abroad. Britain and the Continent had never fully recovered from the upheaval of World War I. Depression in America was given a further downward push by a chain-reaction ﬁnancial collapse in Europe, following the failure in 1931 of a prominent Vienna banking house. A drying up of international trade, moreover, had been hastened by the shortsighted Hawley-Smoot Tariff of 1930. European uncertainties over reparations, war debts, and defaults on loans owed to America caused tensions that reacted unfavorably on the United States. Many of these conditions had been created or worsened by Uncle Sam’s own narrow-visioned policies, but it was now too late to unscramble the omelet. As if man-made disasters were not enough, a terrible drought scorched the Mississippi Valley in 1930. Thousands of farms were sold at auction for taxes, though in some cases kind neighbors would intimidate prospective buyers, bid one cent, and return the property to its original owner. Farm tenancy or rental— a species of peonage—was spreading at an alarming rate among both whites and blacks. By 1930 the depression had become a national calamity. Through no fault of their own, a host of industrious citizens had lost every thing. They wanted to work—but there was no work. The insidious effect of all this dazed despair on the nation’s spirit was incalculable and long-lasting. America’s “uniqueness” no longer seemed so unique or its Manifest Destiny

Hoover and the Depression




“Hooverville” in Seattle, 1934
 In the early years of the depression, desperate, homeless people constructed shacks out of scavenged materials. These shantytowns sprang up in cities across the country.

 so manifest. Hitherto the people had grappled with storms, trees, stones, and other physical obstacles. But the depression was a bafﬂ ing wraith they could not grasp. Initiative and self-respect were stiﬂed, as panhandlers begged for food or “charity soup.” In extreme cases “ragged individualists” slept under “Hoover blankets” (old newspapers), fought over the contents of garbage cans, or cooked their ﬁ ndings in old oil drums in tin-and-paper shantytowns cynically named Hoovervilles. The very foundations of America’s social and political structure trembled.

Rugged Times for
Rugged Individualists
 Hoover’s exalted reputation as a wonder-worker and efﬁciency engineer crashed about as dismally as the stock market. He doubtless would have shone in the prosperity-drenched Coolidge years, when he had foreseen the abolition of poverty and poor-houses. But damming the Great Depression proved to be a task beyond his engineering talents. The perplexed president was impaled on the horns of a cruel dilemma. As a deservedly famed humanitarian, he was profoundly distressed by the widespread misery about him. Yet as a “rugged individualist,” deeply rooted in an earlier era of free enterprise, he shrank from the heresy of government handouts. Convinced

 that industry, thrift, and self-reliance were the virtues that had made America great, President Hoover feared that a government doling out doles would weaken, perhaps destroy, the national ﬁber. As the depression nightmare steadily worsened, relief by local government agencies broke down. Hoover was ﬁ nally forced to turn reluctantly from his doctrine of log-cabin individualism and accept the proposition that the welfare of the people in a nationwide catastrophe is a direct concern of the national government.

 Wall Streeter Martin Devries, observing President Herbert Hoover’s struggle to keep his footing as the tidal wave of the Great Depression washed over him, decided he was a good man stuck in the wrong place, at the wrong time:

“


 Hoover happened to be in a bad spot. The Depression came on, and there he was. If Jesus Christ had been there, he’d have had the same problem. It’s too bad for poor old Herbie that he happened to be there. This was a world-wide Depression. It wasn’t Hoover’s fault. In 1932, . . . a monkey could have been elected against him, no question about it.

”




Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


Home Relief Station, by
Louis Ribak, 1935–1936
 Destitute and despairing, millions of hard-working Americans like these had to endure the degradation and humiliation of going on relief as the pall of depression descended over the land.

 The president at last worked out a compromise between the old hands-off philosophy and the “souldestroying” direct dole then being used in Eng land. He would assist the hard-pressed railroads, banks, and rural credit corporations, in the hope that if ﬁ nancial health were restored at the top of the economic pyramid, unemployment would be relieved at the bottom on a trickle-down basis. Partisan critics sneered at the “Great Humanitar-

 Herbert Hoover (1874–1964) spoke approvingly in a campaign speech in 1928 of “the American system of Rugged Individualism.” In 1930 he referred to Cleveland’s 1887 veto of a bill to appropriate seed grain for the drought-stricken farmers of Texas:

“


 I do not believe that the power and duty of the General Government ought to be extended to the relief of individual suffering. . . . The lesson should be constantly enforced that though the people support the Government the Government should not support the people.

”


 ian”—he who had fed the faraway Belgians but would not use federal funds to feed needy Americans. Hostile commentators remarked that he was willing to lend government money to the big bankers, who allegedly had plunged the country into the mess. He would likewise lend money to agricultural orga ni zations to feed pigs—but not people. Pigs, the cynics of the time noted, had no character to undermine. Much of this criticism was unfair. Although continued suffering seemed to mock the effectiveness of Hoover’s mea sures, his efforts probably prevented a more serious collapse than did occur. And his expenditures for relief, revolutionary for that day, paved the path for the enormous federal outlays of his New Deal successor, Franklin Roosevelt. Hoover proved that the old bootstrap-pulling techniques would no longer work in a crisis of this magnitude, especially when people lacked boots.

Hoover Battles the
Great Depression
 President Hoover, in line with his “trickle-down” philosophy, at last recommended that Congress vote im-

Lampooning Hoover, 1932
 he pages of The American Pageant are ﬁ lled with political cartoons that provide pungent commentary on historical events. With one image rather than many words, a cartoonist can convey a point of view much the way an editorial writer does. This cartoon appeared in the Washington Daily News on July 25, 1932, three and a half months before Republican president Hoover lost the presidential election to his Democratic challenger, Franklin D. Roosevelt. The cartoonist foretells Hoover’s defeat in November and departure from the White House the following March (not January, as at present) and expresses his support for the Home Loan Bank Bill. With this proposal Hoover sought to come to the aid of home mortgage lenders in order to forestall them from foreclosing on homeowners. The cartoonist jokes that Hoover supported this bill because he identiﬁed with homeowners about to lose their homes, but he also cleverly insinuates that Hoover’s bank-

T


 ing reform was motivated by electoral opportunism. Surely Hoover sought to win public support in return for his new banking program as he battled for reelection, but the Home Loan Bank Bill also reﬂected Hoover’s growing recognition that the federal government had to take direct action to remedy ﬂaws that had precipitated the crisis of the Great Depression. As Hoover later recorded in his memoirs, “All this seems dull economics, but the poignant American drama revolving around the loss of the old homestead had a million repetitions straight from life, not because of the designing villain but because of a fault in our ﬁ nancial system.” How does the cartoonist use caricature to make his point? What accounts for the political cartoon’s special power? Are there limitations to this genre? Find another cartoon in this book and subject it to similar analysis.





Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


 mense sums for useful public works. Though at heart an antispender, he secured from Congress appropriations totaling $2.25 billion for such projects. Most imposing of the public enterprises was the gigantic Hoover Dam on the Colorado River. Voted by Congress in the days of Coolidge, it was begun in 1930 under Hoover and completed in 1936 under Roosevelt. It succeeded in creating a huge man-made lake for purposes of irrigation, ﬂood control, and electric power. But Hoover sternly fought all schemes that he regarded as “socialistic.” Conspicuous among them was the Muscle Shoals Bill, designed to dam the Tennessee River and ultimately embraced by Franklin Roosevelt’s Tennessee Valley Authority. Hoover emphatically vetoed this mea sure, primarily because he opposed the government’s selling electricity in competition with its own citizens in private companies. Early in 1932 Congress, responding to Hoover’s belated appeal, established the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC). With an initial working capital of half a billion dollars, this agency became a government lending bank. It was designed to provide indirect relief by assisting insurance companies, banks, agricultural orga ni zations, railroads, and even hard-pressed state and local governments. But to preserve individualism and character, there would be no loans to individuals from this “billion-dollar soup kitchen.” “Pump-priming” loans by the RFC were no doubt of widespread beneﬁt, though the orga ni zation was established many months too late for maximum usefulness. Projects that it supported were largely selfliquidating, and the government as a banker actually proﬁted to the tune of many millions of dollars. Giant corporations so obviously beneﬁted from this assistance that the RFC was dubbed—rather unfairly—“the millionaires’ dole.” The irony is that the thrifty and individualistic Hoover had sponsored the project, though with initial reluctance. It actually had a strong New Dealish ﬂavor. Hoover’s administration also provided some indirect beneﬁts for labor. After stormy debate, Congress passed the Norris–La Guardia Anti-Injunction Act in 1932, and Hoover signed it. The mea sure outlawed “yellow-dog” (antiunion) contracts and forbade the federal courts to issue injunctions to restrain strikes, boycotts, and peaceful picketing. The truth is that Herbert Hoover, despite criticism of his “heartlessness,” did inaugurate a signiﬁcant new policy. In previous panics the masses had been forced to “sweat it out.” Slow though Hoover was to

 abandon this nineteenth-century bias, by the end of his term he had started down the road toward government assistance for needy citizens—a road that Franklin Roosevelt would travel much farther. Hoover’s woes were increased by a hostile Congress. At critical times during his ﬁ rst two years, the Republican majority proved highly uncooperative. Friction worsened during his last two years. A depressioncursed electorate, rebelling in the congressional elections of 1930, so reduced the Republican majority that Democrats controlled the new House and almost controlled the Senate. Insurgent Republicans could—and did—combine with opposition Democrats to harass Hoover. Some of the president’s troubles were deliberately manufactured by Congress, which, in his words, “played politics with human misery.”

Routing the Bonus Army
 in Washington Many veterans of World War I were numbered among the hard-hit victims of the depression. Industry had secured a “bonus”—though a dubious one—in the Hawley-Smoot Tariff. So the thoughts of the former soldiers naturally turned to what the government owed them for their ser vices in 1917–1918, when they had “saved” democracy. A drive developed for the premature payment of the deferred bonus voted by Congress in 1924 and payable in 1945. Thousands of impoverished veterans, both of war and of unemployment, were now prepared to move on Washington, there to demand of Congress the immediate payment of their entire bonus. The “Bonus Expeditionary Force” (BEF), which mustered about twenty thousand souls, converged on the capital in the summer of 1932. These supplicants promptly set up unsanitary public camps and erected shacks on vacant lots—a gigantic “Hooverville.” They thus created a menace to the public health, while attempting to intimidate Congress by their presence in force. After the pending bonus bill had failed in Congress by a narrow margin, Hoover arranged to pay the return fare of about six thousand bonus marchers. The rest refused to decamp, though ordered to do so. Following riots that cost two lives, Hoover responded to the demands of the Washington authorities by ordering the army to evacuate the unwanted guests. Although Hoover charged that the Bonus Army was led by riffraff and reds, in fact only a sprinkling of

Bonus Army on the March




 The Bonus Army in Washington, D.C., 1932 World War I veterans from Muncie, Indiana, were among many contingents to set up camp in the capital during the summer of 1932, determined to remain there until they received full payment of their promised bonuses.

 them were former convicts and communist agitators. The eviction was carried out by General Douglas MacArthur with bayonets and tear gas, and with far more severity than Hoover had planned. A few of the former soldiers were injured as the torch was put to their pathetic shanties in the inglorious “Battle of Anacostia Flats.” An eleven-month-old “bonus baby” allegedly died from exposure to tear gas. This brutal episode brought down additional abuse on the once-popular Hoover, who by now was the most loudly booed man in the country. The Democrats, not content with Hoover’s vulnerable record, employed professional “smear” artists to drive him from ofﬁce. Cynics sneered that the “Great Engineer” had in a few months “ditched, drained, and damned the country.” The existing panic was unfairly branded “the Hoover depression.” In truth, Hoover had been oversold as a wizard, and the public grumbled when his magician’s wand failed to produce rabbits. The time was ripening for the Democratic party—and Franklin D. Roosevelt— to cash in on Hoover’s calamities.

 Japa nese Militarists Attack China The Great Depression, which brewed enough distress at home, added immensely to difﬁculties abroad. Militaristic Japan stole the Far Eastern spotlight. In September 1931 the Japa nese imperialists, noting that the Western world was badly mired in a depression, lunged into Manchuria. Alleging provocation, they rapidly overran the coveted Chinese province and proceeded to bolt shut the Open Door in the conquered area. America had a strong sentimental stake in China but few signiﬁcant economic interests. In fact, American commercial ties with Japan far outweighed those with China. Yet most Americans were stunned by this act of naked aggression. It ﬂagrantly violated the League of Nations covenant, as well as various other international agreements solemnly signed by Tokyo, not to mention the American sense of fair play. Indignant Americans, though by no means a majority, urged



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


Japanese Aggression in
Manchuria This American
 cartoon lambastes Japan for disregarding international treaty agreements when it seized Manchuria in 1931. The next year the Japanese would set up the puppet state of Manchukuo.

 strong mea sures ranging from boycotts to blockades. Possibly a tight blockade by the League, backed by the United States, would have brought Japan sharply to book. But the League was handicapped in taking twoﬁsted action by the nonmembership of the United States. Washington ﬂatly rebuffed initial attempts in 1931 to secure American cooperation in applying economic pressure on Japan. Washington and Secretary

 Hoover later wrote of his differences with Secretary of State Stimson over economic boycotts,

“


 I was soon to realize that my able Secretary was at times more of a warrior than a diplomat. To him the phrase ‘economic sanctions’ was the magic wand of force by which all peace could be summoned from the vasty deep. . . . Ever since Versailles I had held that ‘economic sanctions’ meant war when applied to any large nation.

”


 of State Henry L. Stimson in the end decided to ﬁ re only paper bullets at the Japa nese aggressors. The socalled Stimson doctrine, proclaimed in 1932, declared that the United States would not recognize any territorial acquisitions achieved by force. Righteous indignation—or a preach-and-run policy—would substitute for solid initiatives. This verbal slap on the wrist from America did not deter the march of the Japa nese militarists. Smarting under a Chinese boycott, they bombed Shanghai in 1932, with shocking losses to civilians. Outraged Americans launched informal boycotts of Japa nese goods, chieﬂy dime-store knickknacks. But there was no real sentiment for armed intervention among a depressionridden people, who remained strongly isolationist during the 1930s. In a broad sense, collective security died and World War II was born in 1931 on the windswept plains of Manchuria. The League members had the economic and naval power to halt Japan but lacked the courage to act. One reason—though not the only one—was that they could not count on America’s support. Even so, the Republic came closer to stepping into the chill waters of internationalism than American prophets would have dared to predict in the early 1920s.

 Relations with Southern Neighbors

Hoover Pioneers the
Good Neighbor Policy
 Hoover’s arrival in the White House brought a more hopeful turn to relations with America’s southern neighbors. The new president was deeply interested in the often-troubled nations below the Rio Grande. Shortly after his election in 1928, he had undertaken a goodwill tour of Latin America—on a U.S. battleship. World depression softened an age-old aggressive attitude in the United States toward weak Latin neighbors. Following the stock-market collapse of 1929, Americans had less money to invest abroad. As millions of dollars’ worth of investments in Latin America went sour, many Yankees felt as though they were more preyed upon than preying. So-called economic



 imperialism became much less popular in the United States than it had been in the golden twenties. As an advocate of international goodwill, Hoover strove to abandon the interventionist twist given to the Monroe Doctrine by Theodore Roosevelt. In 1932 he negotiated a new treaty with the French-speaking Republic of Haiti, and this pact, later supplanted by an executive agreement, provided for the complete withdrawal of American platoons by 1934. Further pleasing omens came early in 1933, when the last marine “leathernecks” sailed away from Nicaragua after an almost continuous stay of some twenty years. Herbert Hoover, the engineer in politics, thus happily engineered the foundation stones of the Good Neighbor policy. Upon them rose an imposing ediﬁce in the days of his successor, Franklin Roosevelt.

 CHRONOLOGY

 American Legion founded Chicago race riot



Esch-Cummins Transportation Act
Merchant Marine Act




 Veterans Bureau created Capper-Volstead Act



 Five-Power Naval Treaty signed Four-Power and Nine-Power Treaties on the Far East Fordney-McCumber Tariff Law



 Adkins v. Children’s Hospital Teapot Dome scandal Harding dies; Coolidge assumes presidency



 Adjusted Compensation Act for veterans Dawes Plan for international ﬁ nance U.S. troops leave Dominican Republic Coolidge wins three-way presidential election



 U.S. troops occupy Nicaragua



Kellogg-Briand Pact
 Hoover defeats Smith for presidency Hoover makes goodwill tour of Latin America



 Agricultural Marketing Act sets up Federal Farm Board Stock-market crash



Hawley-Smoot Tariff




 Japa nese invade Manchuria



 Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) established Norris–La Guardia Anti-Injunction Act “Bonus Army” dispersed from Washington, D.C.



Chapter 32 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 1920–1932


KEY TERMS
Adkins v. Children’s Hospital (799) Nine-Power Treaty (802) Kellogg-Briand Pact (803) Fordney-McCumber Tariff Law (803) Teapot Dome scandal (803) McNary-Haugen Bill (806) Dawes Plan (809) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Agricultural Marketing Act (811) Hawley-Smoot Tariff (812) Black Tuesday (813) Hoovervilles (815) Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) (818) Norris–La Guardia AntiInjunction Act (818) Bonus Army (818) 
Warren G. Harding
Albert B. Fall
Calvin Coolidge
John W. Davis


Robert M. (“Fighting
Bob”) La Follette
Albert E. Smith


To Learn More
Michael A. Bernstein, The Great Depression: Delayed
Recovery and Economic Change in America, 1929–1939
(1987)
John D. Hicks, Republican Ascendancy, 1921–1933 (1960)
 Robert McElvaine, The Great Depression: America, 1929– 1941 (rev. ed., 1993) Burl Noggle, Into the Twenties: The United States from Armistice to Normalcy (1974) Emily Rosenberg, Financial Missionaries to the World: The Politics and Culture of Dollar Diplomacy, 1900–1930 (1999) Peter Temin, Did Monetary Factors Cause the Great Depression? (1976)

Joan Hoff Wilson, American Business and Foreign Policy,
1920–1933 (1971)
———, Herbert Hoover, Forgotten Progressive (1975)
Robert H. Zieger, American Workers, American Unions,
1920–1985 (1986)


 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Great Depression
 and the New Deal




1933–1939
 The country needs and . . . demands bold, persistent experimentation. It is common sense to take a method and try it. If it fails, admit it frankly and try another. But above all, try something. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT, CAMPAIGN SPEECH, 1932

V


 oters were in an ugly mood as the presidential campaign of 1932 neared. Countless factory chimneys remained ominously cold, while more than 11 million unemployed workers and their families sank ever deeper into the pit of poverty. Herbert Hoover may have won the 1928 election by promising “a chicken in every pot,” but three years later that chicken seemed to have laid a discharge slip in every pay envelope. Hoover, sick at heart, was renominated by the Republican convention in Chicago without great enthusiasm. The platform indulged in extravagant praise of Republican antidepression policies, while halfheartedly promising to repeal national prohibition and return control of liquor to the states. The rising star of the Democratic ﬁ rmament was Governor Franklin Delano Roosevelt of New York, a ﬁ fth cousin of Theodore Roosevelt. Like the Rough Rider, he had been born to a wealthy New York family, had graduated from Harvard, had been elected as a

 kid-gloved politician to the New York legislature, had served as governor of the Empire State, had been nominated for the vice presidency (though not elected), and had served capably as assistant secretary of the navy. Although both men were master politicians, adept with the colorful phrase, TR was pugnacious and confrontational, while FDR was suave and conciliatory—qualities that appealed strongly to a people traumatized by one of the greatest crises in American history.

FDR:
Politician in a Wheelchair Infantile paralysis, while putting steel braces on Franklin Roosevelt’s legs, put additional steel into his soul. Until 1921, when the dread disease struck, young Roosevelt— tall (six feet two inches), athletic, and handsome— 
 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


 impressed observers as charming and witty, yet at times as a superﬁcial and arrogant “lightweight.” But suffering humbled him to the level of common clay. In courageously ﬁghting his way back from complete helplessness to a hobbling mobility, he schooled himself in patience, tolerance, compassion, and strength of will. He once remarked that after trying for two years to wiggle one big toe, all else seemed easy. Another of Roosevelt’s great personal and political assets was his wife, Eleanor. The niece of Theodore Roosevelt, she was Franklin Roosevelt’s distant cousin as well as his spouse. Tall, ungainly, and toothy, she overcame the misery of an unhappy childhood and emerged as a champion of the dispossessed—and, ultimately, as the “conscience of the New Deal.” FDR’s po-

Eleanor Roosevelt (1884–1962) Roosevelt was
 America’s most active First Lady and commanded enormous popularity and inﬂuence during FDR’s presidency. Here she emerges, miner’s cap in hand, from an Ohio coal mine.

 litical career was as much hers as it was his own. She traveled countless miles with him or on his behalf in all his campaigns, beginning with his run for the New York legislature before World War I, later considering herself “his legs.” But Mrs. Roosevelt also marched to her own drummer. As a young woman she had worked in a New York settlement house, and later on she joined the Women’s Trade Union League (see p. 710) and the League of Women Voters. When she and Franklin moved into the White House, she brought an unprecedented number of women activists with her to Washington. This network of reformers helped make her the most active First Lady in history. Through her lobbying of her husband, her speeches, and her syndicated newspaper column, Eleanor Roosevelt powerfully inﬂuenced the policies of the national government. Always she battled for the impoverished and the oppressed. At one meeting in Birmingham, Alabama, she confounded local authorities and ﬂouted the segregation statutes by deliberately straddling the aisle separating the black and white seating sections. Sadly, her personal relationship with her husband was often rocky, due to his inﬁdelities. Condemned by conser vatives and loved by liberals, she was one of the most controversial—and consequential—public ﬁgures of the twentieth century. Franklin Roosevelt’s political appeal was amazing. His commanding presence and his golden speaking voice, despite a sophisticated accent, combined to make him the premier American orator of his generation. He could turn on his charm in private conversations as one would turn on a faucet. As a popular depression governor of New York, he had sponsored heavy state spending to relieve human suffering. Though favoring frugality, he believed that money, rather than humanity, was expendable. He revealed a deep concern for the plight of the “forgotten man”—a phrase he used in a 1932 speech—although he was assailed by the rich as a “traitor to his class.” Exuberant Democrats met in Chicago in June 1932 and speedily nominated Roosevelt. Fellow New Yorker Al Smith felt entitled to a second chance, and a beautiful friendship wilted when he was elbowed aside for Roosevelt. The Democratic platform promised not only a balanced budget but sweeping social and economic reforms. Roosevelt ﬂew daringly through stormy weather to Chicago, where he smashed precedent by accepting the nomination in person. He electriﬁed the delegates and the public with these words: “I pledge you, I pledge myself to a new deal for the American people.”

The Appeal of Roosevelt


Presidential Hopefuls of 1932
 In the campaign that followed, Roosevelt seized the offensive with a slashing attack on the Republican Old Dealers. He was especially eager to prove that he was not an invalid (“Roosevelt Is Robust”) and to display his magniﬁcent torso and radiant personality to as many voters as possible. Roosevelt consistently preached a New Deal for the “forgotten man,” but he was annoyingly vague and somewhat contradictory. Many of his speeches were “ghostwritten” by the “Brains Trust” (popularly the Brain Trust), a small group of reform-minded intellectuals. They were predominantly youngish college professors who, as a kind of kitchen cabinet, later authored much of the New Deal legislation. Roosevelt rashly promised a balanced budget and berated heavy Hooverian deﬁcits, amid cries of “Throw the Spenders Out!” and “Out of the Red with Roosevelt.” All of this was to make ironic reading in later months. The high spirits of the Democrats found expression in the catchy air “Happy Days Are Here Again.” This theme song ﬁt FDR’s indestructible smile, his jauntily angled cigarette holder, his breezy optimism, and his promises to do something, even at the risk of bold experimentation. Grim-faced Herbert Hoover remained in the White House, conscientiously battling the depression through short lunches and long hours. Out on the ﬁ ring line, his supporters halfheartedly assured half-listening voters, “The Worst Is Past,” “It Might Have Been Worse,” and “Prosperity Is Just Around the Corner.” Hoover never ceased to insist that the uncertainty and fear produced by Roosevelt’s impending victory plunged the nation deeper into the depression.



 With the campaign going badly for the Republicans, a weary and despondent Hoover was persuaded to take to the stump. He stoutly reafﬁrmed his faith in American free enterprise and individual initiative, and gloomily predicted that if the Hawley-Smoot Tariff was repealed, grass would grow “in the streets of a hundred cities.” Such down-at-the-mouthism contrasted sharply with Roosevelt’s tooth-ﬂashing optimism and sparkling promises.

 In his successful campaign for the governorship of New York in 1928, Franklin Roosevelt (1882–1945) had played down alleged Democratic “socialism”:

“


 We often hear it said that government operation of anything under the sun is socialistic. If that is so, our postal service is socialistic, so is the parcel post which has largely taken the place of the old express companies; so are the public highways which took the place of the toll roads.

”


 The Vanquished and the Victor A dour Hoover and an ebullient Roosevelt ride to the inauguration ceremonies on March 4, 1933. This magazine cover was never published, presumably because of the editors’ sensitivity about the attempted assassination of Roosevelt when he was riding in an open car in Florida on February 15, 1933, less than three weeks earlier. The attempt on Roosevelt’s life ended in the death of Chicago mayor Anton J. Cermak.



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


 Hoover’s Humiliation in 1932 Hoover had been swept into ofﬁce on the rising tide of prosperity; he was swept out of ofﬁce by the receding tide of depression. The ﬂood of votes totaled 22,809,638 for Roosevelt and 15,758,901 for Hoover; the electoral count stood at 472 to 59. In all, the loser carried only six rock-ribbed Republican states. One striking feature of the election was the beginning of a distinct shift of blacks, traditionally grateful to the Republican party of Lincoln, over to the Roosevelt camp. As the “last hired and ﬁ rst ﬁ red,” black Americans had been among the worst sufferers from the depression. Beginning with the election of 1932, they became, notably in the great urban centers of the North, a vital element in the Democratic party. Hard times unquestionably ruined the Republicans, for the electoral upheaval in 1932 was as much anti-Hoover as it was pro-Roosevelt. Democrats had only to harness the national grudge and let it pull them to victory. An overwhelming majority of Democrats appear to have voiced a demand for change: a new deal rather than the New Deal, for the latter was only a gleam in the eyes of its sponsors. Any upstanding Democratic candidate probably could have won. The preinauguration lame duck period now ground slowly to an end. Hoover, though defeated and repudiated, continued to be president for four long months, until March 4, 1933. But he was helpless to embark upon any long-range policies without the cooperation of Roosevelt—and the victorious president-elect proved rather uncooperative. Hoover at length succeeded in arranging two meetings with him to discuss the wardebt muddle. But Roosevelt, who airily remarked to the press, “It’s not my baby,” fought shy of assuming responsibility without authority. As Hoover privately confessed, he was trying to bind his successor to an anti-inﬂationary policy that would have made impossible many of the later New Deal experiments. But in politics the winner, not the loser, calls the tune. With Washington deadlocked, the vast and vaunted American economic machine clanked to a virtual halt. One worker in four tramped the streets, feet weary and hands idle. Banks were locking their doors all over the nation, as people ner vously stuffed paper money under their mattresses. Hooverites, then and later, accused Roosevelt of deliberately permitting the depression to worsen so that he could emerge the more spectacularly as a savior.

 FDR and the Three R’s: Relief, Recovery, Reform Great crises often call forth gifted leaders, and the hand of destiny tapped Roosevelt on the shoulder. On a dreary Inauguration Day, March 4, 1933, his vibrant voice, broadcast nationally from a bulletproof stand, provided the American people with inspirational new hope. He denounced the “money changers” who had brought on the calamity and declared that the government must wage war on the Great Depression as it would wage war on an armed foe. His clarion note was “Let me assert my ﬁ rm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself.” Roosevelt moved decisively. Now that he had full responsibility, he boldly declared a nationwide banking holiday, March 6–10, as a prelude to opening the banks on a sounder basis. He then summoned the over-

 Unemployed and Frustrated Democratic candidate Franklin Roosevelt offered hope, if few concrete plans, to the millions struggling to cope with the Great Depression.

Roosevelt Ousts Hoover


 whelmingly Democratic Congress into special session to cope with the national emergency. For the so-called Hundred Days (March 9–June 16, 1933), members hastily cranked out an unprecedented basketful of remedial legislation (see Table 33.1). Some of it derived from earlier progressivism, but these new mea sures mostly sought to deal with a desperate emergency.



 Roosevelt’s New Deal programs aimed at three R’s—relief, recovery, and reform. Short-range goals were relief and immediate recovery, especially in the ﬁ rst two years. Long-range goals were permanent recovery and reform of current abuses, particularly those that had produced the boom-or-bust catastrophe. The three-R objectives often overlapped and got in one

Table 33.1 Principal New Deal Acts During the Hundred Days Congress, 1933*
 (items in parentheses indicate secondary purposes) Recovery

Relief


Reform


(Beer Act)


(Beer Act)


Beer and Wine Revenue Act,
March 22, 1933


 (CCC)

Unemployment Relief Act,
 March 31, 1933, creates Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC)

 FDR closes banks, March 6, 1933 Emergency Banking Relief Act, March 9, 1933

 FDR orders gold surrender, April 5, 1933 FDR abandons gold standard, April 19, 1933 (FERA)

Federal Emergency Relief Act,
 May 12, 1933, creates Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA)

 (AAA)

 Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA), May 12, 1933

 (TVA)

 (TVA)

Tennessee Valley Authority Act
 (TVA), May 18, 1933 Federal Securities Act, May 27, 1933

 Gold-payment clause repealed, June 5, 1933 (HOLC)

 Home Owners’ Reﬁ nancing Act, June 13, 1933, creates Home Owners’ Loan Corporation (HOLC)

National Industrial Recovery Act,
 June 16, 1933, creates National Recovery Administration (NRA), Public Works Administration (PWA)

 (NRA, PWA)

 (NRA)

(Glass-Steagall Act)


(Glass-Steagall Act)


Glass-Steagall Banking Reform Act,
 June 16, 1933, creates Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation

 *For later New Deal mea sures, see p. 831.



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


 another’s way. But amid all the topsy-turvy haste, the gigantic New Deal program lurched forward. Firmly ensconced in the driver’s seat, President Roosevelt cracked the whip. A green Congress so fully shared the panicky feeling of the country that it was ready to rubber-stamp bills drafted by White House advisers—mea sures that Roosevelt called “must legislation.” More than that, Congress gave the president extraordinary blank-check powers: some of the laws it passed expressly delegated legislative authority to the chief executive. One senator complained that if FDR asked Congress “to commit suicide tomorrow, they’d do it.” Roosevelt was delighted to exert executive leadership, and Congress responded to it, although he did not always know precisely where he was going. He was inclined to do things by intuition—off the cuff. He was like the quarterback, as he put it, whose next play depends on the outcome of the previous play. So desperate was the mood of an action-starved public that any movement, even in the wrong direction, seemed better than no movement at all.

 One Chinese observer of America, No-Yong Park (1899–1976), born in Manchuria and educated in the United States, remained optimistic about America even in the depths of the Great Depression. He wrote in An Oriental View of American Civilization (1934),

“


 Of all the peoples of the world, Americans, to my mind, are the most progressive. They are the ones who live in the future tense. Their mind and soul are always bent for the future. They never move backward and always march forward.

”


 The frantic Hundred Days Congress passed many essentials of the New Deal “three R’s,” though important long-range mea sures were added in later sessions. These reforms owed much to the legacy of the pre– World War I progressive movement. Many of them were long overdue, sidetracked by the war in Europe and the

 The Champ: FDR Chatting with Reporters Roosevelt mastered the press as few presidents before or since have been able to do. He was also ingenious in ﬁnding opportunities to converse with reporters in situations where he could conceal his physical limitations.



The Hundred Days of Congress


 Old Guard reaction of the 1920s. In an explosive burst of pent-up energy, New Dealers raided ﬁ le cabinets full of old pamphlets on German social insurance, English housing and garden cities, Danish agricultural recovery, and American World War I collectivization. In time they embraced progressive ideas such as unemployment insurance, old-age insurance, minimumwage regulations, the conservation and development of natural resources, and restrictions on child labor. They also invented some new schemes, such as the Tennessee Valley Authority (see p. 839). Soon depressionweary Europeans would come to the United States to marvel at the exciting din of reform activity under way. No longer would America look as backward in the realm of social welfare as it once had.









Roosevelt Manages the Money
 Banking chaos cried aloud for immediate action. Congress pulled itself together and in an incredible eight hours had the Emergency Banking Relief Act of 1933 ready for Roosevelt’s busy pen. The new law invested the president with the power to regulate banking transactions and foreign exchange and to reopen solvent banks. Roosevelt, the master showman, next turned to the radio to deliver the ﬁ rst of his thirty famous “ﬁ reside chats.” As some 35 million people hung on his soothing words, he gave assurances that it was now safer to keep money in a reopened bank than “under the mattress.” Conﬁdence returned with a gush, and the banks began to unlock their doors. The Hundred Days, or Emergency, Congress buttressed public reliance on the banking system by enacting the memorable Glass-Steagall Banking Reform Act. This mea sure provided for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which insured individual deposits up to $5,000 (later raised). Thus ended the disgraceful epidemic of bank failures, which dated back to the “wildcat” days of Andrew Jackson (see Figure 33.1).* Roosevelt moved swiftly elsewhere on the ﬁ nancial front, seeking to protect the melting gold reserves and to prevent panicky hoarding. He ordered all private holdings of gold to be surrendered to the Treasury in exchange for paper currency and then took the nation off the gold standard. The Emergency Congress responded to his recommendation by canceling the

 *When FDR was inaugurated in 1933, not a single Canadian bank had failed.



















Figure 33.1 Bank Failures Before and After the
Glass-Steagall Banking Reform Act of 1933


 gold-payment clause in all contracts and authorizing repayment in paper money. A “managed currency” was well on its way. The goal of Roosevelt’s “managed currency” was inﬂation, which he believed would relieve debtors’ burdens and stimulate new production. Roosevelt’s principal instrument for achieving inﬂation was gold buying. He instructed the Treasury to purchase gold at increasing prices, ratcheting the dollar price of gold up from $21 an ounce in 1933 to $35 an ounce in early 1934, a price that held for nearly four decades. This policy did increase the amount of dollars in circulation, as holders of gold cashed it in at the elevated prices. But this inﬂationary result also provoked the wrath of “sound-money” critics, who gagged on the “baloney dollar.” The gold-buying scheme came to an end in February 1934, when FDR returned the nation to a limited gold standard for purposes of international trade only. Thereafter (until 1971—see p. 1010), the United States pledged itself to pay foreign bills, if requested, in gold at the rate of one ounce of gold for every $35 due. But domestic circulation of gold continued to be prohibited, and gold coins became collectors’ items.



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


Creating Jobs for the Jobless
 Overwhelming unemployment, even more than banking, clamored for prompt remedial action. One out of every four workers was jobless when FDR took his inaugural oath—the highest level of unemployment in the nation’s history, before or since. Roosevelt had no hesitancy about using federal money to assist the unemployed and at the same time to “prime the pump” of industrial recovery. (A farmer has to pour a little water into a dry pump—that is, “prime it”—to start the ﬂow.) The Hundred Days Congress responded to Roosevelt’s spurs when it created the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), which proved to be perhaps the most popular of all the New Deal “alphabetical agencies.” This law provided employment in fresh-air government camps for about 3 million uniformed young men, many of whom might otherwise have been driven by desperation into criminal habits. Their work was useful—including reforestation, ﬁ reﬁghting (forty-seven lost their lives), ﬂood control, and swamp drainage. The recruits were required to help their parents by sending home most of their pay. Both human resources and natural resources were thus conserved, though there were minor complaints of “militarizing” the nation’s youth. Critics charged that CCC “soldiers” would later claim pensions for exposure to poison ivy. The ﬁ rst major effort of the new Congress to grapple with the millions of adult unemployed was the Federal Emergency Relief Act. Its chief aim was immediate relief rather than long-range recovery. The resulting Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) was handed over to zealous Harry L. Hopkins, a painfully thin, shabbily dressed, chain-smoking New York

 One desperate man wrote to a newspaper in 1932,

“


 I am forty-eight; married twenty-one years; four children, three in school. For the last eight years I was employed as a Pullman conductor. Since September, 1930, they have given me seven months part-time work. Today I am an object of charity. . . . My small, weak, and frail wife and two small children are suffering and I have come to that terrible place where I could easily resort to violence in my desperation.

”


CCC
Workers in Alaska, 1939 These Tlingit carvers in Alaska’s southeastern panhandle were part of a CCC project to restore totem poles. Here they stand with a pole carved in the likeness of Abraham Lincoln. 
 social worker who had earlier won Roosevelt’s friendship and who became one of his most inﬂuential advisers. Hopkins’s agency in all granted about $3 billion to the states for direct dole payments or preferably for wages on work projects.* Immediate relief was also given to two large and hard-pressed special groups by the Hundred Days Congress. One section of the Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) made available many millions of dollars to help farmers meet their mortgages. Another law created the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation (HOLC). Designed to reﬁ nance mortgages on nonfarm homes, it ultimately assisted about a million badly pinched

 *A boast attributed to Hopkins in 1938 was “We will spend and spend, tax and tax, and elect and elect.”

Rooseveltian Reforms


 households. The agency not only bailed out mortgageholding banks, it also bolted the political loyalties of relieved middle-class homeowners securely to the Democratic party. Harassed by the continuing plague of unemploy-



 ment, FDR himself established the Civil Works Administration (CWA) late in 1933 (see Table 33.2). As a branch of the FERA, it also fell under the direction of Hopkins. Designed to provide purely temporary jobs during the cruel winter emergency, it served a useful purpose.

Table 33.2 Later Major New Deal Measures, 1933–1939
 (items in parentheses indicate secondary purposes) Recovery

Relief


 (CWA)

 FDR establishes Civil Works Administration (CWA), November 9, 1933

Gold Reserve Act, January 30, 1934,
 authorizes FDR’s devaluation, January 31, 1934

(Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act)


Reform


Securities and Exchange
 Commission (SEC) authorized by Congress, June 6, 1934 (Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act)

Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act,
 June 12, 1934 (see pp. 855–856) Indian Reorga ni zation Act, June 18,

 (FHA)

National Housing Act,
 June 28, 1934, authorizes Federal Housing Administration (FHA)

(Frazier-Lemke Act)


Frazier-Lemke Farm Bankruptcy
Act, June 28, 1934


(Resettlement Administration)


 FDR creates Resettlement Administration, April 30, 1935

 (WPA)

 FDR creates Works Progress Administration (WPA), May 6, 1935, under act of April 8, 1935

(Wagner Act)


(Wagner Act)


 (FHA)

Wagner Act (National Labor
Relations Act), July 5, 1935
Social Security Act, August 14, 1935
Public Utility Holding Company Act,
August 26, 1935


(Soil Conservation Act)


Soil Conservation and
Domestic Allotment Act,
February 29, 1936


 (USHA)

 (USHA)

 (Second AAA)

Second Agricultural Adjustment Act,
February 16, 1938


(Fair Labor Standards Act)


(Fair Labor Standards Act)


United States Housing Authority
 (USHA) established by Congress, September 1, 1937

Fair Labor Standards Act (Wages and
Hours Bill), June 25, 1938
 Reorga ni zation Act, April 3, 1939 Hatch Act, August 2, 1939



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


 Tens of thousands of jobless were employed at leaf raking and other make-work tasks, which were dubbed “boondoggling.” As this kind of labor put a premium on shovel-leaning slow motion, the scheme was widely criticized. “The only thing we have to fear,” scoffers remarked, “is work itself.”

A
Day for Every Demagogue  Direct relief from Washington to needy families helped pull the nation through the ghastly winter of 1933– 1934. But the disheartening persistence of unemployment and suffering demonstrated that emergency relief mea sures had to be not only continued but supplemented. One danger signal was the appearance of various demagogues, notably a magnetic “microphone messiah,” Father Charles Coughlin, a Catholic priest in Michigan who began broadcasting in 1930 and whose slogan was “Social Justice.” His anti–New Deal harangues to some 40 million radio fans ﬁ nally became so anti-Semitic, fascistic, and demagogic that he was silenced in 1942 by his ecclesiastical superiors. Also notorious among the new brood of agitators were those who capitalized on popular discontent to make pie-in-the-sky promises. Most conspicuous of

 these individuals were Dr. Francis E. Townsend, a retired Cal i fornia physician who promised everyone over sixty $200 a month, and Senator Huey P. (“Kingﬁsh”) Long of Louisiana, who was said to have more brass than a government mule. He used his abundant rabble-rousing talents to publicize his “Share Our Wealth” program, which promised to make “Every Man a King.” Every family was to receive $5,000, supposedly at the expense of the prosperous. H. L. Mencken called Long’s chief lieutenant, former clergyman Gerald L. K. Smith, “the gutsiest, goriest, loudest and lustiest, the deadliest and damndest orator ever heard on this or any other earth, the champion boob-bumper of all time.” Fear of Long’s becoming a fascist dictator ended when he was shot by an assassin in the Louisiana state capitol in 1935. Father Coughlin and Huey Long frightened many Americans because they raised troubling questions about the link between fascism and economic crisis. Danger seemed to be lurking ominously in many corners of the world. Authoritarian rule was strengthening in Japan, while Adolf Hitler was acquiring absolute

 In 1935 Father Charles Coughlin (1891–1979) singlehandedly defeated President Roosevelt’s effort to win Senate ratiﬁcation of a treaty providing for American membership in the World Court, a judicial body of limited authority established by the League of Nations. What FDR saw as a symbolic embrace of international responsibility Coughlin convinced his radio listeners was a conspiracy of international moneyed interests against American sovereignty:

“


 Our thanks are due to Almighty God in that America retains her sovereignty. Congratulations to the aroused people of the United States who, by more than 200,000 telegrams containing at least 1,000,000 names, demanded that the principles established by Washington and Jefferson shall keep us clear from foreign entanglements and European hatreds.

”


 Huey Long (1893–1935) Long pursued progressive policies as governor of Louisiana, even while he ruled the state with a dictatorial hand. A ﬂamboyant and unpredictable populist, he set the orthodox political establishment on its ear, especially after he became a U.S. senator in 1930. Long’s admirers called him the “Kingﬁsh”; Franklin Roosevelt called him “one of the two most dangerous men in the country.” (The other, said Roosevelt, was General Douglas MacArthur.)

Father Coughlin and Senator Long




WPA
Mural, by Victor Arnautoff (1896–1979), 1934 The Pedestrian Scene, painted on a wall of Coit Tower in San Francisco, was one of a series of murals commissioned by the federal government to employ artists during the Great Depression. 
 authority in Germany. Some even worried that Franklin Roosevelt himself would turn into a dictator. Partly to quiet the groundswell of unrest that might lead to a political explosion, Congress authorized the Works Progress Administration (WPA) in 1935. The objective was employment on useful projects. Launched under the supervision of the ailing but energetic Hopkins, this remarkable agency ultimately spent about $11 billion on thousands of public buildings, bridges, and hard-surfaced roads. Not every WPA project strengthened the infrastructure: for instance, one controlled crickets in Wyoming, while another built a monkey pen in Oklahoma City. John Steinbeck, future Nobel Prize novelist, counted dogs in his Cal i fornia county. One of the most well-loved WPA programs was the Federal Art Project, which hired artists to create posters and murals—many still adorning post ofﬁce walls. Critics sneered that WPA meant “We Provide

 Alms.” But the fact is that over a period of eight years, nearly 9 million people were given jobs, not handouts. The WPA nourished much precious talent, preserved self-respect, and fostered the creation of more than a million pieces of art, many of them publicly displayed.

New Visibility for Women
 Just over a decade after the ratiﬁcation of the Nineteenth Amendment, American women began to carve a larger space for themselves in the nation’s political and intellectual life. First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt may have been the most visible woman in the Roosevelt White House, but she was hardly the only female voice. Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins (1880–1965) burst through the gender barrier when she became America’s ﬁ rst woman cabinet member. Mary McLeod Bethune



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


Frances Perkins (1880–1965) at the Site of the Golden Gate Bridge Project,
 1935 The ﬁrst woman cabinet member, Perkins served as secretary of labor under Roosevelt. She was subjected to much undeserved criticism from male businessmen, laborites, and politicians. They sneered that FDR “kept her in labor” for many years.

 (1875–1955), director of the Ofﬁce of Minority Affairs in the National Youth Administration, served as the highest-ranking African American in the Roosevelt administration. Women also made important contributions in the social sciences, especially in the relatively new and open ﬁeld of anthropology. Ruth Benedict (1887–1948) carried on the work of her mentor, Franz Boas (1858– 1942), by developing the “culture and personality movement” in the 1930s and 1940s. Benedict’s landmark work, Patterns of Culture (1934), established the study of cultures as collective personalities. Each culture, like each individual, had its own “more or less consistent pattern of thought and action.” One of Benedict’s students, Margaret Mead (1901–1978), drew

 from her own scholarly studies of adolescence among Paciﬁc island peoples to advance bold new ideas about sexuality, gender roles, and intergenerational relationships. With thirty-four books and a curatorship at the American Museum of Natural History in New York City to her credit, Mead helped popularize cultural anthropology and achieved a celebrity status rare among social scientists. Pearl S. Buck (1892–1973) won similar acclaim as a novelist. Raised in China by Presbyterian missionary parents, Buck introduced American readers to Chinese peasant society. Her best-selling novel, The Good Earth (1931), earned her the Nobel Prize for literature in 1938, making her the third American (after Sinclair Lewis and Eugene O’Neill) to win the award.

The National Recovery Administration




 Mary McLeod Bethune (1875–1955) The daughter of ex-slaves and founder of a college in Florida, Bethune became the highest-ranking African American in the Roosevelt administration when she was appointed director of the Ofﬁce of Minority Affairs in the National Youth Administration (NYA). From this base she organized the “Black Cabinet” to make sure blacks beneﬁted from the New Deal programs along with whites. Here she is picketing against segregated hiring practices at the Peoples Drug Store chain, one of the earliest targets of the black civil rights movement.

 A proliﬁc author all her life, Buck also used her fame to advance humanitarian causes.

Helping Industry and Labor
 A daring attempt to stimulate a nationwide comeback was initiated when the Emergency Congress authorized the National Recovery Administration (NRA). This ingenious scheme was by far the most complex and far-reaching effort by the New Dealers to combine

 immediate relief with long-range recovery and reform. Triple-barreled, it was designed to assist industry, labor, and the unemployed. Individual industries—over two hundred in all— were to work out codes of “fair competition,” under which hours of labor would be reduced so that employment could be spread over more people. A ceiling was placed on the maximum hours of labor; a ﬂoor was placed under wages to establish minimum levels. Labor, under the NRA, was granted additional beneﬁts. Workers were formally guaranteed the right to organize and bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing—not through handpicked agents of the company’s choosing. The hated “yellowdog,” or antiunion, contract was expressly forbidden, and certain safeguarding restrictions were placed on the use of child labor. Industrial recovery through the NRA’s “fair competition” codes would at best be painful, for these called for self-denial by both management and labor. Patriotism was aroused by mass meetings and monster parades, which included 200,000 marchers on New York City’s Fifth Avenue. A handsome blue eagle was designed as the symbol of the NRA, and merchants subscribing to a code displayed it in their windows with the slogan “We Do Our Part.” A newly formed professional football team was christened the Philadelphia Eagles. Such was the enthusiasm for the NRA that for a brief period, there was a marked upswing in business activity, although Roosevelt had warned, “We cannot ballyhoo our way to prosperity.” But the high-ﬂying eagle gradually ﬂuttered to earth. Too much self-sacriﬁce was expected of labor, industry, and the public for such a scheme to work. Critics began to brand the NRA “National Run Around” and “Nuts Running America,” symbolized by what Henry Ford called “that damn Roosevelt buzzard.” A new “age of chiselry” dawned as certain unscrupulous



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


 businesspeople (“chiselers”) publicly displayed the blue bird in their windows but secretly violated the codes. Complete collapse was imminent when, in 1935, the Supreme Court shot down the dying eagle in the famed Schechter “sick chicken” decision. The learned justices unanimously held that Congress could not “delegate legislative powers” to the executive. They further declared that congressional control of interstate commerce could not properly apply to a local fowl business, like that of the Schechter brothers in Brooklyn, New York. Roosevelt was incensed by this “horse and buggy” interpretation of the Constitution, but actually the Court helped him out of a bad jam.

Grand Coulee Dam Under Construction on the
 Columbia River, 1939 Located in central Washington State, the Grand Coulee Dam was one of the most ambitious projects of the New Deal’s Public Works Administration. It is the largest concrete structure in the United States and the central facility in the Columbia Basin Project, which generates electricity for the Paciﬁc Northwest and provides irrigation for half a million acres of Columbia Valley farmland— services that have transformed the life of the region.

 The same act of Congress that hatched the NRA eagle also authorized the Public Works Administration (PWA), likewise intended both for industrial recovery and for unemployment relief. The agency was headed by the secretary of the interior, acid-tongued Harold L. Ickes, a free-swinging former bull mooser. Long-range recovery was the primary purpose of the new agency, and in time over $4 billion was spent on some thirty-four thousand projects, which included public buildings, highways, and parkways. One spectacular achievement was the Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia River—the largest structure erected by humans since the Great Wall of China. In the depths of the depression, the grand dam seemed the height of folly. It made possible the irrigation of millions of acres of new farmland—at a time when the government was desperately trying to reduce farm surpluses. It created more electrical power than the entire Tennessee Valley Authority—in a region with little industry and virtually no market for additional power. But with the outbreak of World War II and then postwar prosperity, the dam would come to seem a stroke of genius, transforming the entire region with abundant water and power. Special stimulants aided the recovery of one segment of business—the liquor industry. The imminent repeal of the prohibition amendment afforded an opportunity to raise needed federal revenue and at the same time to provide a mea sure of employment. Prodded by Roosevelt, the Hundred Days Congress, in one of its earliest acts, legalized light wine and beer with an alcoholic content (presumably nonintoxicating) not exceeding 3.2 percent by weight, and levied a tax of $5 on every barrel so manufactured. Disgruntled drys, unwilling to acknowledge the breakdown of law and order begotten by bootlegging, damned Roosevelt as “a 3.2 percent American.” Prohibition was ofﬁcially repealed by the Twenty-ﬁ rst Amendment late in 1933 (see the Appendix), and the saloon doors swung open.

Paying Farmers Not to Farm
 Ever since the war-boom days of 1918, farmers had suffered from low prices and overproduction, especially in grain. During the depression, conditions became desperate as innumerable mortgages were foreclosed, as corn was burned for fuel, and as embattled farmers tried to prevent the shipment of crops to glutted markets. In Iowa several volatile counties were placed under martial law.

Aid for Agriculture


 A radical new approach to farm recovery was embraced when the Emergency Congress established the Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA). Through “artiﬁcial scarcity” this agency was to establish “parity prices” for basic commodities. “Parity” was the price set for a product that gave it the same real value, in purchasing power, that it had enjoyed during the period from 1909 to 1914. The AAA would eliminate price-depressing surpluses by paying growers to reduce their crop acreage. The millions of dollars needed for these payments were to be raised by taxing processors of farm products, such as ﬂour millers, who in turn would shift the burden to consumers. Unhappily, the AAA got off to a wobbly start. It was begun after much of the cotton crop for 1933 had been planted, and balky mules, trained otherwise, were forced to plow under countless young plants. Several million squealing pigs were purchased and slaughtered. Much of their meat was distributed to people on relief, but some of it was used for fertilizer. This “sinful” destruction of food, at a time when thousands of citizens were hungry, increased condemnation of the American economic system by many left-leaning voices. “Subsidized scarcity” did have the effect of raising farm income, but the whole confused enterprise met with acid criticism. Farmers, food processors, consumers, and taxpayers were all to some degree unhappy. Paying the farmers not to farm actually increased unemployment, at a time when other New Deal agencies were striving to decrease it. When the Supreme Court ﬁ nally killed the AAA in 1936 by declaring its regulatory taxation provisions unconstitutional, foes of the plow-under program rejoiced loudly. Quickly recovering from this blow, the New Deal Congress hastened to pass the Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act of 1936. The withdrawal of acreage from production was now achieved by paying farmers to plant soil-conserving crops, like soybeans, or to let their land lie fallow. With the emphasis thus on conservation, the Supreme Court placed its stamp of approval on the revamped scheme. The Second Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938, passed two years later, was a more comprehensive substitute, although it continued conservation payments. If growers observed acreage restrictions on speciﬁed commodities like cotton and wheat, they would be eligible for parity payments. Other provisions of the new AAA were designed to give farmers not only a fairer price but a more substantial share of the national income. Both goals were partially achieved.



 An Okie Family Hits the Road in the 1930s to Escape the Dust Bowl

Dust Bowls and Black Blizzards
 Nature meanwhile had been providing some unplanned scarcity. Late in 1933 a prolonged drought struck the states of the trans-Mississippi Great Plains. Rainless weeks were followed by furious, whining winds, while the sun was darkened by millions of tons of powdery topsoil torn from homesteads in an area that stretched from eastern Colorado to western Missouri—soon to be dubbed the Dust Bowl. Despondent citizens sat on front porches with protective masks on their faces, watching their farms swirl by. A sevenyear-old boy in Kansas suffocated. Overawed victims of the Dust Bowl disaster predicted the end of the world or the second coming of Christ. Drought and wind triggered the dust storms, but they were not the only culprits. The human hand had also worked its mischief. High grain prices during World War I had enticed farmers to bring countless acres of marginal land under cultivation. Worse, dryfarming techniques and mechanization had revolutionized Great Plains agriculture. The steam tractor and the disk plow tore up inﬁ nitely more sod than a team of oxen ever could, leaving the powdery topsoil to be swept away at nature’s whim (see Map 33.1).



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


110°W


100°W


90°W


80°W


C A N A D A




 WASH.



NORTH DAKOTA

MONTANA OREGON WYOMING

PAC I F

 NEBRASKA

 IC

 CALIF.

 COLORADO

PENN. OHIO IND.

 MO.

 OC

 EA

 OKLA.

N


N. MEX.

30°N


 TEXAS

S.C.


 LA.

 FLA.

 Severe wind erosion M E X I C O

VA. N.C.

TENN. ARK. MISS. ALA.

 Severest wind erosion

 ME.

Gulf of Mexico


 States losing population

 GA.

MA. R.I. CT. N.J. DEL.

W.
 VA.

 KY.



 Marginal cropland

N.H.


N.Y.


IOWA ILL.



 VT.

 MICH.

 KANSAS

 ARIZONA

400 Mi.


 WISC.

NEVADA UTAH



 MINN.

SOUTH DAKOTA

 IDAHO

40°N


70°W


200 400 Km.


 OCEAN

50°N
120°W


 MD.

 NTIC

N


AT L A

130°W


Map 33.1 The Extent of
 Erosion in the 1930s Note the extensive wind erosion in the western Oklahoma panhandle region, which was dubbed the “Dust Bowl” in the 1930s. Mechanized farmers had “busted” the sod of the southern plains so thoroughly that they literally broke the back of the land. Tons of dust blew out of the Dust Bowl in the 1930s and blotted the sun from the skies as far away as New York. A Kansas newspaperman reported in 1935 that in his dust-darkened town, “Lady Godiva could ride through streets without even the horse seeing her.” Interactive Map

 Burned and blown out of the Dust Bowl, tens of thousands of refugees ﬂed their ruined acres. In ﬁve years about 350,000 Oklahomans and Arkansans— “Okies” and “Arkies”—trekked to southern Cal i fornia in “junkyards on wheels.” Undeterred by signs saying “KEEP OUT,” many found a new home in the San Joaquin Valley, which shared much in common with the southern plains—arid climate, cotton growing, newfound oil deposits, and abundant land. Yet the transition was cruel. Food, shelter, and clothing were scarce; the winter months, without work and heat, proved nearly unendurable for the migrants. The dismal story of these human tumbleweeds was realistically portrayed in John Steinbeck’s best-selling novel The Grapes

 Novelist John Steinbeck (1902–1968) relates in his novel The Grapes of Wrath (1939) that when the “Okies” and “Arkies” reached California, they found the big growers unwilling to pay more than twentyﬁve cents an hour for work in the ﬁelds. One owner mutters,

“


A
Red is any son-of-a-bitch that wants thirty cents an hour when we’re paying twenty-ﬁve! 
”


 of Wrath (1939), which proved to be the Uncle Tom’s Cabin of the Dust Bowl. Zealous New Dealers, sympathetic toward the soiltillers, made various other efforts to relieve their burdens. The Frazier-Lemke Farm Bankruptcy Act, passed in 1934, made possible a suspension of mortgage foreclosures for ﬁve years, but it was voided the next year by the Supreme Court. A revised law, limiting the grace period to three years, was unanimously upheld. In 1935 the president set up the Resettlement Administration, charged with the task of removing nearfarmless farmers to better land. And more than 200 million young trees were successfully planted on the bare prairies as windbreaks by the young men of the Civilian Conservation Corps, even though one governor jeered at trying to “grow hair on a bald head.” Native Americans also felt the far-reaching hand of New Deal reform. Commissioner of Indian Affairs John Collier ardently sought to reverse the forcedassimilation policies in place since the Dawes Act of 1887 (see p. 639). Inspired by a sojourn among the Pueblo Indians in Taos, New Mexico, Collier promoted the Indian Reorga ni zation Act of 1934 (the “Indian New Deal”). The new law encouraged tribes to establish local self-government and to preserve their native crafts and traditions. The act also helped to stop the loss of Indian lands and revived tribes’ interest in their identity and culture. Yet not all Indians applauded it.

The Tennessee Valley Authority


 Some denounced the legislation as a “back-to-theblanket” mea sure that sought to make museum pieces out of Native Americans. Seventy-seven tribes refused to organize under its provisions, though nearly two hundred others did establish tribal governments.

Battling Bankers and
Big Business
 Reformist New Dealers were determined from the outset to curb the “money changers” who had played fast and loose with gullible investors before the Wall Street crash of 1929. The Hundred Days Congress passed the “Truth in Securities Act” (Federal Securities Act), which required promoters to transmit to investors sworn information regarding the soundness of their stocks and bonds. An old saying was thus reversed to read “Let the seller beware,” although the buyer might never read the ﬁ ne print. In 1934 Congress took further steps to protect the public against fraud, deception, and inside manipulation. It authorized the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which was designed as a watchdog administrative agency. Stock markets henceforth were to operate more as trading marts and less as gambling casinos. New Dealers likewise directed their ﬁ re at public utility holding companies, those supercorporations. Citizens had seen one of these incredible colossi collapse during the spring of 1932, when Chicagoan Samuel Insull’s multibillion-dollar ﬁ nancial empire crashed. Possibilities of controlling, with a minimum of capital, a half-dozen or so pyramided layers of big business suggested to Roosevelt “a ninety-six-inch dog being wagged by a four-inch tail.” The Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 ﬁ nally delivered a “death sentence” to this type of bloated growth, except where it might be deemed economically needful.

The TVA Harnesses
 the Tennessee Inevitably, the sprawling electric-power industry attracted the ﬁ re of New Deal reformers. Within a few decades, it had risen from nothingness to a behemoth with an investment of $13 billion. As a public utility, it reached directly and regularly into the pocketbooks of millions of consumers for vitally needed ser vices. Ardent New Dealers accused it of gouging the public



 with excessive rates, especially since it owed its success to having secured, often for a song, priceless waterpower sites from the public domain. The tempestuous Tennessee River provided New Dealers with a rare opportunity. With its tributaries, the river drained a badly eroded area about the size of Eng land, and one containing some 2.5 million of the most poverty-stricken people in America. The federal government already owned valuable properties at Muscle Shoals, where it had erected plants for needed nitrates in World War I. By developing the hydroelectric potential of the entire area, Washington could combine the immediate advantage of putting thousands of people to work and a long-term project for reforming the power monopoly. An act creating the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) was passed in 1933 by the Hundred Days Congress. This far-ranging enterprise was largely a result of the steadfast vision and unﬂagging zeal of Senator George W. Norris of Nebraska, after whom one of the mighty dams was named. From the standpoint of “planned economy,” the TVA was by far the most revolutionary of all the New Deal schemes. This new agency was determined to discover precisely how much the production and distribution of electricity cost, so that a “yardstick” could be set up to test the fairness of rates charged by private companies. Utility corporations lashed back at this entering wedge of government control, charging that the low cost of TVA power was due to dishonest bookkeeping and the absence of taxes. Critics complained that the whole dream was “creeping socialism in concrete.” But the New Dealers, shrugging off such outcries, pointed a prideful ﬁ nger at the amazing achievements of the TVA. The gigantic project brought to the area not only full employment and the blessings of cheap electric power (see Figure 33.2), but low-cost housing, abundant cheap nitrates, the restoration of eroded soil, reforestation, improved navigation, and ﬂood control. Rivers ran blue instead of brown, and a once-povertycursed area was being transformed into one of the most ﬂourishing regions in the United States. Foreigners were greatly impressed with the possibilities of similar schemes in their own lands, and exulting New Dealers agitated for parallel enterprises in the valleys of the Columbia, Colorado, and Missouri Rivers. Federally built dams one day would span all those waterways, impounding more than 30 percent of the total annual runoff from the “roof of America” in the Rocky Mountains. Hydroelectric power from those dams would drive the growth of the urban West, and

ILLINOIS O

 MISSOURI

 hio R.

88°W


86°W


84°W


Kentucky
Dam


C um


Paducah


Watts Bar
Dam


 ssee R.

 TENNESSEE

 w Po

H


 st ol

 on

R
 e ll

W. VA.


80°W


.


 lin

 ch

R.


 VIRGINIA

R.


Knoxville
Coulter
Shoals Dam


Du
Hiw
Pickwick
 ck R . assee Landing R. Hiwassee Dam n e Dam T Chattanooga Memphis Wilson Dam Wheeler Dam Chickamauga Dam Guntersville Dam Muscle Shoals Tupelo

Br


Fr


Asheville


NORTH CAROLINA

Great Smoky
Mountains
National Park


Te
 n

 ne

 ss

 ee

R.


 ne

R.


 pi si p

 s is

M is


R.


 h e n c d R. oa

N


 b erl an d

Norris
Dam
Norris
Oak Ridge


Nashville


36°N


 ARKANSAS

82°W


KENTUCKY C

90°W


 GEORGIA

 MISSISSIPPI

34°N


SOUTH CAROLINA

Atlanta
Birmingham


 Tennessee River watershed

 ALABAMA

 TVA dams

 LA.





 Area served by TVA electric power

100 Km.


100 Mi.


 Power plant

 Map 33.2 TVA Area More than twenty dams were constructed on the river’s tributaries as part of a massive project to control ﬂooding, generate hydroelectric power, and revitalize the Tennessee Valley region, while also creating jobs for the unemployed. The shaded area represents the area served by TVA electric power.

 the waters they diverted would nurture agriculture in the previously bone-dry western deserts. But conser vative reaction against the “socialistic” New Deal would conﬁ ne the TVA’s brand of federally guided resource management and comprehensive regional development to the Tennessee Valley (see Map 33.2).

Percentage


Interactive Map




Housing and Social Security




’10


’20


’30


’40


’50


’60


’70


’80


’90 2000 ’08


Year


 Figure 33.2 Occupied Households with Electric Service, 1900–2008 The Tennessee Valley Authority contributed to making electricity available to almost all Americans by 1960. African American leader Andrew Young later claimed that the TVA created the economic underpinnings of the civil rights movement: “It was the presence of the cheap electricity, lower interest rates, water projects, that laid the foundation for the New South.”

 The New Deal had meanwhile framed sturdy new policies for housing construction. To speed recovery and better homes, Roosevelt set up the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) as early as 1934. The building industry was to be stimulated by small loans to householders, both for improving their dwellings and for completing new ones. So popular did the FHA prove to be that it was one of the few “alphabetical agencies” to outlast the age of Roosevelt. Congress bolstered the program in 1937 by authorizing the United States Housing Authority (USHA), an agency designed to lend money to states or communi-

Social Security


 ties for low-cost construction. Although units for about 650,000 low-income people were started, new building fell tragically short of needs. New Deal efforts to expand the project collided with brick-wall opposition from real estate promoters, builders, and landlords (“slumlords”), to say nothing of anti–New Dealers who attacked what they considered down-the-rathole spending. Nonetheless, for the ﬁ rst time in a century, the slum areas in America ceased growing and even shrank. Incomparably more important was the success of New Dealers in the ﬁeld of unemployment insurance and old-age pensions. Their greatest victory was the epochal Social Security Act of 1935—one of the most complicated and far-reaching laws ever to pass Congress. To cushion future depressions, the mea sure provided for federal-state unemployment insurance. To provide security for old age, speciﬁed categories of retired workers were to receive regular payments from Washington. These payments ranged from $10 to $85 a month (raised periodically) and were ﬁ nanced by a payroll tax on both employers and employees. Provision was also made for the blind, the physically handicapped, delinquent children, and other dependents. Republican opposition to the sweeping new legislation was bitter. “Social Security,” insisted Hoover, “must be builded upon a cult of work, not a cult of leisure.” The GOP national chairman falsely charged that every worker would have to wear a metal dog tag for life. Social Security was largely inspired by the example of some of the more highly industrialized nations of Europe. In the agricultural America of an earlier day, there had always been farm chores for all ages, and the large family had cared for its own dependents. But in an urbanized economy, at the mercy of boomor-bust cycles, the government was now recognizing its responsibility for the welfare of its citizens. By 1939 over 45 million people were eligible for Social Security beneﬁts. In subsequent years further categories of workers were added, including, belatedly, farm and domestic workers. For decades millions of poor men and women were excluded from Social Security. In contrast to Europe, where welfare programs generally were universal, American workers had to be employed and in certain kinds of jobs to get coverage.

A
New Deal for Labor  The NRA blue eagles, with their call for collective bargaining, had been a godsend to orga nized labor. As



 New Deal expenditures brought some slackening of unemployment, labor began to feel more secure and hence more self-assertive. A rash of walkouts occurred in the summer of 1934, including a paralyzing general strike in San Francisco (following a “Bloody Thursday”), which was broken only when outraged citizens resorted to vigilante tactics. When the Supreme Court axed the blue eagle, a Congress sympathetic to labor unions undertook to ﬁ ll the vacuum. The fruit of its deliberations was the National Labor Relations Act of 1935, more commonly known as the Wagner Act, after its congressional sponsor, New York senator Robert F. Wagner. This trailblazing law created a powerful new National Labor Relations Board for administrative purposes and reasserted the right of labor to engage in self-orga ni zation and to bargain collectively through representatives of its own choice. Considered the Magna Carta of American labor, the Wagner Act proved to be a major milestone for American workers. Under the encouragement of a highly sympathetic National Labor Relations Board, a host of unskilled workers began to organize themselves into effective unions. The leader of this drive was beetle-browed, domineering, and melodramatic John L. Lewis, boss of the United Mine Workers. In 1935 he succeeded in forming the Committee for Industrial Organization (CIO) within the ranks of the skilled-craft American Federation of Labor. But skilled workers, ever since the days of the ill-fated Knights of Labor in the 1880s, had shown only lukewarm sympathy for the cause of unskilled labor, especially blacks. In 1936, following inevitable friction with the CIO, the older federation suspended the upstart unions associated with the newer orga ni zation. Undaunted, the rebellious CIO moved on a concerted scale into the huge automobile industry. Late in 1936 the workers resorted to a revolutionary technique (earlier used in both Europe and America) known as the sit-down strike: they refused to leave the factory building of General Motors at Flint, Michigan, and thus prevented the importation of strikebreakers. Conservative respecters of private property were scandalized. The CIO ﬁ nally won a resounding victory when its union, after heated negotiations, was recognized by General Motors as the sole bargaining agency for its employees. Unskilled workers now pressed their advantage. The United States Steel Company, hitherto an impossible nut for labor to crack, averted a costly strike when it voluntarily granted rights of unionization to its



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


John L. Lewis (1880–1969) Inciting Textile Workers to
 Strike, 1937 A miner, Lewis worked his way up to the presidency of the United Mine Workers of America. He then founded the Committee for Industrial Organization, later reconstituted as the Congress of Industrial Organizations, in the mid-1930s to unite all industrial workers in a powerful bloc of “big labor” to stand up to “big business.”

 CIO-orga nized employees. But the “little steel” companies fought back savagely. Citizens were shocked in 1937 by the Memorial Day massacre at the plant of the Republic Steel Company in South Chicago. In a bloody

 General Motors Sit-down Strikers, Flint, Michigan, 1937 Strikers like these sometimes kept their spirits up with the song “Sit Down”: When the boss won’t talk Don’t take a walk; Sit down, sit down.

 fracas, police ﬁ red upon pickets and workers, leaving the area strewn with several score dead and wounded. A better deal for labor continued when Congress, in 1938, passed the memorable Fair Labor Standards Act (Wages and Hours Bill). Industries involved in interstate commerce were to set up minimum-wage and maximum-hour levels. The eventual goals were forty cents an hour (later raised) and a forty-hour week. Labor by children under sixteen (under eighteen if the occupation was dangerous) was forbidden. These reforms were bitterly though futilely opposed by many industrialists, especially by those southern textile manufacturers who had proﬁted from low-wage labor. But the exclusion of agricultural, ser vice, and domestic workers meant that blacks, Mexican Americans, and women—who were concentrated in these ﬁelds— did not beneﬁt from the act. In later New Deal days, labor unionization thrived (see Figure 33.3). “Roosevelt wants you to join a union” was the rallying cry of professional organizers. The president received valuable support at ballot-box time

Social Security




Sweden


 Percentage of employees unionized



Ireland




Japan




United
Kingdom


Germany
 USA





France






Year


Figure 33.3 Labor Union Membership in Selected
Countries, 1913–2001 In the United States, the
 percentage of the total labor force that was unionized increased until 1954, when it began to decline. In the 1990s it had a brief rise with the organization of service and government workers, only to decline again until it reached a low of 12 percent in 2006. In 2007 unionized workers grew by .1 percent, an increase of 311,000 workers, which brought total union membership to 15.7 million, the highest in many years. Note the very different fortunes of organized labor in other countries in the face of the Great Depression, World War II, postwar prosperity, and deindustrialization. Labor Triumphant After generations of struggle, organized labor made dramatic gains in membership and bargaining power during the New Deal years.

 from labor leaders and many appreciative workingpeople. One mill worker remarked that Roosevelt was “the only man we ever had in the White House who would know that my boss is a s.o.b.”

 A worker at a Chevrolet plant in Flint, Michigan, wrote after the United Auto Workers–CIO victory in 1937,

“


 The inhuman high speed is no more. We now have a voice, and have slowed up the speed of the line. And [we] are now treated as human beings, and not as part of the machinery. The high pressure is taken off. . . . It proves clearly that united we stand, divided or alone we fall.

”


Source: From James C. Docherty, Historical Dictionary of Organized
 Labor, 2nd ed., pp. 408–415 and 420–421. Copyright © 2004. Reprinted by permission of Scavenger Press, Lanham, MD.

 The CIO surged forward, breaking completely with the AF of L in 1938. On that occasion the Committee for Industrial Organization was formally reconstituted as the Congress of Industrial Organizations (the new CIO), under the visionary though high-handed presidency of John L. Lewis. By 1940 the CIO could claim about 4 million members in its constituent unions, including some 200,000 blacks. Nevertheless, bitter and annoying jurisdictional feuding involving strikes continued with the AF of L. At times labor seemed more bent on costly civil war than on its age-old war with management.

Landon Challenges
 “the Champ” As the presidential campaign of 1936 neared, the New Dealers were on top of the world. They had achieved



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


 considerable progress, and millions of “reliefers” were grateful to their bountiful government. The exultant Democrats renominated Roosevelt on a platform squarely endorsing the New Deal. The Republicans were hard-pressed to ﬁ nd someone to feed to “the Champ.” They ﬁ nally settled on the colorless but homespun and honest governor of the Sunﬂower State of Kansas, Alfred M. Landon. Landon himself was a moderate who accepted some New Deal reforms, although not the popular Social Security Act. But the Republican platform vigorously condemned the New Deal of Franklin “Deﬁcit” Roosevelt for its radicalism, experimentation, confusion, and “frightful waste.” Backing Landon, ex-president Hoover called for a “holy crusade for liberty,” echoing the cry of the American Liberty League, a group of wealthy conservatives who had orga nized in 1934 to ﬁght “socialistic” New Deal schemes. Roosevelt gave as good as he got. Angry enough to stretch sheet iron, the president took to the stump and denounced the “economic royalists” who sought to “hide behind the ﬂag and the Constitution.” “I welcome their hatred,” he proclaimed. A landslide overwhelmed Landon, as the demoralized Republicans carried only two states, Maine and Vermont. This dismal showing caused political wiseacres to make the old adage read, “As Maine goes, so goes Vermont.”* The popular vote was 27,752,869 to 16,674,665; the electoral count was 523 to 8—the most lopsided in 116 years. A good-humored newspaper columnist quipped, “If Landon had given one more speech, Roosevelt would have carried Canada, too.” Democratic majorities, riding in on Roosevelt’s magic coattails, were again returned to Congress. Jubilant Democrats could now claim more than two-thirds of the seats in the House and a like proportion in the Senate. The battle of 1936, perhaps the most bitter since Bryan’s defeat in 1896, partially bore out Republican charges of class warfare. Even more than in 1932, the needy economic groups were lined up against the socalled greedy economic groups. CIO units contributed generously to FDR’s campaign chest. Many left-wingers turned to Roosevelt, as the customary third-party protest vote sharply declined. Blacks, several million of whom had also appreciated welcome relief checks, had

 *Maine, which traditionally held its state elections in September, was long regarded as a political weathervane, hence the expression “As Maine goes, so goes the nation.”

 Three days before the 1936 election, Roosevelt took the moral high ground in his speech at New York’s Madison Square Garden:

“


 I should like to have it said of my ﬁrst Administration that in it the forces of selﬁshness and of lust for power met their match. I should like to have it said of my second Administration that in it these forces met their master.

”


 by now largely shaken off their traditional allegiance to the Republican party. To them, Lincoln was “ﬁ nally dead.” FDR won primarily because he appealed to the “forgotten man,” whom he never forgot. Some of the president’s support was only pocketbook-deep: “reliefers” were not going to bite the hand that doled out the government checks. No one, as Al Smith remarked, “shoots at Santa Claus.” But Roosevelt in fact had forged a powerful and enduring coalition of the South: blacks, urbanites, and the poor. He proved especially effective in marshaling the support of the multitudes of “New Immigrants”—mostly the Catholics and Jews who had swarmed into the great cities since the turn of the century. These once-scorned newcomers, with their now-numerous sons and daughters, had at last come politically of age. In the 1920s one out of every twentyﬁve federal judgeships went to a Catholic; Roosevelt appointed Catholics to one out of every four.

Nine Old Men on the Bench
 Bowing his head to the sleety blasts, Roosevelt took the presidential oath on January 20, 1937, instead of the traditional March 4. The Twentieth Amendment to the Constitution had been ratiﬁed in 1933. (See the Appendix.) It swept away the postelection lame duck session of Congress and shortened by six weeks the awkward period before inauguration. Flushed with victory, Roosevelt interpreted his reelection as a mandate to continue New Deal reforms. But in his eyes, the cloistered old men on the supreme bench, like fossilized stumbling blocks, stood stubbornly in the pathway of progress. In nine major cases involving the New Deal, the Roosevelt administration

The Court-Packing Controversy


 had been thwarted seven times. The Court was ultraconser vative, and six of the nine oldsters in black were over seventy. As luck would have it, not a single member had been appointed by FDR in his ﬁ rst term. Roosevelt, his “Dutch up,” viewed with mounting impatience what he regarded as the obstructive conservatism of the Court. Some of these Old Guard appointees were hanging on with a senile grip, partly because they felt it their patriotic duty to curb the “socialistic” tendencies of that radical in the White House. Roosevelt believed that the voters in three successive elections—the presidential elections of 1932 and 1936 and the midterm congressional elections of 1934—had returned a smashing verdict in favor of his program of reform. Democracy, in his view, meant rule by the people. If the American way of life was to be preserved, Roosevelt argued, the Supreme Court ought to get in line with the supreme court of public opinion. Roosevelt ﬁ nally hit upon a Court scheme that he regarded as “the answer to a maiden’s prayer.” In fact, it proved to be one of the most costly political misjudgments of his career. When he sprang his brainstorm on a shocked nation early in 1937, he caught the country and Congress completely by surprise. Roosevelt bluntly asked Congress for legislation to permit



 him to add a new justice to the Supreme Court for every member over seventy who would not retire. The maximum membership could then be ﬁ fteen. Roosevelt pointed to the necessity of injecting vigorous new blood, for the Court, he alleged, was far behind in its work. This charge, which turned out to be false, brought heated accusations of dishonesty. At best Roosevelt was headstrong and not fully aware of the fact that the Court, in popular thinking, had become something of a sacred cow.

The Court Changes Course
 Congress and the nation were promptly convulsed over Roosevelt’s Court-packing plan to expand the Supreme Court. Franklin “Double-crossing” Roosevelt was viliﬁed for attempting to break down the delicate checks and balances among the three branches of the government. He was accused of grooming himself as a dictator by trying to browbeat the judiciary. In the eyes of countless citizens, mostly Republicans but including many Democrats, basic liberties seemed to be in jeopardy. “God Bless the Supreme Court” was a fervent prayer.

 The Response to Roosevelt’s “Court-Packing” Plan, 1937 Even the Democratic donkey kicked up a storm in opposition to President Roosevelt’s plan to expand the Supreme Court to as many as ﬁfteen judges.



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


 The Court had meanwhile seen the ax hanging over its head. Whatever his motives, Justice Owen J. Roberts, formerly regarded as a conser vative, began to vote on the side of his liberal colleagues. “A switch in time saves nine” was the classic witticism inspired by this ideological change. By a ﬁve-to-four decision, the Court, in March 1937, upheld the principle of a state minimum wage for women, thereby reversing its stand on a different case a year earlier. In succeeding decisions, a Court more sympathetic to the New Deal upheld the National Labor Relations Act (Wagner Act) and the Social Security Act. Roosevelt’s “Court-packing” was further undermined when Congress voted full pay for justices over seventy who retired, whereupon one of the oldest conser vative members resigned, to be replaced by a New Dealer, Justice Hugo Black. Congress ﬁnally passed a court reform bill, but this watered-down version applied only to lower courts. Roosevelt, the master politician, thus suffered his ﬁ rst major legislative defeat at the hands of his own party in Congress. Americans have never viewed lightly a president’s tampering with the Supreme Court, no matter how popular their chief executive may be. Yet in losing this battle, Roosevelt incidentally won his campaign. The Court, as he had hoped, became markedly more friendly to New Deal reforms. Furthermore, a succession of deaths and resignations enabled him in time to make nine appointments to the tribunal— more than any of his predecessors since George Washington. The clock “unpacked” the Court. Yet in a sense, FDR lost both the Court battle and the war. He so aroused conser vatives of both parties in Congress that few New Deal reforms were passed after 1937, the year of the ﬁght to “pack” the bench. With this catastrophic miscalculation, he squandered much of the political goodwill that had carried him to such a resounding victory in the 1936 election.

Twilight of the New Deal
 Roosevelt’s ﬁ rst term, from 1933 to 1937, did not banish the depression from the land. Unemployment stubbornly persisted in 1936 at about 15 percent, down from the grim 25 percent of 1933 but still miserably high (see Figure 33.4). Despite the inventiveness of New Deal programs and the billions of dollars in “pump priming,” recovery had been dishearteningly modest, though the country seemed to be inching its way back to economic health. Then, in 1937, the economy took another sharp downturn, a surprisingly severe depression-within-

 the-depression that the president’s critics quickly dubbed the “Roosevelt recession.” In fact, government policies had caused the nosedive, as new Social Security taxes began to bite into payrolls and as the administration cut back on spending out of continuing reverence for the orthodox economic doctrine of the balanced budget. Only at this late date did Roosevelt at last frankly and deliberately embrace the recommendations of the British economist John Maynard Keynes. The New Deal had run deﬁcits for several years, but all of them had been rather small and none was intended. Now, in April 1937, Roosevelt announced a bold program to stimulate the economy by planned deﬁcit spending. Although the deﬁcits were still undersized for the herculean task of conquering the depression, this abrupt policy reversal marked a major turning point in the government’s relation to the economy. Keynesianism—the use of government spending and ﬁscal policy to “prime the pump” of the economy and encourage consumer spending—became the new economic orthodoxy and remained so for decades. Roosevelt had meanwhile been pushing the remaining reform mea sures of the New Deal. Early in 1937 he urged Congress—a Congress growing more conser vative—to authorize a sweeping reorga ni zation of the national administration in the interests of streamlined efﬁciency. But the issue became tangled up with his presumed autocratic ambitions in regard to the Supreme Court, and he suffered another stinging defeat. Two years later, in 1939, Congress partially relented and in the Reorga ni zation Act gave him limited powers for administrative reforms, including the key new Executive Ofﬁce in the White House. The New Dealers were accused of having the richest campaign chest in history, and in truth government relief checks had a curious habit of coming in bunches just before ballot time. To remedy such practices, Congress adopted the much-heralded Hatch Act

 A basic objective of the New Deal was featured in Roosevelt’s second inaugural address (1937):

“


 I see one-third of a nation ill-housed, illclad, ill-nourished. . . . The test of our progress is not whether we add more to the abundance of those who have much; it is whether we provide enough for those who have too little.

”


The Controversial New Deal




INDEX OF INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
(Percentage in 1929 levels) 
PERCENTAGE OF WORK FORCE UNEMPLOYED



Germany


United Kingdom 4






Germany 2,3






United States1




United Kingdom




United States






’30


’31


’32


’33


’34


’35


’36


’37


’38


’39




Year




’30


’31


’32


’33


’34


’35


’36


’37


’38


’39




Year


Figure 33.4 Economic Impact of the Great Depression on the United States, the United
Kingdom, and Germany, 1929–1940


 Federal Emergency Relief Administration workers are counted as employed. Figure shows registered unemployment in Germany in 1929; industrial unemployment, as reported by unions, was 13.1 percent. Unemployment ceased to be an issue in Germany by 1939 with the mobilization for war. The labor force was actually augmented by the often-forced importation of foreign workers and the use of prison labor. Those who were unemployed suffered from a disability of some kind. This is an average of the industrial indexes in the United Kingdom for the ﬁrst six months of 1939 only. Thereafter, no ﬁgures are available until 1946.

 [Sources: United States Historical Statistics, vol. 2; Statistical Yearbook of the League of Nations (1938–1939 and 1941–1942); International Historical Statistics, 1750–2005: Europe; State, Economy, and Society in Western Europe, 1815–1975, vol. 2.]

 of 1939. This act barred federal administrative ofﬁcials, except the highest policy-making ofﬁcers, from active political campaigning and soliciting. It also forbade the use of government funds for political purposes, as well as the collection of campaign contributions from people receiving relief payments. The Hatch Act was broadened in 1940 to place limits on campaign contributions and expenditures, but such clever ways of getting around it were found that on the whole the legislation proved disappointing. By 1938 the New Deal had clearly lost most of its early momentum. Magician Roosevelt could ﬁ nd few dazzling new reform rabbits to pull out of his tall silk hat. In the congressional elections of 1938, the Republicans, for the ﬁ rst time, cut heavily into the New Deal majorities in Congress, though failing to gain control of either house. The international crisis that came to a boil in 1938–1939 shifted public attention away from domestic reform and no doubt helped save the political hide of the Roosevelt “spendocracy.” The New Deal, for all practical purposes, had shot its bolt.

New Deal or Raw Deal?
 Foes of the New Deal condemned its alleged waste, incompetence, confusion, contradictions, and crosspurposes, as well as the chiseling and graft in the alphabetical agencies—“alphabet soup,” sneered Al Smith. Roosevelt had done nothing, cynics said, that an earthquake could not have done better. Critics deplored the employment of “crackpot” college professors, leftist “pinkos,” and outright Communists. Such subversives, it was charged, were trying to make America over in the Bolshevik-Marxist image under “Rooseveltski.” The Hearst newspapers lambasted, The Red New Deal with a Soviet seal Endorsed by a Moscow hand, The strange result of an alien cult In a liberty-loving land. Roosevelt was further accused by conser vatives of being Jewish (“Rosenﬁeld”) and of tapping too many



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


Employment Agency, by Isaac Soyer,
 1937 Millions of jobless Americans felt the despair Soyer captured in this painting, as depression-era unemployment reached levels never seen before or since in American history.

 bright young Jewish leftists (“The Jew Deal”) for his “Drain Trust.” Hardheaded businesspeople, who “had met a payroll,” were shocked by the leap-before-you-look, tryanything-once spirit of Roosevelt, the jolly improviser. They accused him of confusing noise and movement with progress. Others appreciated the president’s dosomething approach. Humorist Will Rogers, the ropetwirling “poet lariat” of the era, remarked that if Roosevelt were to burn down the Capitol, people would say, “Well, we at least got a ﬁ re started, anyhow.” “Bureaucratic meddling” and “regimentation” were also bitter complaints of anti–New Dealers; in truth, bureaucracy did blossom. The federal government, with its hundreds of thousands of employees, became incomparably the largest single business in the country, as the states faded further into the background. Promises of budget balancing, to say nothing of other promises, had ﬂown out the window—so foes of the New Deal pointed out. The national debt had stood at the already enormous ﬁgure of $19,487,000,000 in 1932 and had skyrocketed to $40,440,000,000 by 1939. America was becoming, its critics charged, a “handout state” trying to squander itself into prosperity—U.S. stood for “unlimited spending.” Such lavish benefactions were undermining the old virtues of thrift and initiative. Ordinary Americans, once self-reliant citizens, were getting a bad case of the “gimmies”: their wishbones were becoming larger than their back-

 bones. In the nineteenth century, hard-pressed workers went west; now they went on relief. Business was bitter. Accusing the New Deal of fomenting class strife, conser vatives insisted that the laborer and the farmer—especially the big operator— were being pampered. Why “soak the successful”? Countless businesspeople, especially Republicans, declared that they could pull themselves out of the depression if they could only get the federal government—an interventionist big government—off their backs. Private enterprise, they charged, was being stiﬂed by “planned economy,” “planned bankruptcy,” “creeping socialism,” and the philosophy “Washington can do it better,” with a federal pill for every ill. States’ rights were being ignored, while the government was competing in business with its own citizens, under a “dictatorship of do-gooders.” The aggressive leadership of Roosevelt—“one-man supergovernment”—also came in for denunciation. Heavy ﬁ re was especially directed at his attempts to browbeat the Supreme Court and to create a “dummy Congress.” Roosevelt had even tried in the 1938 elections, with backﬁ ring results, to “purge” members of Congress who would not march in lockstep with him. The three senators whom he publicly opposed were all triumphantly reelected. The most damning indictment of the New Deal was that it had failed to cure the depression. Aﬂoat in a sea of red ink, some argued, it had merely adminis-

 Roosevelt's Record

 tered aspirin, sedatives, and Band-Aids. Many economists came to believe that better results would have been achieved by much greater deﬁcit spending. Despite some $20 billion poured out in six years of deficit spending and lending, of leaf raking and pump priming, the gap was not closed between production and consumption. There were even more mountainous farm surpluses under Roosevelt than under Hoover. Millions of dispirited men and women were still unemployed in 1939, after six years of drain, strain, and pain. Not until World War II blazed forth in Europe was the unemployment headache solved.

 FDR’s Balance Sheet New Dealers staunchly defended their record. Admitting that there had been some waste, they pointed out that relief—not economy—had been the primary object of their multifront war on the depression. Conceding also that there had been some graft, they argued that it had been trivial in view of the immense sums spent and the obvious need for haste. Apologists for Roosevelt further declared that the New Deal had relieved the worst of the crisis in 1933. It promoted the philosophy of “balancing the human budget” and accepted the principle that the federal government was morally bound to prevent mass hunger and starvation by “managing” the economy. The Washington regime was to be used, not feared. The collapse of America’s economic system was averted, a fairer distribution of the national income was achieved, and the citizens were enabled to regain and



 retain their self-respect. “Nobody is going to starve” was Roosevelt’s promise. Though hated by business tycoons, FDR should have been their patron saint, so his admirers claimed. He deﬂected popular resentments against business and may have saved the American system of free enterprise. Roosevelt’s quarrel was not with capitalism but with capitalists; he purged American capitalism of some of its worst abuses so that it might be saved from itself. He may even have headed off a more radical swing to the left by a mild dose of what was mistakenly reviled as “socialism.” The head of the American Socialist party, when once asked if the New Deal had carried out the Socialist program, reportedly replied that it had indeed—on a stretcher. Nor, Roosevelt’s defenders claimed, did the New Deal bankrupt the United States: the sensational increase in the national debt was caused by World War II, not the New Deal. The national debt was only $40 billion in 1939 but $258 billion in 1945. Roosevelt, like Jefferson, provided bold reform without a bloody revolution—at a time in history when some foreign nations were suffering armed uprisings and when many Europeans were predicting either communism or fascism for America. He was upbraided by the left-wing radicals for not going far enough, by the right-wing radicals for going too far. Choosing the middle road, he has been called the greatest Amer ican conser vative since Hamilton. He was in fact Hamiltonian in his espousal of big government, but Jeffersonian in his concern for the “forgotten man.” Demonstrating anew the value of powerful presidential leadership, he exercised that power to relieve the erosion of the nation’s greatest physical resource—its people. He helped preserve democracy in America in a time when democracies abroad were disappearing down the sinkhole of dictatorship. And in playing this role, he unwittingly girded the nation for its part in the titanic war that loomed on the horizon—a war in which democracy the world over would be at stake.

 Our Skipper This pro-FDR cartoon depicts a conﬁdent Roosevelt ignoring his critics while heading cheerily toward economic recovery. In fact, FDR’s New Deal brought neither the recovery he promised nor the ruin his detractors prophesied. The depression dragged on with only periodic improvement for nearly eight years under his leadership, until the cataclysmic emergency of World War II ﬁnally banished unemployment from the land.



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


 CHRONOLOGY

 Roosevelt defeats Hoover for presidency



 Bank holiday Emergency Banking Relief Act Beer and Wine Revenue Act Hundred Days Congress enacts AAA, TVA, HOLC, NRA, and PWA Federal Securities Act Glass-Steagall Banking Reform Act CWA established Twentieth Amendment (changed calendar of congressional sessions and date of presidential inauguration) Twenty-ﬁ rst Amendment (prohibition repealed) Nazis legally come to power in Germany with passage of Enabling Act



Gold Reserve Act
Securities and Exchange Commission
 authorized Indian Reorga ni zation Act FHA established Frazier-Lemke Farm Bankruptcy Act

KEY TERMS
Brain Trust (725) New Deal (825) Hundred Days (827) Glass-Steagall Banking Reform Act (829) Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) (830) National Recovery Administration (NRA) (835) Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA) (837) 


 WPA established Wagner Act Resettlement Administration Social Security Act Public Utility Holding Company Act Schechter “sick chicken” case CIO orga nized



Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act
 Roosevelt defeats Landon for presidency



 USHA established Roosevelt announces “Court-packing” plan



Second AAA
Fair Labor Standards Act




 Reorga ni zation Act Hatch Act

PEOPLE TO KNOW
Dust Bowl (837) Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) (839) Social Security Act (841) Wagner Act (841) Fair Labor Standards Act (842) Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) (843) Court-packing plan (845) Keynesianism (846) 
Franklin Delano
Roosevelt
Eleanor Roosevelt
Harry L. Hopkins
Father Charles
Coughlin


Francis E. Townsend
 Huey P. (“Kingﬁsh”) Long Frances Perkins Mary McLeod Bethune Robert F. Wagner

Varying Viewpoints




How Radical Was the New Deal?


T


 he Great Depression was both a great calamity and a great opportunity. How effectively Franklin Roosevelt responded to the calamity and what use he made of the opportunity are the two great questions that have animated historical debate about the New Deal. Some historians have actually denied that there was much of a connection between the depression and the New Deal. Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., for example, who believed in “cycles” of reform and reaction in American history, wrote that “there would very likely have been some sort of New Deal in the 1930s even without the Depression.” But most of the ﬁ rst generation of historians who wrote about the New Deal (in the 1940s, 1950s, and early 1960s) agreed with Carl Degler’s judgment that the New Deal was “a revolutionary response to a revolutionary situation.” In this view, though Roosevelt never found a means short of war to bring about economic recovery, he shrewdly utilized the stubborn economic crisis as a means to enact sweeping reforms. Some leftist scholars writing in the 1960s, however, notably Barton J. Bernstein, charged that the New Deal did not reach far enough. This criticism echoed the socialist complaint in the 1930s that the depression represented the total collapse of American capitalism and that the New Deal had muffed the chance truly to remake American society. Roosevelt had the chance, these historians argued, to redistribute wealth, improve race relations, and bring the giant corporations to heel. Instead, said these critics, the New Deal simply represented a conser vative holding action to shore up a sagging and corrupt capitalist order. Those charges against the New Deal stimulated another generation of scholars in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s to look closely at the concrete institutional, attitudinal, and economic circumstances in which the New Deal unfolded. Historians such as James Patterson, Alan Brinkley, Kenneth Jackson, Harvard Sitkoff, and Lizabeth Cohen—sometimes loosely referred to as the “constraints school”—concluded that the New Deal offered just about as much reform as

 circumstances allowed and as the majority of Americans wanted. The ﬁ ndings of these historians are impressive: the system of checks and balances limited presidential power; the disproportionate inﬂuence of southern Democrats in Congress stalled attempts to move toward racial justice; the federal system, in fact, inhibited all efforts to initiate change from Washington. Most important, a majority of the American people at the time wanted to reform capitalism, not overthrow it. Industrial workers, for example, were not hapless pawns upon whom the New Deal was foisted, frustrating their yearning for more radical change. Instead, as David Kennedy has argued, they sought security and self-determination in ways quite compatible with the New Deal’s programs for unemployment insurance, old-age pensions, and guarantees of labor’s right to organize. Most recently, scholars such as Alice KesslerHarris, Linda Gordon, and Suzanne Mettler have argued that the New Deal had a more radical effect on men than on women. Social Security, for example, was designed to assist male breadwinners, who were then expected to share their beneﬁts with their dependent wives and children. In addition, married women were rarely favored for government jobs in agencies such as the WPA. As a result, many women found themselves cast ever more ﬁ rmly in the traditional role of wife and mother. At the time, however, most people believed that these were fair, if unequal, solutions to the catastrophic Great Depression. Perhaps William Leuchtenburg summed it up best when he described the New Deal as a “half-way revolution,” neither radical nor conser vative, but accurately reﬂecting the American people’s needs and desires in the 1930s—and for a long time thereafter. The great “New Deal coalition” that dominated American politics for nearly four decades after Roosevelt’s election in 1932 represented a broad consensus in American society about the opportunities and legitimate limits of government efforts to shape the social and economic order.



Chapter 33 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 1933–1939


To Learn More
Alan Brinkley, The End of Reform: New Deal Liberalism in
Depression and War (1995)
———, Voices of Protest: Huey Long, Father Coughlin, and
 the Great Depression (1982) Lizabeth Cohen, Making a New Deal: Industrial Workers in Chicago, 1919–1939 (rev. ed., 2008) Blanche Wiesen Cook, Eleanor Roosevelt: A Life (1992). Michael Denning, The Cultural Front: The Laboring of American Culture in the Twentieth Century (1996) James N. Gregory, American Exodus: The Dustbowl Migration and Okie Culture in California (1989) Robin D. G. Kelley, Hammer and Hoe: Alabama Communists During the Great Depression (1990) David Kennedy, Freedom from Fear: The American People in Depression and War (1999)

Alice Kessler-Harris, In Pursuit of Equity: Men, Women, and
 the Quest for Economic Citizenship in Twentieth-Century America (2001) Lois Scharf, Eleanor Roosevelt: First Lady of American Liberalism (1987) Studs Terkel, Hard Times: An Oral History of the Great Depression (1970)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Franklin D. Roosevelt
 and the Shadow of War




1933–1941
 The epidemic of world lawlessness is spreading. When an epidemic of physical disease starts to spread, the community approves and joins in a quarantine of the patients in order to protect the health of the community against the spread of the disease. . . . There must be positive endeavors to preserve peace. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT, CHICAGO “QUARANTINE SPEECH,” 1937

A


 mericans in the 1930s tried to turn their backs on the world’s problems. Their president at ﬁ rst seemed to share these views. The only battle Roosevelt sought was against the depression. America had its own burdens to shoulder, and the costs of foreign involvement, whether in blood or trea sure, simply seemed too great. But as the clouds of war gathered over Europe, Roosevelt eventually concluded that the United States could no longer remain aloof. Events gradually brought the American people around to his thinking: no nation was safe in an era of international anarchy, and the world could not remain half-enchained and half-free.

The London Conference
 The sixty-six-nation London Economic Conference, meeting in the summer of 1933, revealed how thor-

 oughly Roosevelt’s early foreign policy was subordinated to his strategy for domestic economic recovery. The delegates to the London Conference hoped to organize a coordinated international attack on the global depression. They were particularly eager to stabilize the values of the various nations’ currencies and the rates at which they could be exchanged. Exchange-rate stabilization was essential to the revival of world trade, which had all but evaporated by 1933. Roosevelt at ﬁ rst agreed to send an American delegation to the conference, including Secretary of State Cordell Hull. But the president soon began to have second thoughts about the conference’s agenda. He wanted to pursue his gold-juggling and other inﬂationary policies at home as a means of stimulating American recovery. An international agreement to maintain the value of the dollar in terms of other currencies might tie his hands, and at bottom Roosevelt was unwilling to

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 34 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 1933–1941


 sacriﬁce the possibility of domestic recovery for the sake of international cooperation. While vacationing on a yacht along the New Eng land coast, he dashed off a radio message to London, scolding the conference for attempting to stabilize currencies and essentially declaring America’s withdrawal from the negotiations. Roosevelt’s bombshell announcement yanked the rug from under the London Conference. The delegates adjourned empty-handed, amid cries of American bad faith. Whether the conference could have arrested the worldwide economic slide is debatable, but Roosevelt’s every-man-for-himself attitude plunged the planet even deeper into economic crisis. The collapse of the London Conference also strengthened the global trend toward extreme nationalism, making international cooperation ever more difﬁcult as the dangerous decade of the 1930s unfolded. Reﬂecting the powerful persistence of American isolationism, Roosevelt’s action played directly into the hands of the power-mad dictators who were determined to shatter the peace of the world. Americans themselves would eventually pay a high price for the narrow-minded belief that the United States could go it alone in the modern world.

 Freedom for (from?) the Filipinos and Recognition for the Rus sians Roosevelt matched isolationism from Europe with withdrawal from Asia. The Great Depression burst the fragile bubble of President McKinley’s imperialistic dream in the Far East. With the descent into hard times, American taxpayers were eager to throw overboard their expensive tropical liability in the Philippine Islands. Organized labor demanded the exclusion of low-wage Filipino workers, and American sugar producers clamored for the elimination of Philippine competition. Remembering its earlier promises of freedom for the Philippines, Congress passed the Tydings-McDufﬁe Act in 1934. The act provided for the independence of the Philippines after a twelve-year period of economic and political tutelage—that is, by 1946. The United States agreed to relinquish its army bases, but naval bases were reserved for future discussion—and retention. In truth, the American people were not so much giving freedom to the Philippines as they were freeing themselves from the Philippines. With a selﬁsh eye to their own welfare, and with apparent disregard for the political situation in Asia, they proposed to leave the

Just Another Customer, 1933 The United States
 recognizes the Soviet Union.

 Philippines to their fate, while imposing upon the Filipinos economic terms so ungenerous as to threaten the islands with economic prostration. Once again, American isolationists rejoiced. Yet in Tokyo, Japa nese militarists were calculating that they had little to fear from an inward-looking America that was abandoning its principal possession in Asia. At the same time, Roosevelt made at least one internationalist gesture when he formally recognized the Soviet Union in 1933. Over the noisy protests of anticommunist conser vatives, as well as Roman Catholics offended by the Kremlin’s antireligious policies, Roosevelt extended the hand of diplomatic recognition to the sixteen-year-old Bolshevik regime. He was motivated in part by the hope for trade with Soviet Russia, as well as by the desire to bolster the Soviet Union as a friendly counterweight to the possible threat of German power in Europe and Japa nese power in Asia.

 Roosevelt's Early Foreign Policies

Becoming a Good Neighbor
 Closer to home, Roosevelt inaugurated a refreshing new era in relations with Latin America. He proclaimed in his inaugural address, “I would dedicate this nation to the policy of the Good Neighbor.” Taken together, Roosevelt’s noninvolvement in Europe and withdrawal from Asia, along with this brotherly embrace of his New World neighbors, suggested that the United States was giving up its ambition to be a world power and would content itself instead with being merely a regional power, its interests and activities conﬁ ned exclusively to the Western Hemisphere. Old-fashioned intervention by bayonet in the Caribbean had not paid off, except in an evil harvest of resentment, suspicion, and fear. The Great Depression had cooled off Yankee economic aggressiveness, as thousands of investors in Latin American securities became sackholders rather than stockholders. There were now fewer dollars to be protected by the riﬂes of the hated marines. With war-thirsty dictators seizing power in Europe and Asia, Roosevelt was eager to line up the Latin Americans to help defend the Western Hemisphere. Embittered neighbors would be potential tools of transoceanic aggressors. President Roosevelt made clear at the outset that he was going to renounce armed intervention, particularly the vexatious corollary to the Monroe Doctrine devised by his cousin Theodore Roosevelt. Late in 1933, at the Seventh Pan-American Conference in Montevideo, Uruguay, the U.S. delegation formally endorsed nonintervention. Deeds followed words. The last marines departed from Haiti in 1934. The same year, after military strongman Fulgencio Batista had come to power, restive Cuba was released from the worst hobbles of the Platt Amendment, under which America had been free to intervene, although the United States retained its naval base at Guantánamo (see p. 684). The tiny country of Panama received a similar uplift in 1936, when Washington partially relaxed its grip on the isthmus nation. The hope-inspiring Good Neighbor policy, with the accent on consultation and nonintervention, received its acid test in Mexico. When the Mexican government seized Yankee oil properties in 1938, American investors vehemently demanded armed intervention to repossess their conﬁscated businesses. But Roosevelt successfully resisted the badgering, and a settlement was ﬁ nally threshed out in 1941, even though the oil companies lost much of their original stake.



 Spectacular success crowned Roosevelt’s Good Neighbor policy. His earnest attempts to usher in a new era of friendliness, though hurting some U.S. bondholders, paid rich dividends in goodwill among the peoples to the south. No other citizen of the United States has ever been held in such high esteem in Latin America during his lifetime. Roosevelt was cheered with tumultuous enthusiasm when, as a “traveling salesman for peace,” he journeyed to the special InterAmerican Conference at Buenos Aires, Argentina, in 1936. The Colossus of the North now seemed less a vulture and more an eagle.

 Secretary Hull’s Reciprocal Trade Agreements Intimately associated with Good Neighborism, and also popular in Latin America, was the reciprocal trade policy of the New Dealers. Its chief architect was idealistic Secretary of State Hull, a high-minded Tennessean of the low-tariff school. Like Roosevelt, he believed that trade was a two-way street, that a nation can sell abroad only as it buys abroad, that tariff barriers choke off foreign trade, and that trade wars beget shooting wars. Responding to the Hull-Roosevelt leadership, Congress passed the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act in 1934. Designed in part to lift American export trade from the depression doldrums, this enlightened mea sure was aimed at both relief and recovery. At the same time, it activated the low-tariff policies of the New Dealers. (See the tariff chart in the Appendix.) The Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act avoided the dangerous uncertainties of a wholesale tariff revision; it merely whittled down the most objectionable schedules of the Hawley-Smoot law by amending them. Roosevelt was empowered to lower existing rates by as much as 50 percent, provided that the other country involved was willing to respond with similar reductions. The resulting pacts, moreover, were to become effective without the formal approval of the Senate. This novel feature not only ensured speedier action but sidestepped the twin evils of high-stakes logrolling and high-pressure lobbying in Congress. Secretary Hull, whose zeal for reciprocity was unﬂagging, succeeded in negotiating pacts with twentyone countries by the end of 1939. During these same years, U.S. foreign trade increased appreciably, presumably in part as a result of the Hull-Roosevelt policies. Trade agreements undoubtedly bettered economic



Chapter 34 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 1933–1941


 and political relations with Latin America and proved to be an inﬂuence for peace in a war-bent world. The Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act was a landmark piece of legislation. It reversed the traditional high-protective-tariff policy that had persisted almost unbroken since Civil War days and that had so damaged the American and international economies following World War I. It also paved the way for the American-led free-trade international economic system that took shape after World War II, a period that witnessed the most robust growth in the history of international trade.

 space for its teeming millions, cooped-up in their crowded island nation. Japa nese navalists were not to be denied. Determined to ﬁ nd a place in the Asiatic sun, Tokyo gave notice in 1934 of the termination of the twelve-yearold Washington Naval Treaty. A year later at London, the Japa nese torpedoed all hope of effective naval disarmament. Upon being denied complete parity, they walked out of the multipower conference and accelerated their construction of giant battleships. By 1935 Japan, too, had quit the League of Nations. Five years later it joined arms with Germany and Italy in the Tripartite Pact.

Storm-Cellar Isolationism
 Post-1918 chaos in Europe, followed by the Great Depression, spawned the ominous spread of totalitarianism. The individual was nothing; the state was every thing. The communist USSR led the way, with the crafty and ruthless Joseph Stalin ﬁ nally emerging as dictator. In 1936 he began to purge his communist state of all suspected dissidents, ultimately executing hundreds of thousands and banishing millions to remote Siberian forced-labor camps. Blustery Benito Mussolini, a swaggering Fascist, seized the reins of power in Italy during 1922. And Adolf Hitler, a fanatic with a toothbrush mustache, plotted and harangued his way into control of Germany in 1933 with liberal use of the “big lie.” Hitler was the most dangerous of the dictators, because he combined tremendous power with impulsiveness. A frustrated Austrian painter, with hypnotic talents as an orator and a leader, he had secured control of the Nazi party by making political capital of the Treaty of Versailles and Germany’s depression-spawned unemployment. He was thus a misbegotten child of the shortsighted postwar policies of the victorious Allies, including the United States. The desperate German people had fallen in behind the new Pied Piper, for they saw no other hope of escape from the plague of economic chaos and national disgrace. Hitler withdrew Germany from the League of Nations in 1933 and began clandestinely (and illegally) rearming. In 1936 the Nazi Hitler and the Fascist Mussolini allied themselves in the Rome-Berlin Axis. International gangsterism was likewise spreading in the Far East, where imperial Japan was on the make. Like Germany and Italy, Japan was a so-called have-not power. Like them, it resented the ungenerous Treaty of Versailles. Like them, it demanded additional

Adolf Hitler Reviewing Troops, Berlin, 1939
 Egging his people on with theatrical displays of pomp and ceremony, Hitler had created a vast military machine by 1939, when he started World War II with a brutal attack against Poland.

Isolationism Enthroned


 Jut-jawed Mussolini, seeking both glory and empire in Africa, brutally attacked Ethiopia in 1935 with bombers and tanks. The brave defenders, armed with spears and ancient ﬁ rearms, were speedily crushed. Members of the League of Nations could have caused Mussolini’s war machine to creak to a halt—if they had only dared to embargo oil. But when the League quailed rather than risk global hostilities, it merely signed its own death warrant. Isolationism, long festering in America, received a strong boost from these alarms abroad. Though disapproving of the dictators, Americans still believed that their encircling seas conferred a kind of mystic immunity. They were continuing to suffer the disillusion-



 The thirst of Benito Mussolini (1883–1945) for national glory in Ethiopia is indicated by his remark in 1940:

“


 To make a people great it is necessary to send them to battle even if you have to kick (The Italians were them in the pants. notoriously unwarlike.)

”


 In 1934 Mussolini proclaimed in a public speech,

“ ”


 We have buried the putrid corpse of liberty.

 ment born of their participation in World War I, which they now regarded as a colossal blunder. They likewise nursed bitter memories of the ungrateful and defaulting debtors. As early as 1934, a spiteful Congress passed the Johnson Debt Default Act, which prevented debtdodging nations from borrowing further in the United States. If attacked again by aggressors, these delinquents could “stew in their own juices.” Mired down in the Great Depression, Americans had no real appreciation of the revolutionary forces being harnessed by the dictators. The “have-not” powers were out to become “have” powers. Americans were not so much afraid that totalitarian aggression would cause trouble as they were fearful that they might be drawn into it. Strong nationwide sentiment welled up for a constitutional amendment to forbid a declaration of war by Congress—except in case of invasion— unless there was a favorable popular referendum. With a mixture of seriousness and frivolity, a group of Princeton University students began to agitate in 1936 for a bonus to be paid to the Veterans of Future Wars (VFW) while the prospective frontliners were still alive.

Congress Legislates
Neutrality


 The Wages of Despair Disillusioned and desperate, millions of Germans in the 1930s looked to Adolf Hitler as their savior from the harsh terms of the Treaty of Versailles, which had concluded World War I. This Nazi poster reads, “Our Last Hope: Hitler.”

 As the gloomy 1930s lengthened, an avalanche of lurid articles and books condemning the munitions manufacturers as war-fomenting “merchants of death” poured from American presses. A Senate committee, headed by Senator Gerald Nye of North Dakota, was appointed in 1934 to investigate the “blood business.” By sensationalizing evidence regarding America’s entry into World War I, the senatorial probers tended to



Chapter 34 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 1933–1941


 shift the blame away from the German submarines onto the American bankers and arms manufacturers. Because the munitions makers had obviously made money out of the war, many a naive citizen leaped to the illogical conclusion that these soulless scavengers had caused the war in order to make money. This kind of reasoning suggested that if the proﬁts could only be removed from the arms trafﬁc—“one hell of a business”—the country could steer clear of any world conﬂ ict that might erupt in the future. Responding to overwhelming popular pressure, Congress made haste to legislate the nation out of war. Action was spurred by the danger that Mussolini’s Ethiopian assault would plunge the world into a new bloodbath. The Neutrality Acts of 1935, 1936, and 1937, taken together, stipulated that when the president proclaimed the existence of a foreign war, certain restrictions would automatically go into effect. No American could legally sail on a belligerent ship, sell or transport munitions to a belligerent, or make loans to a belligerent. This head-in-the-sand legislation in effect marked an abandonment of the traditional policy of freedom

 of the seas—a policy for which America had professedly fought two full-ﬂedged wars and several undeclared wars. The Neutrality Acts were speciﬁcally tailored to keep the nation out of a conﬂ ict like World War I. If they had been in effect at that time, America probably would not have been sucked in—at least not in April 1917. Congress was one war too late with its legislation. What had seemed dishonorable to Wilson seemed honorable and desirable to a later disillusioned generation. Storm-cellar neutrality proved to be tragically shortsighted. America falsely assumed that the decision for peace or war lay in its own hands, not in those of the satanic forces already unleashed in the world. Prisoner of its own fears, it failed to recognize that it might have used its enormous power to shape international events. Instead it remained at the mercy of events controlled by the dictators. Statutory neutrality, though of undoubted legality, was of dubious morality. America served notice that it would make no distinction whatever between brutal aggressors and innocent victims. By striving to hold the scales even, it actually overbalanced them in favor of the dictators, who had armed themselves to the teeth. By declining to use its vast industrial strength to aid its democratic friends and defeat its totalitarian foes, it helped goad the aggressors along their bloodspattered path of conquest.

America Dooms Loyalist Spain


“The Only Way We Can Save Her,” 1939 Even as war
 broke out in Europe, many Americans continued to insist on the morality of U.S. neutrality.

 The Spanish Civil War of 1936–1939—a proving ground and dress rehearsal in miniature for World War II— was a painful object lesson in the folly of neutralityby-legislation. Spanish rebels, who rose against the left-leaning republican government in Madrid, were headed by fascistic General Francisco Franco. Generously aided by his fellow conspirators Hitler and Mussolini, he undertook to overthrow the established Loyalist regime, which in turn was assisted on a smaller scale by the Soviet Union. This pipeline from communist Moscow chilled the natural sympathies of many Americans, especially Roman Catholics, for the republican Loyalists. But other Americans burned with passion to defend the struggling republic against Franco’s fascist coup. Some three thousand young men and women headed to Spain to ﬁght as volunteers in the Abraham Lincoln Brigade. Washington continued ofﬁcial relations with the Loyalist government. But Congress, with the encour-

The Spanish Civil War


 agement of Roosevelt and with only one dissenting vote, amended the existing neutrality legislation so as to apply an arms embargo to both Loyalists and rebels. “Roosevelt,” remarked the dictator Franco, “behaved in the manner of a true gentleman.” FDR later regretted being so gentlemanly. Uncle Sam thus sat on the sidelines while Franco, abundantly supplied with arms and men by his fellow dictators, strangled the republican government of Spain. The democracies, including the United States, were so determined to stay out of war that they helped to condemn a fellow democracy to death. In so doing they further encouraged the dictators to take the dangerous road that led over the precipice to World War II. Such peace-at-any-price-ism was further cursed with illogic. Although determined to stay out of war, America declined to build up its armed forces to a point where it could deter the aggressors. In fact, it allowed its navy to decline in relative strength. It had been led to believe that huge ﬂeets caused huge wars; it was also trying to spare the complaining taxpayer during the grim days of the Great Depression. When President Roosevelt repeatedly called for preparedness, he was branded a warmonger. Not until 1938, the year

Canute Frankson (1890–194?), an African American
 member of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade, explained why he went to Spain to ﬁght against the fascist Franco in 1937:

“


 Since this is a war between whites who for centuries have held us in slavery, and have heaped every kind of insult and abuse upon us, segregated and Jim-crowed us; why [am] I, a Negro . . . in Spain today? Because we are no longer an isolated minority group ﬁghting hopelessly against an immense giant. . . . Because if we crush Fascism here we’ll save our people in America, and in other parts of the world from the vicious persecution, wholesale imprisonment, and slaughter which the Jewish people . . . are suffering under Hitler’s Fascist heels. . . . We will build us a new society—a society of peace and plenty. There will be no color line, no jim-crow trains, no lynching. That is why, my dear, I’m here in Spain.

”




 America’s policy toward Spain “had been a grave mistake,” Franklin D. Roosevelt (1882–1945) told his cabinet in early 1939:

“


 The policy we should have adopted was to forbid the transportation of munitions of war in American bottoms [ships]. This could have been done and Loyalist Spain would still have been able to come to us for what she needed to ﬁght for her life against Franco—to ﬁght for her life and for the lives of some of the rest of us as well, as events will very likely prove.

”


 before World War II exploded, did Congress come to grips with the problem when it passed a billion-dollar naval construction act. The calamitous story was repeated of too little, too late.

Appeasing Japan and Germany
 Sulfurous war clouds had meanwhile been gathering in the tension-taut Far East. In 1937 the Japa nese militarists, at the Marco Polo Bridge near Beijing (Peking), touched off the explosion that led to an all-out invasion of China. In a sense this attack was the curtainraiser of World War II. Roosevelt shrewdly declined to invoke the recently passed neutrality legislation by refusing to call the China incident an ofﬁcially declared war. If he had put the existing restrictions into effect, he would have cut off the trickle of munitions on which the Chinese were desperately dependent. The Japa nese, of course, could continue to buy mountains of war supplies in the United States. In Chicago—unofﬁcial isolationist “capital” of America—President Roosevelt delivered his sensational Quarantine Speech in the autumn of 1937. Alarmed by the recent aggressions of Italy and Japan, he called for “positive endeavors” to “quarantine” the aggressors— presumably by economic embargoes. The speech triggered a cyclone of protest from isolationists and other foes of involvement; they feared that a moral quarantine would lead to a shooting quarantine. Startled by this angry response, Roosevelt retreated and sought less direct means to curb the dictators.



Chapter 34 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 1933–1941


 America’s isolationist mood intensiﬁed, especially in regard to China. In December 1937 Japanese aviators bombed and sank an American gunboat, the Panay, in Chinese waters, with a loss of two killed and thirty wounded. In the days of 1898, when the Maine went down, this outrage might have provoked war. But after Tokyo hastened to make the necessary apologies and pay a proper indemnity, Americans breathed a deep sigh of relief. Japa nese militarists were thus encouraged to vent their anger against the “superior” white race by subjecting American civilians in China, both male and female, to humiliating slappings and strippings. Adolf Hitler meanwhile grew louder and bolder in Europe. In 1935 he had openly ﬂouted the Treaty of Versailles by introducing compulsory military ser vice in Germany. The next year he brazenly marched into the demilitarized German Rhineland, likewise contrary to the detested treaty, while France and Britain looked on in an agony of indecision. Lashing his following to a frenzy, Hitler undertook to persecute and then exterminate the Jewish population in the areas under his control. In the end he wiped out about 6 million innocent victims, mostly in gas chambers. Calling upon his people to sacriﬁce butter for guns, he whipped the new German air force and mechanized ground divisions into the most devastating military machine the world had yet seen. Suddenly, in March 1938, Hitler bloodlessly occupied German-speaking Austria, his birthplace. The democratic powers, wringing their hands in despair, prayed that this last grab would satisfy his passion for conquest. But like a drunken reveler calling for madder music and stronger wine, Hitler could not stop. Intoxicated by his recent gains, he began to make bullying demands for the German-inhabited Sudetenland of neighboring Czechoslovakia. The leaders of Britain and France, eager to appease Hitler, sought frantically to bring the dispute to the conference table. President Roosevelt, also deeply alarmed, kept the wires hot with personal messages to both Hitler and Mussolini urging a peaceful settlement. A conference was ﬁ nally held in Munich, Germany, in September 1938. The Western European democracies, badly unprepared for war, betrayed Czechoslovakia to Germany when they consented to the shearing away of the Sudetenland. They hoped—and these hopes were shared by the American people—that the concessions at the conference table would slake Hitler’s thirst for power and bring “peace in our time.” Indeed Hitler publicly promised that the Sudetenland “is the last territorial claim I have to make in Europe.”

 What Next? 1938 The Western European democracies looked on helplessly as Nazi Germany swallowed up Austria and part of Czechoslovakia in 1938, and Hitler’s juggernaut seemed unstoppable.

 Appeasement of the dictators, symbolized by the ugly word Munich, turned out to be merely surrender on the installment plan. It was like giving a cannibal a ﬁ nger in the hope of saving an arm. In March 1939, scarcely six months later, Hitler suddenly erased the rest of Czechoslovakia from the map, contrary to his solemn vows. The democratic world was again stunned.

 Hitler’s Belligerency and U.S. Neutrality Joseph Stalin, the sphinx of the Kremlin, was a key to the peace puzzle. In the summer of 1939, the British and French were busily negotiating with Moscow, hopeful of securing a mutual-defense treaty that would halt Hitler. But mutual suspicions proved insuperable. Then the Soviet Union astounded the world by signing, on August 23, 1939, a nonaggression treaty with the German dictator. The notorious Hitler-Stalin pact meant that the Nazi German leader now had a green light to make war

Hitler Launches His War


 on Poland and the Western democracies, without fearing a stab in the back from the Soviet Union—his Communist arch-foe. Consternation struck those wishful thinkers in Western Europe who had fondly hoped that Hitler might be sicced upon Stalin so that the twin menaces would bleed each other to death. It was as plain as the mustache on Stalin’s face that the wily Soviet dictator was plotting to turn his German accomplice against the Western democracies. The two warring camps would then kill each other off—and leave Stalin bestriding Europe like a colossus. With the signing of the Nazi-Soviet pact, World War II was only hours away. Hitler now demanded from neighboring Poland a return of the areas wrested from Germany after World War I. Failing to secure satisfaction, he sent his mechanized divisions crashing into Poland at dawn on September 1, 1939. Britain and France, honoring their commitments to Poland, promptly declared war. At long last they perceived the folly of continued appeasement. But they were powerless to aid Poland, which succumbed in three weeks to Hitler’s smashing strategy of terror. Stalin, as prearranged secretly in his fateful pact with Hitler, came in on the kill for his share of old Russian Poland. Long-dreaded World War II was now fully launched, and the long truce of 1919–1939 had come to an end. President Roosevelt speedily issued the routine proclamations of neutrality. Americans were overwhelmingly anti-Nazi and anti-Hitler; they fervently hoped that the democracies would win; they fondly believed that the forces of righteousness would triumph, as in 1918. But they were desperately determined to stay out: they were not going to be “suckers” again. Neutrality promptly became a heated issue in the United States. Ill-prepared Britain and France urgently needed American airplanes and other weapons, but the Neutrality Act of 1937 raised a sternly forbidding

 President Roosevelt was roused at 3 a.m. on September 1, 1939, by a telephone call from Ambassador William Bullitt (1891–1967) in Paris:

“


 Mr. President, several German divisions are deep in Polish territory. . . . There are reports of bombers over the city of Warsaw.

 FDR replied,

“ ”


 Well, Bill, it has come at last. God help us all.

”




 hand. Roosevelt summoned Congress in special session, shortly after the invasion of Poland, to consider lifting the arms embargo. After six hectic weeks of debate, a makeshift law emerged. The Neutrality Act of 1939 provided that henceforth the European democracies might buy American war materials, but only on a “cash-and-carry basis.” This meant that they would have to transport the munitions in their own ships, after paying for them in cash. America would thus avoid loans, war debts, and the torpedoing of American arms-carriers. While Congress thus loosened former restrictions in response to interventionist cries, it added others in response to isolationist fears. Roosevelt was now also authorized to proclaim danger zones into which American merchant ships would be forbidden to enter. This unneutral neutrality law unfortunately hurt China, which was effectively blockaded by the Imperial Japa nese Navy. But despite its defects, it clearly favored the European democracies against the dictators. As the British and French navies controlled the Atlantic, the European aggressors could not send their ships to buy America’s munitions. The United States not only improved its moral position but simultaneously helped its economic position. Overseas demand for war goods brought a sharp upswing from the recession of 1937–1938 and ultimately solved the decadelong unemployment crisis (see Figure 33.4 on p. 847).

The Fall of France
 The months following the collapse of Poland, while France and Britain marked time, were known as the “phony war.” An ominous silence fell on Europe, as Hitler shifted his victorious divisions from Poland for a knockout blow at France. Inaction during this anxious period was relieved by the Soviets, who wantonly attacked neighboring Finland in an effort to secure strategic buffer territory. The debt-paying Finns, who had a host of admirers in America, were speedily granted $30 million by an isolationist Congress for nonmilitary supplies. But despite heroic resistance, Finland was ﬁnally ﬂattened by the Soviet steamroller. An abrupt end to the “phony war” came in April 1940 when Hitler, again without warning, overran his weaker neighbors Denmark and Norway. Hardly pausing for breath, the next month he attacked the Netherlands and Belgium, followed by a paralyzing blow at France. By late June France was forced to surrender, but not until Mussolini had pounced on its rear for a jackal’s share of the loot. In a pell-mell but successful



Chapter 34 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 1933–1941


 Adolf Hitler (1889–1945) promised to win his fellow Germans Lebensraum, or “living space,” and to win it by war if necessary. In his eyes, his nationalist and racist crusade justiﬁed every violent means at hand. As he told his commanders,

“


 When you start a war, what matters is not who is right, but who wins. Close your hearts to pity. Act with brutality. Eighty million Germans must get what is their due. Their existence must be made secure. The stronger man is in the right.

”


 Hitler Swaggers into Paris, 1940 The fall of France to German forces in June 1940 was a galling blow to French pride and convinced many Americans that their country must mobilize to defeat the Nazi menace.

 evacuation from the French port of Dunkirk, the British managed to salvage the bulk of their shattered and partially disarmed army. The crisis providentially brought forth an inspired leader in Prime Minister Winston Churchill, the bulldog-jawed orator who nerved his people to ﬁght off the fearful air bombings of their cities. France’s sudden collapse shocked Americans out of their daydreams. Stouthearted Britons, singing “There’ll Always Be an Eng land,” were all that stood between Hitler and the death of constitutional government in Europe. If Britain went under, Hitler would have at his disposal the workshops, shipyards, and slave labor of Western Europe. He might even have the powerful British ﬂeet as well. This frightening possibility, which seemed to pose a dire threat to American security, steeled the American people to a tremendous effort.

 Roosevelt moved with electrifying energy and dispatch. He called upon an already debt-burdened nation to build huge airﬂeets and a two-ocean navy, which could also check Japan. Congress, jarred out of its apathy toward preparedness, within a year appropriated the astounding sum of $37 billion. This ﬁgure was more than the total cost of ﬁghting World War I and about ﬁve times larger than any New Deal annual budget. Congress also passed a conscription law, approved September 6, 1940. Under this mea sure—America’s ﬁ rst peacetime draft—provision was made for training each year 1.2 million troops and 800,000 reserves.

 President Roosevelt made a compelling case against the isolationists in a speech at the University of Virginia on June 10, 1940:

“


 Some indeed still hold to the now somewhat obvious delusion that we of the United States can safely permit the United States to become a lone island, a lone island in a world dominated by the philosophy of force. Such an island may be the dream of those who still talk and vote as isolationists. Such an island represents to me and to the overwhelming majority of Americans today a helpless nightmare of a people without freedom—the nightmare of a people lodged in prison, handcuffed, hungry, and fed through the bars from day to day by the contemptuous, unpitying masters of other continents.

”


 Public-Opinion Polling in the 1930s n 1936 the prominent news publication Literary Digest made a monumental gaffe when it relied on public-opinion polling data to forecast a victory for the Republican candidate, Alf Landon, over the incumbent, Franklin D. Roosevelt. As it happened, Roosevelt racked up a monstrous majority, winning the electoral votes of all but two states. The Digest’s error had been to compile its polling lists from records of automobile registration and telephone directories—unwittingly skewing its sample toward relatively well-off voters in an era when fewer than half of American families owned either a car or a telephone. The Digest’s embarrassing mistake ended an era of informal polling techniques, as new, scientiﬁcally sophisticated polling orga ni zations founded by George Gallup and Elmo Roper forged to the fore.

 From this date forward, polling became a standard tool for marketers and advertisers—as well as for political strategists and historians. Yet controversy has long clouded the relationship between pollsters and politicians, who are often accused of abdicating their roles as leaders and slavishly deferring to public opinion, rather than trying to shape it. Franklin Roosevelt confronted this issue in the 1930s, as polls seemed to conﬁ rm the stubborn isolationism of the American people, even as the president grew increasingly convinced that the United States must play a more active international role. What do the poll results below suggest about Roosevelt’s handling of this issue? About the reliability of polling data? What are the legitimate political uses of publicopinion polls? How valuable are they to the historian?

 [ 1.] (U.S. Oct 3 ’39) Do you think the United States should do everything possible to help England and France win the war, except go to war ourselves? (AIPO)

 [ 3.] (U.S. May 29 ’40) If the question of the United States going to war against Germany came up for a national vote to go to war (go into the war or stay out of the war)? (AIPO)

I


Yes 62%


No 38%


 [ 2.] (U.S. Oct 3 ’39) If it appears that Germany is defeating England and France, should the United States declare war on Germany and send our army and navy to Europe to fight? (AIPO) National total . . . . . .

Yes
29%


No
71%


Yes 16%
No 84%
(June 11 ’40) . . . . Go in 19%
Stay out 81%


[ 4.] (U.S. Aug 5 ’41) Should the United States go to
 war now against Japan? (AIPO)

(Oct 22 ’41) . . . .


Yes
22%


No
 No opinion 78% = 100% 11%

BY GEOGRAPHICAL SECTION

New England .
Middle Atlantic
 East central . . West central . . South. . . . . . . West . . . . . . .

.
.
.
.
.
.


.
.
.
.
.
.


.
.
.
.
.
.


.
.
.
.
.
.


.
.
.
.
.
.


33%


67%


(Jan 30 ’40) National
 total . . . . . . . . . . . . 23%

77%


[ 5.] (U.S. Sept 17 ’41) Should the United States go
 into the war now and send an army to Europe to fight? (AIPO) Yes

9%


No


87%


 No opinion

4%


 [ 6.] (U.S. Nov 5 ’41) If, in trying to defeat Germany, it becomes necessary to send a large American army to Europe, would you favor this step? (AIPO) Yes 47%

No 46%


 No opinion 7%

 Source: From Hadley Cantril, ed., Public Opinion, 1935–1946 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1951).





Chapter 34 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 1933–1941


 The act was later adapted to the requirements of a global war. The Latin American bulwark likewise needed bracing. The Netherlands, Denmark, and France, all crushed under the German jackboot, had orphaned colonies in the New World. Would these fall into German hands? At the Havana Conference of 1940, the United States agreed to share with its twenty New World neighbors the responsibility of upholding the Monroe Doctrine. This ancient dictum, hitherto unilateral, had been a bludgeon brandished only in the hated Yankee ﬁst. Now multilateral, it was to be wielded by twentyone pairs of American hands—at least in theory.

 Refugees from the Holocaust Aroused by Adolf Hitler, the ancient demon of antiSemitism brutally bared its fangs. During the late nineteenth century, Jewish communities in eastern Europe were frequent victims of pogroms, mob attacks approved or condoned by local authorities. In modern Germany primeval violence reappeared with shocking

 efﬁciency on the night of November 9, 1938. Instigated by a speech by Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels, mobs ransacked more than seven thousand Jewish shops and almost all of the country’s synagogues. At least ninety-one Jews lost their lives, and about thirty thousand were sent to concentration camps in the turbulent wake of Kristallnacht, the “night of broken glass.” Many Jews attempted to escape from Hitler’s racist juggernaut. To take one poignant case, in May 1939, 937 passengers, almost all of them Jewish refugees, boarded the ship St. Louis in Hamburg and departed for Havana. When they reached Cuba, however, most were denied entry for lack of a valid Cuban visa. The St. Louis then sailed to Miami, which proved no more hospitable. President Roosevelt brieﬂ y showed some interest in accepting the beleaguered passengers, but restrictive immigration laws, together with opposition from southern Democrats and Secretary of State Cordell Hull, convinced him otherwise. After being turned away one last time in Canada, the St. Louis eventually deposited its passengers in Eng land, France, Belgium, and the Netherlands, where many of them subsequently perished under the Nazi heel.

 Shattered Jewish Storefronts in Berlin. This photo was taken after the attacks of Kristallnacht on November 9, 1938.

Aid for Britain


Albert Einstein Arriving in America, 1933
 Sadly, the United States admitted only a trickle of Jewish refugees, while the Holocaust engulfed European Jewry.



 Roosevelt faced a historic decision: whether to hunker down in the Western Hemisphere, assume a “Fortress America” defensive posture, and let the rest of the world go it alone; or to bolster beleaguered Britain by all means short of war itself. Both sides had their advocates. Supporters of aid to Britain formed propaganda groups, the most potent of which was the Committee to Defend America by Aiding the Allies. Its argument was double-barreled. To interventionists it could appeal for direct succor to the British by such slogans as “Britain Is Fighting Our Fight.” To isolationists it could appeal for assistance to the democracies by “All Methods Short of War,” so that the terrible conﬂ ict would be kept in faraway Europe. The isolationists, both numerous and sincere, were by no means silent. Determined to avoid American

 After reports of the Nazi genocide began to be veriﬁed in 1942, Roosevelt created the War Refugee Board, which saved thousands of Hungarian Jews from deportation to the notorious death camp at Auschwitz. But all told, only 150,000 Jews, mostly Germans and Austrians, found refuge in the United States. By the end of the war, some 6 million Jews had been murdered in the Holocaust.

Bolstering Britain
 Before the fall of France in June 1940, Washington had generally observed a technical neutrality. But now, as Britain alone stood between Hitler and his dream of world domination, the wisdom of neutrality seemed increasingly questionable. Hitler launched air attacks against Britain in August 1940, preparatory to an invasion scheduled for September. For months the Battle of Britain raged in the air over the British Isles. The Royal Air Force’s tenacious defense of its native islands eventually led Hitler to postpone his planned invasion indeﬁ nitely. During the precarious months of the Battle of Britain, debate intensiﬁed in the United States over what foreign policy to embrace. Radio broadcasts from London brought the drama of the nightly German air raids directly into millions of American homes. Sympathy for Britain grew, but it was not yet sufﬁcient to push the United States into war.

 Pro-British Propaganda This patriotic poster was put out by the Committee to Defend America by Aiding the Allies.



Chapter 34 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 1933–1941


 bloodshed at all costs, they orga nized the America First Committee and proclaimed, “Eng land Will Fight to the Last American.” They contended that America should concentrate what strength it had to defend its own shores, lest a victorious Hitler, after crushing Britain, plot a transoceanic assault. Their basic philosophy was “The Yanks Are Not Coming,” and their most effective speechmaker was the famed aviator Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh, who, ironically, had narrowed the Atlantic in 1927. Britain was in critical need of destroyers, for German submarines were again threatening to starve it out with attacks on shipping. Roosevelt moved boldly when, on September 2, 1940, he agreed to transfer to Great Britain ﬁ fty old-model, four-funnel destroyers left over from World War I. In return, the British promised to hand over to the United States eight valuable defensive base sites, stretching from Newfoundland to South America. These strategically located outposts were to remain under the Stars and Stripes for ninetynine years. Transferring ﬁfty destroyers to a foreign navy was a highly questionable disposal of government property, despite a strained interpretation of existing legislation. The exchange was achieved by a simple presidential agreement, without so much as a “by your leave” to Congress. Applause burst from the aid-to-Britain advocates, many of whom had been urging such a step. But condemnation arose from America Firsters and other isolationists, as well as from antiadministration Republicans. Some of them approved the transfer but decried Roosevelt’s secretive and arbitrary methods. Yet so grave was the crisis that the president was unwilling to submit the scheme to the uncertainties and delays of a full-dress debate in the Congress. Shifting warships from a neutral United States to a belligerent Britain was, beyond question, a ﬂagrant violation of neutral obligations—at least neutral obligations that had existed before Hitler’s barefaced aggressions rendered foolish such old-fashioned concepts of fair play. Public-opinion polls demonstrated that a majority of Americans were determined, even at the risk of armed hostilities, to provide the battered British with “all aid short of war.”

Shattering the Two-Term
Tradition
 A distracting presidential election, as fate decreed, came in the midst of this crisis. The two leading Repub-

 lican aspirants were round-faced and ﬂat-voiced Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio, son of the ex-president, and the energetic boy wonder, lawyer-prosecutor Thomas E. Dewey of New York. But in one of the miracles of American political history, the Philadelphia convention was swept off its feet by a colorful latecomer, Wendell L. Willkie, a German-descended son of Hoosier Indiana. This dynamic lawyer—tousled-headed, longlipped, broad-faced, and large-framed—had until recently been a Democrat and the head of a huge public utility corporation. A complete novice in politics, he had rocketed from political nothingness in a few short weeks. His great appeal lay in his personality, for he was magnetic, transparently trustful, and honest in a homespun, Lincolnesque way. With the galleries in Philadelphia wildly chanting “We Want Willkie,” the delegates ﬁ nally accepted this political upstart as the only candidate who could possibly beat Roosevelt. The Republican platform condemned FDR’s alleged dictatorship, as well as the costly and confusing zigzags of the New Deal. Willkie, an outspoken liberal, was opposed not so much to the New Deal as to its extravagances and inefﬁciencies. Democratic critics branded him “the rich man’s Roosevelt” and “the simple barefoot Wall Street lawyer.” While the rumor pot boiled, Roosevelt delayed to the last minute the announcement of his decision to challenge the sacred two-term tradition. Despite what he described as his personal yearning for retirement, he avowed that in so grave a crisis he owed his experienced hand to the ser vice of his country and humanity. The Democratic delegates in Chicago, realizing that only with “the Champ” could they defeat Willkie, drafted him by a technically unanimous vote. “Better a Third Term Than a Third-Rater” was the war cry of many Democrats. Burning with sincerity and energy, Willkie launched out upon a whirlwind, Bryanesque campaign in which he delivered over ﬁve hundred speeches. At times his voice became a hoarse croak. The country was already badly split between interventionists and isolationists, and Willkie might have widened the breach dangerously by a violent attack on Roosevelt’s aid-to-Britain policies. But seeing eye-to-eye with FDR on the necessity of bolstering the beleaguered democracies, he refrained from assailing the president’s interventionism, though objecting to his methods. In the realm of foreign affairs, there was not much to choose between the two candidates. Both promised to stay out of the war; both promised to strengthen the nation’s defenses. Yet Willkie, with a mop of black



The Election of 1940


A
Campaign Poster from the Election of 1940 Roosevelt emerged as the only president ever to break the two-term tradition. 
 hair in his eyes, hit hard at Rooseveltian “dictatorship” and the third term. His enthusiastic followers cried, “Win with Willkie,” “No Fourth Term Either,” and “There’s No Indispensable Man.” Roosevelt, busy at his desk with mounting problems, made only a few speeches. Stung by taunts that he was leading the nation by the back door into the European slaughterhouse, he repeatedly denied any such intention. His most speciﬁc statement was at Boston, where he emphatically declared, “Your boys are not going to be sent into any foreign wars”—a pledge that later came back to plague him. He and his supporters vigorously defended the New Deal, as well as all-out preparations for the defense of America and aid to the Allies. Roosevelt triumphed, although Willkie ran a strong race. The popular total was 27,307,819 to 22,321,018, and the electoral count was 449 to 82 (see Map 34.1). This contest was much less of a walkaway than in 1932 or 1936; Democratic majorities in Congress remained about the same. Jubilant Democrats hailed their triumph as a mandate to abolish the two-term tradition. But the truth is that Roosevelt won in spite of the third-term handicap. Voters generally felt that should war come, the experienced hand of the tried leader was needed at the helm. Less appealing was the completely inexperienced hand of the well-intentioned Willkie, who had never held public ofﬁce. The time-honored argument that one should not change horses in the middle of a stream was strong, especially in an era of war-pumped prosperity. Roosevelt might not have won if there had not been a war crisis.

 On the other hand, he probably would not have run if foreign perils had not loomed so ominously. In a sense, his opponent was Adolf Hitler, not Willkie.

WA MT

OR ID NV CA

 ND

 WY

 SD

 CO

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 AZ

 MN

KS OK

 NM

 TX

 IL

MI IN

 MO

 LA

OH KY

 MS

 AL

 WV

VA NC

 TN

 AR

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 17 RI PA NJ CT 4 16 8

 GA

DE MD

 SC

 FL

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Roosevelt (Democrat)




85%


27,307,819


54.8%




15%


22,321,018


44.8%


Willkie (Republican)


 Map 34.1 Presidential Election of 1940 (with electoral vote by state) Willkie referred to Roosevelt only as “the third-term candidate.” On election eve FDR hinted that communists and fascists were among Willkie’s supporters. Despite these campaign conﬂicts, the two men respected each other. FDR later asked Willkie to serve as his emissary abroad and even suggested that they run together on a coalition ticket in 1944. Interactive Map



Chapter 34 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 1933–1941


A
Landmark Lend-Lease Law  By late 1940 embattled Britain was nearing the end of its ﬁ nancial tether; its credits in America were being rapidly consumed by insatiable war orders. But Roosevelt, who had bitter memories of the wrangling over the Allied debts of World War I, was determined, as he put it, to eliminate “the silly, foolish, old dollar sign.” He ﬁ nally hit on the scheme of lending or leasing American arms to the reeling democracies. When the shooting was over, to use his comparison, the guns and tanks could be returned, just as one’s next-door neighbor would return a garden hose when a threatening ﬁ re was put out. But isolationist Senator Taft (who was reputed to have the ﬁ nest mind in Washington until he made it up) retorted that lending arms was like lending chewing gum: “You don’t want it back.” Who wants a chewed-up tank? The Lend-Lease Bill, patriotically numbered 1776, was entitled “An Act Further to Promote the Defense of the United States.” Sprung on the country after the election was safely over, it was praised by the administration as a device that would keep the nation out of the war rather than drag it in. The underlying concept was “Send guns, not sons” or “Billions, not bodies.” America, so President Roosevelt promised, would be

No to Lend-Lease Members of the
 Massachusetts Woman’s Political Club presented President Roosevelt with a petition protesting adoption of the Lend-Lease Bill and picketed the White House. They feared that America’s increasing involvement with the Allied cause would eventually draw their sons into battle—as it did, despite the president’s assurances to the contrary.

 the “arsenal of democracy.” It would send a limitless supply of arms to the victims of aggression, who in turn would ﬁ nish the job and keep the war on their side of the Atlantic. Accounts would be settled by returning the used weapons or their equivalents to the United States when the war was ended. Lend-lease was heatedly debated throughout the land and in Congress. Most of the opposition came, as might be expected, from isolationists and antiRoosevelt Republicans. The scheme was assailed as “the blank-check bill” and, in the words of isolationist Senator Burton Wheeler, as “the new Triple-A [Agricultural Adjustment Act] bill”—a mea sure designed to “plow under every fourth American boy.” Nevertheless, lend-lease was ﬁ nally approved in March 1941 by sweeping majorities in both houses of Congress. Lend-lease was one of the most momentous laws ever to pass Congress; it was a challenge hurled squarely into the teeth of the Axis dictators. America pledged itself, to the extent of its vast resources, to bolster those nations that were indirectly defending it by ﬁghting aggression. When the gigantic operation ended in 1945, America had sent about $50 billion worth of arms and equipment—much more than the cost to the country of World War I—to those nations ﬁghting aggressors (see Map 34.2). The passing of lend-lease was in effect an economic declaration of war; now a shooting declaration could not be very far around the corner.

 America's Lend-Lease Policy

SOVIET UNION

EUROPE UNITED STATES

 CHINA

BRITAIN AFRICA

SOUTH AMERICA AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND



SOVIET UNION

 Map 34.2 Main Flow of LendLease Aid (width of arrows indicates relative amount) The proud but desperate British prime minister, Winston Churchill, declared in early 1941, “Give us the tools and we will ﬁnish the job.” Lend-lease eventually provided the British and other Allies with $50 billion worth of “tools.” Interactive Map

 By its very nature, the Lend-Lease Bill marked the abandonment of any pretense of neutrality. It was no destroyer deal arranged privately by President Roosevelt. The bill was universally debated, over drugstore counters and cracker barrels, from Cal i fornia all the way to Maine, and the sovereign citizen at last spoke through convincing majorities in Congress. Most people probably realized that they were tossing the old concepts of neutrality out the window. But they also recognized that they would play a suicidal game if they bound themselves by the oxcart rules of the nineteenth century—especially while the Axis aggressors themselves openly spurned international obligations. Lend-lease would admittedly involve a grave risk of war, but most Americans were prepared to take that chance rather than see Britain collapse and then face the diabolical dictators alone. Lend-lease had the somewhat incidental result of gearing U.S. factories for all-out war production. The enormously increased capacity thus achieved helped save America’s own skin when, at long last, the shooting war burst around its head. Hitler evidently recognized lend-lease as an unofﬁcial declaration of war. Until then Germany had avoided attacking U.S. ships; memories of America’s decisive intervention in 1917–1918 were still fresh in German minds. But after the passing of lend-lease, there was less point in trying to curry favor with the United States. On May 21, 1941, the Robin Moor, an unarmed American merchantman, was torpedoed and destroyed by a German submarine in the South Atlantic, outside a war zone. The sinkings had started, but on a limited scale.

Charting a New World
 Two globe-shaking events marked the course of World War II before the assault on Pearl Harbor in December 1941. One was the fall of France in June 1940; the other was Hitler’s invasion of the Soviet Union, almost exactly one year later, in June 1941. The scheming dictators Hitler and Stalin had been uneasy yoke-fellows under the ill-begotten Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939. As masters of the double cross, neither trusted the other. They engaged in prolonged dickering in a secret attempt to divide potential territorial spoils between them, but Stalin balked at dominant German control of the Balkans. Hitler thereupon decided to crush his co-conspirator, seize the oil and other resources of the Soviet Union, and then have two free hands to snuff out Britain. He assumed that his invincible armies would subdue Stalin’s “Mongol halfwits” in a few short weeks. Out of a clear sky, on June 22, 1941, Hitler launched a devastating attack on his Soviet neighbor. This timely assault was an incredible stroke of good fortune for the democratic world—or so it seemed at the time. The two ﬁends could now slit each other’s throats on the icy steppes of Russia. Or they would if the Soviets did not quickly collapse, as many military experts predicted. Sound American strategy seemed to dictate speedy aid to Moscow while it was still aﬂoat. Roosevelt immediately promised assistance and backed up his words by making some military supplies available. Several



Chapter 34 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 1933–1941


 months later, interpreting the lend-lease law to mean that the defense of the USSR was now essential for the defense of the United States, he extended $1 billion in lend-lease—the ﬁ rst installment on an ultimate total of $11 billion. Meanwhile, the valor of the red army, combined with the white paralysis of an early Russian winter, had halted Hitler’s invaders at the gates of Moscow. With the surrender of the Soviet Union still a dread possibility, the drama-charged Atlantic Conference was held in August 1941. British prime minister Winston Churchill, with cigar embedded in his cherubic face, secretly met with Roosevelt on a warship off the foggy coast of Newfoundland. This was the ﬁ rst of a series of history-making conferences between the two statesmen for the discussion of common problems, including the menace of Japan in the Far East. The most memorable offspring of this get-together was the eight-point Atlantic Charter. It was formally accepted by Roosevelt and Churchill and endorsed by the Soviet Union later that year. Suggestive of Wilson’s Fourteen Points, the new covenant outlined the aspirations of the democracies for a better world at war’s end. Arguing for the rights of individuals rather than nations, the Atlantic Charter laid the groundwork for later advocacy on behalf of universal human rights. Many were surprised by how speciﬁc the document was. Opposing imperialistic annexations, the charter promised that there would be no territorial changes contrary to the wishes of the inhabitants (selfdetermination). It further afﬁrmed the right of a people to choose their own form of government and, in particular, to regain the governments abolished by the dictators. Among various other goals, the charter declared for disarmament and a peace of security, pending a “permanent system of general security” (a new League of Nations). Liberals the world over took heart from the Atlantic Charter, as they had taken heart from Wilson’s compa-

 Senator (later president) Harry S Truman (1884– 1972) expressed a common reaction to Hitler’s invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941:

“


 If we see that Germany is winning, we ought to help Russia, and if we see Russia is winning, we ought to help Germany, and that way let them kill as many as possible.

”


Unexpected Guest, 1941
Britain and America.


 Stalin joins the democracies,

 rable Fourteen Points. It was especially gratifying to subject populations, like the Poles, who were then ground under the iron heel of a conqueror. But the agreement was roundly condemned in the United States by isolationists and others hostile to Roosevelt. What right, they charged, had “neutral” America to confer with belligerent Britain on common policies? Such critics missed the point: the nation was in fact no longer neutral.

U.S.
Destroyers and  Hitler’s U-boats Clash Lend-lease shipments of arms to Britain on British ships were bound to be sunk by German wolf-pack submarines. If the intent was to get the munitions to Eng land, not to dump them into the ocean, the freighters would have to be escorted by U.S. warships. Britain simply did not have enough destroyers. The dangerous possibility of being “convoyed into war” had been mentioned in Congress during the lengthy debate on lendlease, but administration spokespeople had brushed

America Enters the War


 the idea aside. Their strategy was to make only one commitment at a time. Roosevelt made the fateful decision to convoy in July 1941. By virtue of his authority as commander in chief of the armed forces, the president issued orders to the navy to escort lend-lease shipments as far as Iceland. The British would then shepherd them the rest of the way. Inevitable clashes with submarines ensued on the Iceland run, even though Hitler’s orders were to strike at American warships only in self-defense. In September 1941 the U.S. destroyer Greer, provocatively trailing a German U-boat, was attacked by the undersea craft, without damage to either side. Roosevelt then proclaimed a shoot-on-sight policy. On October 17 the escorting destroyer Kearny, while engaged in a battle with U-boats, lost eleven men when it was crippled but not sent to the bottom. Two weeks later the destroyer Reuben James was torpedoed and sunk off southwestern Iceland, with the loss of more than a hundred ofﬁcers and enlisted men. Neutrality was still inscribed on the statute books, but not in American hearts. Congress, responding to public pressures and confronted with a shooting war, voted in mid-November 1941 to pull the teeth from the now-useless Neutrality Act of 1939. Merchant ships could henceforth be legally armed, and they could enter the combat zones with munitions for Britain. Americans braced themselves for wholesale attacks by Hitler’s submarines.

Surprise Assault on
Pearl Harbor
 The blowup came not in the Atlantic, but in the faraway Paciﬁc. This explosion should have surprised no close observer, for Japan, since September 1940, had been a formal military ally of Nazi Germany— America’s shooting foe in the North Atlantic. Japan’s position in the Far East had grown more perilous by the hour. It was still mired down in the costly and exhausting “China incident,” from which it could extract neither honor nor victory. Its war machine was fatally dependent on immense shipments of steel, scrap iron, oil, and aviation gasoline from the United States. Such assistance to the Japa nese aggressor was highly unpopular in America. But Roosevelt had resolutely held off an embargo, lest he goad the Tokyo warlords into a descent upon the oil-rich but defense-poor Dutch East Indies.



 Washington, late in 1940, ﬁ nally imposed the ﬁ rst of its embargoes on Japan-bound supplies. This blow was followed in mid-1941 by a freezing of Japa nese assets in the United States and a cessation of all shipments of gasoline and other sinews of war. As the oil gauge dropped, the squeeze on Japan grew steadily more nerve-racking. Japa nese leaders were faced with two painful alternatives. They could either knuckle under to the Americans or break out of the embargo ring by a desperate attack on the oil supplies and other riches of Southeast Asia. Final tense negotiations with Japan took place in Washington during November and early December of 1941. The State Department insisted that the Japa nese clear out of China, but to sweeten the pill offered to renew trade relations on a limited basis. Japa nese imperialists, after waging a bitter war against the Chinese for more than four years, were unwilling to lose face by withdrawing at the behest of the United States. Faced with capitulation or continued conquest, they chose the sword. Ofﬁcials in Washington, having “cracked” the topsecret code of the Japa nese, knew that Tokyo’s decision was for war. But the United States, as a democracy committed to public debate and action by Congress, could not shoot ﬁ rst. Roosevelt, misled by Japa nese ship movements in the Far East, evidently expected the blow to fall on British Malaya or on the Philippines. No one in high authority in Washington seems to have believed that the Japa nese were either strong enough or foolhardy enough to strike Hawaii. But the paralyzing blow struck Pearl Harbor, while Tokyo was deliberately prolonging negotiations in Washington. Japa nese bombers, winging in from distant aircraft carriers, attacked without warning on the “Black Sunday” morning of December 7, 1941. It was a date, as Roosevelt told Congress, “which will live in infamy.” About three thousand casualties were inﬂicted on American personnel, many aircraft were destroyed,

 Roosevelt’s war message to Congress began with these famous words:

“


 Yesterday, December 7, 1941—a date which will live in infamy—the United States of America was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the Empire of Japan.

”




Chapter 34 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 1933–1941


The Battleship West Virginia
 The shocking Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, propelled the United States into World War II. One of the ﬁrst ships to be hit, the USS West Virginia quickly sank at its mooring, taking at least seventy sailors down with it. By September 1944 the West Virginia had been repaired and was back in service.

 the battleship ﬂeet was virtually wiped out when all eight of the craft were sunk or otherwise immobilized, and numerous small vessels were damaged or destroyed. Fortunately for America, the three priceless aircraft carriers happened to be outside the harbor. An angered Congress the next day ofﬁcially recognized the war that had been “thrust” upon the United States. The roll call in the Senate and House fell only one vote short of unanimity. Germany and Italy, allies of Japan, spared Congress the indecision of debate by declaring war on December 11, 1941. This challenge was formally accepted on the same day by a unanimous vote of both Senate and House. The unofﬁcial war, already of many months’ duration, was now ofﬁcial.

 America’s Transformation from Bystander to Belligerent Japan’s hara-kiri gamble in Hawaii paid off only in the short run. True, the Paciﬁc ﬂeet was largely destroyed or immobilized, but the sneak attack aroused and united America as almost nothing else could have

 done. To the very day of the blowup, a strong majority of Americans still wanted to keep out of war. But the bombs that pulverized Pearl Harbor blasted the isolationists into silence. The only thing left to do, growled isolationist Senator Wheeler, was “to lick hell out of them.” But Pearl Harbor was not the full answer to the question of why the United States went to war. This treacherous attack was but the last explosion in a long chain reaction. Following the fall of France, Americans were confronted with a devil’s dilemma. They desired above all to stay out of the conﬂ ict, yet they did not want Britain to be knocked out. They wished to halt Japan’s conquests in the Far East—conquests that menaced not only American trade and security but international peace as well. To keep Britain from collapsing, the Roosevelt administration felt compelled to extend the unneutral aid that invited attacks from German submarines. To keep Japan from expanding, Washington undertook to cut off vital Japa nese supplies with embargoes that invited possible retaliation. Rather than let democracy die and dictatorship rule supreme, most citizens were evidently determined to support a policy that might lead to war. It did.

People to Know




 CHRONOLOGY



 FDR torpedoes London Economic Conference United States recognizes Soviet Union FDR declares Good Neighbor policy toward Latin America Hitler becomes German chancellor Germany quits League of Nations Tydings-McDufﬁe Act provides for Philippine independence on July 4, 1946 Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act U.S. Marines vacate Haiti Mao’s Long March into northern China begins



 Nuremberg Laws implemented against German Jews Mussolini invades Ethiopia U.S. Neutrality Act of 1935 Japan quits League of Nations



U.S.
Neutrality Act of 1936  Mussolini and Hitler form Rome-Berlin Axis Stalin begins Great Purge German troops invade Rhineland

1936–


Spanish Civil War




U.S.
Neutrality Act of 1937  Panay incident Japan invades China

KEY TERMS
London Economic Conference (853) Good Neighbor policy (855) Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act (855) Rome-Berlin Axis (856) Johnson Debt Default Act (857) Neutrality Acts of 1935, 1936, and 1937 (858) Abraham Lincoln Brigade (858) 


 Hitler seizes Austria Munich Conference Kristallnacht in Germany



 Hitler seizes all of Czechoslovakia Nazi-Soviet pact World War II begins in Europe with Hitler’s invasion of Poland U.S. Neutrality Act of 1939



Fall of France
 Hitler invades Denmark, Norway, Netherlands, and Belgium United States invokes ﬁ rst peacetime draft Havana Conference Battle of Britain Bases-for-destroyers deal with Britain FDR defeats Willkie for presidency



Lend-Lease Act
 Hitler attacks Soviet Union Atlantic Charter Japan attacks Pearl Harbor

PEOPLE TO KNOW
Quarantine Speech (859) Appeasement (860) Hitler-Stalin pact (860) Neutrality Act of 1939 (861) Kristallnacht (864) War Refugee Board (865) Lend-Lease Bill (868) Atlantic Charter (870) Pearl Harbor (871) 
Benito Mussolini
Adolf Hitler
Francisco Franco


Cordell Hull
Wendell L. Willkie




Chapter 34 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 1933–1941


To Learn More
Peter N. Carroll, The Odyssey of the Abraham Lincoln
Brigade: Americans in the Spanish Civil War (1994)
Robert Dallek, Franklin D. Roosevelt and American Foreign
Policy, 1932–1945 (1995)
Justus D. Doenecke, Storm on the Horizon: The Challenge to
American Intervention, 1939–1941 (2000)
Irwin F. Gellman, Good Neighbor Diplomacy: United States
Policies in Latin America, 1933–1945 (1979)
Akira Iriye, The Globalizing of America, 1913–1945 (1993)
Manfred Jonas, Isolationism in America, 1935–1941 (1966)
Primo Levi, Survival in Auschwitz: The Nazi Assault on
Humanity (1961)
B. J. C.
McKercher, Transition of Power: Britain’s Loss of 
 Global Pre-eminence to the United States, 1930–1945 (1999) Gordon W. Prange, At Dawn We Slept: The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor (1981) David Reynolds, From Munich to Pearl Harbor: Roosevelt’s America and the Origins of the Second World War (2001)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

America in
World War II





1941–1945
 Never before have we had so little time in which to do so much. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT, 1942

T


 he United States was plunged into the inferno of World War II with the most stupefying and humiliating military defeat in its history. In the dismal months that ensued, the democratic world teetered on the edge of disaster. Japan’s fanatics forgot that whoever stabs a king must stab to kill. A wounded but still potent American giant pulled itself out of the mud of Pearl Harbor, grimly determined to avenge the bloody treachery. “Get Japan ﬁ rst” was the cry that rose from millions of infuriated Americans, especially on the Paciﬁc Coast. These outraged souls regarded America’s share in the global conﬂ ict as a private war of vengeance in the Paciﬁc, with the European front a kind of holding operation. But Washington, in the so-called ABC-1 agreement with the British, had earlier and wisely adopted the grand strategy of “getting Germany ﬁ rst.” If America diverted its main strength to the Paciﬁc, Hitler might crush both the Soviet Union and Britain and then emerge unconquerable in Fortress Europe. But if Germany was knocked out ﬁrst, the combined Allied forces

 could be concentrated on Japan, and its daring game of conquest would be up. Meanwhile, just enough American strength would be sent to the Paciﬁc to prevent Japan from digging in too deeply. The get-Germany-ﬁ rst strategy was the solid foundation on which all American military strategy was built. But it encountered much ignorant criticism from two-ﬁsted Americans who thirsted for revenge against Japan. Aggrieved protests were also registered by shorthanded American commanders in the Paciﬁc and by Chinese and Australian allies. But President Roosevelt, a competent strategist in his own right, wisely resisted these pressures.

The Allies Trade
Space for Time
 Given time, the Allies seemed bound to triumph. But would they be given time? True, they had on their side the great mass of the world’s population, but the wolf is

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 never intimidated by the number of the sheep. The United States was the mightiest military power on earth—potentially. But wars are won with bullets, not blueprints. Indeed America came perilously close to losing the war to the well-armed aggressors before it could begin to throw its full weight onto the scales. Time, in a sense, was the most needed munition. Expense was no limitation. The overpowering problem confronting America was to retool itself for all-out war production, while praying that the dictators would not meanwhile crush their adversaries who still remained in the ﬁeld—notably Britain and the Soviet Union. Haste was all the more imperative because the highly skilled German scientists might turn up with unbeatable secret weapons, including rocket bombs and perhaps even atomic arms. America’s task was far more complex and backbreaking than during World War I. It had to feed, clothe, and arm itself, as well as transport its forces to regions as far separated as Britain and Burma. More than that, it had to send a vast amount of food and munitions to its hard-pressed allies, who stretched all the way from the USSR to Australia. Could the American people, reputedly “gone soft,” measure up to this herculean task? Was democracy “rotten” and “decadent,” as the dictators sneeringly proclaimed?

The Shock of War
 National unity was no worry, thanks to the electrifying blow by the Japa nese at Pearl Harbor. American Communists had denounced the Anglo-French “imperialist” war before Hitler attacked Stalin in 1941, but they now clamored for an unmitigated assault on the Axis powers. The handful of strutting pro-Hitlerites in the United States melted away, while millions of Italian Americans and German Americans loyally supported the nation’s war program. In contrast to World War I, when the patriotism of millions of immigrants was hotly questioned, World War II actually speeded the assimilation of many ethnic groups into American society. Immigration had been choked off for almost two decades before 1941, and America’s ethnic communities were now composed of well-settled members, whose votes were crucial to Franklin Roosevelt’s Democratic party. Consequently, there was virtually no government witch-hunting of minority groups, as had happened in World War I. A painful exception was the plight of some 110,000 Japanese Americans, concentrated on the Paciﬁc Coast

 Enemy Aliens When the United States suddenly found itself at war with Germany, Italy, and Japan in December 1941, noncitizen German, Italian, and Japanese immigrants became “enemy aliens” and were required to register with the authorities. Several hundred resident Germans and Italians were detained in internment camps, but the harshest treatment was meted out to the Japanese, some 110,000 of whom, noncitizens and citizens alike, were eventually interned. Ironically, the two Japanese American Boy Scouts posting this notice in Los Angeles would soon be on their way to a government detention camp.

 (see “Makers of America: The Japanese,” pp. 878–879). The Washington top command, fearing that they might act as saboteurs for Japan in case of invasion, forcibly herded them together in concentration camps, though about two-thirds of them were American-born U.S. citizens. This brutal precaution, authorized under Executive Order No. 9066, was both unnecessary and unfair, as the loyalty and combat record of Japa nese Americans proved to be admirable. But a wave of post– Pearl Harbor hysteria, backed by the long historical swell of anti-Japa nese prejudice on the West Coast, temporarily robbed many Americans of their good sense—and their sense of justice. The internment camps deprived these uprooted Americans of dignity and basic rights; the internees also lost hundreds of millions of dollars in property and foregone earnings. The wartime Supreme Court in 1944 upheld the constitutionality of the Japa nese relocation in Korematsu v. U.S. But more than four decades later, in 1988, the U.S.

The Internment of Japanese Americans




 American song titles after Pearl Harbor combined nationalism with unabashed racism: “We Are the Sons of the Rising Guns,” “Oh, You Little Son of an Oriental,” “To Be Speciﬁc, It’s Our Paciﬁc,” “The Sun Will Soon Be Setting on the Land of the Rising Sun,” “The Japs Don’t Stand a Chinaman’s Chance,” and “We’re Gonna Find a Fellow Who Is Yellow and Beat Him Red, White, and Blue.” Monica Sone (b. 1919), a college-age Japanese American woman in Seattle, recorded the shock she and her brother felt when they learned of Executive Order No. 9066, which authorized the War Department to remove Japanese—aliens and citizens alike—from their homes:

“


Anti-Japanese Poster, World War II
 Government propaganda during the war exploited racial stereotypes, often depicting Japanese people with big teeth and poor vision.

 government ofﬁcially apologized for its actions and approved the payment of reparations of $20,000 to each camp survivor. The war prompted other changes in the American mood. Many programs of the once-popular New Deal— including the Civilian Conservation Corps, the Works Progress Administration, and the National Youth Administration—were wiped out by the conser vative Congress elected in 1942. Roosevelt declared in 1943 that “Dr. New Deal” was going into retirement, to be replaced by “Dr. Win-the-War.” His announcement acknowledged not only the urgency of the war effort but the power of the revitalized conser vative forces in the country. The era of New Deal reform was over. World War II was no idealistic crusade, as World War I had been. The Washington government did make

 In anger, Henry and I read and reread the Executive Order. Henry crumbled the newspaper in his hand and threw it against the wall. ‘Doesn’t my citizenship mean a single blessed thing to anyone? Why doesn’t somebody make up my mind for me? First they want me in the army. Now they’re going to slap an alien 4-C on me because of my ancestry. . . .’ Once more I felt like a despised, pathetic two-headed freak, a Japanese and an American, neither of which seemed to be doing me any good.

”


 some effort to propagandize at home and abroad with the Atlantic Charter, but the accent was on action. Opinion polls in 1942 revealed that nine out of ten Americans could cite no provisions of the Atlantic Charter. A majority then, and a near-majority two years later, confessed to having “no clear idea what the war is about.” All Americans knew was that they had a dirty job on their hands and that the only way out was forward. They went about their bloody task with astonishing efﬁciency.

Building the War Machine
 The war crisis caused the drooping American economy to snap to attention. Massive military orders—over $100 billion in 1942 alone—almost instantly soaked up the idle industrial capacity of the still-lingering Great Depression. Orchestrated by the War Production Board (WPB), American factories poured forth an avalanche

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Japanese American Migration 
I


 n 1853 the American commodore Matthew Perry Like many Chinese and European immigrants, sailed four gunboats into Japan’s Uraga Bay and demost Japa nese who came to America expected to stay only temporarily. They planned to work hard for wages manded that the nation open itself to diplomatic and that were high by Japa nese standards and then to recommercial exchange with the United States. Perry’s turn home and buy land. In Hawaii most Japa nese arrival ended two centuries of Japan’s self-imposed labored on the vast sugar cane plantations. On the isolation and eventually led to the overthrow of the mainland they initially found migratory work on the last Japa nese shogun (military ruler) and the restorarailroads or in ﬁsh, fruit, or vegetable canneries. A seption of the emperor. Within two decades of Perry’s ararate Japa nese economy of restaurants, stores, and rival, Japan’s new “Meiji” government had launched boardinghouses soon sprang up in cities to serve the the nation on an ambitious program of industrializaimmigrants’ needs. tion and militarization designed to make it the ecoFrom such humble beginnings, many Japa nese— nomic and political equal of the Western powers. particularly those on the Paciﬁc Coast—quickly moved As Japan rapidly modernized, its citizens increasinto farming. In the late nineteenth century, the spread ingly took ship for America. A steep land tax imposed of irrigation shifted Cal i fornia agriculture from grain by the Meiji government to pay for its reforms drove to fruits and vegetables, and the invention of the remore than 300,000 Japa nese farmers off their land. In frigerated railcar opened hungry new markets in the 1884 the Meiji government permitted Hawaiian plantEast. The Japa nese, with centuries of experience in iners to recruit contract laborers from among this distensive farming, arrived just in time to take advantage placed population. By the 1890s many Japa nese were of these developments. As early as 1910, Japanese farmsailing beyond Hawaii to the ports of Long Beach, San ers produced 70 percent of Cal i fornia’s strawberries, Francisco, and Seattle. and by 1940 they grew 95 percent of the state’s snap Between 1885 and 1924, roughly 200,000 Japa nese beans and more than half of its tomatoes. One Japanese migrated to Hawaii, and around 180,000 more ventured to the U.S. mainland. They were a select group: because the Meiji government saw overseas Japa nese as representatives of their homeland, it strictly regulated emigration. Thus Japa nese immigrants to America arrived with more money than their European counterparts. Also, because of Japan’s system of compulsory education, Japa nese immigrants on average were better educated and more literate than European immigrants. Women as well as men migrated. The Japanese government, wanting to avoid the problems of an itinerant bachelor society that it observed among the Chinese in the United States, actively promoted women’s migration. Although most Japa nese immigrants were young men in their twenties and thirties, thousands of women also ventured to Hawaii and the mainland as contract laborers or “picture Campaign Against the Japanese, Hollywood, California, 1923 brides,” so called because their courtship had Long before Japanese Americans were interned during World consisted exclusively of an exchange of photo- War II as a security risk, they faced intense discrimination graphs with their prospective husbands. throughout the United States.



Japanese American Evacuees, 1942 After the U.S.
 Army’s Western Defense Command ordered the forced evacuation of all Japanese and Japanese Americans living on the Paciﬁc Coast, families had no choice but to pack up whatever they could carry and move to the “relocation centers” hastily erected farther inland.

 farmer, known as the Potato King, sent his children to Harvard and Stanford and died in 1926 with an estate valued at $15 million. But the very success of the Japa nese proved a lightning rod for trouble. On the West Coast, Japa nese immigrants had long endured racist barbs and social segregation. Increasingly, white workers and farmers, jealous of Japa nese success, pushed for immigration restrictions. Bowing to this pressure, President Theodore Roosevelt in 1908 negotiated the “Gentlemen’s Agreement,” under which the Japa nese government voluntarily agreed to limit emigration. In 1913 the Cal ifornia legislature denied Japa nese immigrants already living in the United States the right to own land. Legally barred from becoming citizens, Japa nese immigrants (the “Issei,” from the Japa nese word for ﬁrst) became more determined than ever that their American-born children (the “Nissei,” from the Japanese word for second) would reap the full beneﬁts of their birthright. Japa nese parents encouraged their children to learn Eng lish, to excel in school, and to get a college education. Many Nissei grew up in two worlds, a fact they often recognized by Americanizing their Japa nese names. Although education and acculturation did not protect the Nissei from the hysteria of World War II, those assets did give them a springboard to success in the postwar era.

Three Boys at Manzanar, by
Toyo Miyatake (1895–1979)
 Miyatake was an acclaimed Japanese American photographer with his own studio in Los Angeles before he and his family were evacuated to the Manzanar internment camp. He was determined to pursue his craft there, at ﬁrst working secretly and then with the knowledge of the authorities. His pictures are the only photographic records of daily camp life taken by an internee. The guards allowed him to step outside the barbed-wire fence to take this photograph.





Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 of weaponry: 40 billion bullets, 300,000 aircraft, 76,000 ships, 86,000 tanks, and 2.6 million machine guns. Miracle-man shipbuilder Henry J. Kaiser was dubbed “Sir Launchalot” for his prodigies of ship construction; one of his ships was fully assembled in fourteen days, complete with life jackets and coat hangers. The War Production Board halted the manufacture of nonessential items such as passenger cars. It assigned priorities for transportation and access to raw materials. When the Japa nese invasion of British Ma-

The Four Freedoms, by Norman Rockwell
 In his January 6, 1941, speech to Congress requesting lend-lease aid to the Allies, President Roosevelt spoke eloquently of the “four freedoms” then threatened by Nazi and Japanese aggression. They are here given pictorial representation by Norman Rockwell, probably the most popular and best-loved American artist of the time.

 laya and the Dutch East Indies snapped America’s lifeline of natural rubber, the government imposed a national speed limit and gasoline rationing in order to conserve rubber and built ﬁ fty-one synthetic-rubber plants. By war’s end they were far outproducing the prewar supply. Farmers, too, rolled up their sleeves and increased their output. The armed forces drained the farms of workers, but heavy new investment in agricultural machinery and improved fertilizers more than made up the difference. In 1944 and 1945, blue-jeaned farmers hauled in record-breaking billion-bushel wheat harvests. These wonders of production also brought economic strains. Full employment and scarce consumer goods fueled a sharp inﬂationary surge in 1942. The Ofﬁce of Price Administration (OPA) eventually brought ascending prices under control with extensive regulations. Rationing held down the consumption of critical goods such as meat and butter, though some “black marketeers” and “meatleggers” cheated the system. The National War Labor Board (NWLB) imposed ceilings on wage increases. Labor unions, whose membership grew from about 10 million to more than 13 million workers during the war, ﬁercely resented the government-dictated wage ceilings. Despite the no-strike pledges of most of the major unions, a rash of labor walkouts plagued the war effort. Prominent among the strikers were the United Mine Workers, who several times were called off the job by their crusty and iron-willed chieftain, John L. Lewis. Threats of lost production through strikes became so worrisome that Congress, in June 1943, passed the Smith-Connally Anti-Strike Act. This act authorized the federal government to seize and operate tied-up industries. Strikes against any government-operated industry were made a criminal offense. Under the act, Washington took over the coal mines and, for a brief period, the railroads. Yet work stoppages, although dangerous, actually accounted for less than 1 percent of the total working hours of the United States’ wartime laboring force—a record better than blockaded Britain’s. American workers, on the whole, were commendably committed to the war effort.

Manpower and Womanpower
 The armed ser vices enlisted nearly 15 million men in World War II and some 216,000 women, who were em-

Mobilizing the Economy


 Poster appeals and slogans urging women to enlist in the WAACs (Women’s Army Auxiliary Corps) were “Speed Them Back, Join the WAAC,” “I’d Rather Be with Them—Than Waiting for Them,” “Back the Attack, Be a WAAC! For America Is Calling,” and (a song throwback to World War I) “The WAACs and WAVES Will Win the War, Parlez Vous.”

 ployed for noncombat duties. Best known of these “women in arms” were the WAACs (army), WAVES (navy), and SPARs (Coast Guard). As the draft net was tightened after Pearl Harbor, millions of young men were plucked from their homes and clothed in “GI” (government issue) outﬁts. As the arsenal of democracy, the United States exempted certain key catego-



 ries of industrial and agricultural workers from the draft, in order to keep its mighty industrial and foodproducing machines humming. But even with these exemptions, the draft left the nation’s farms and factories so short of personnel that new workers had to be found. An agreement with Mexico in 1942 brought thousands of Mexican agricultural workers, called braceros, across the border to harvest the fruit and grain crops of the West. The Bracero program outlived the war by some twenty years, becoming a ﬁ xed feature of the agricultural economy in many western states. Even more dramatic was the march of women onto the factory ﬂoor. More than 6 million women took up jobs outside the home; over half of them had never before worked for wages. Many of them were mothers, and the government was obliged to set up some 3,000 daycare centers to care for “Rosie the Riveter’s” children

 War Workers More than 6 million women—more than 3 million of them homemakers who had never before worked for wages—entered the work force during World War II. In contrast to the experience of women workers in World War I, many of these newly employed women continued as wage workers after the war ended.



Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 while she drilled the fuselage of a heavy bomber or joined the links of a tank track. When the war ended, Rosie and many of her sisters were in no hurry to put down their tools. They wanted to keep on working and often did. The war thus foreshadowed an eventual revolution in the roles of women in American society. Yet the war’s immediate impact on women’s lives has frequently been exaggerated. The great majority of American women—especially those with husbands present in the home or with small children to care for—did not work for wages in the wartime economy but continued in their traditional roles. In both Britain and the Soviet Union, a far greater percentage of women, including mothers, were pressed into industrial employment as the gods of war laid a much heavier hand on those societies than they did on the United States. A poll in 1943 revealed that a majority of American women would not take a job in a war plant if it were offered. At war’s end, two-thirds of women war workers left the labor force. Many of them were forced out of their jobs by employers and unions eager to reemploy returning ser vicemen. But half of them told census takers that they quit their jobs voluntarily because of family obligations. The immediate postwar period witnessed not a permanent widening of women’s employment opportunities, but a widespread rush into suburban domesticity and the mothering of the “baby boomers,” who were born by the tens of millions in the decade and a half after 1945. America was destined to experience a thoroughgoing revolution in women’s status later in the postwar period, but that epochal change was only beginning to gather momentum in the war years.

 $6 billion of federally ﬁ nanced industrial facilities. Here were the seeds of the postwar blossoming of the “Sunbelt” (see Map 35.1). Despite this economic stimulus in the South, some 1.6 million blacks left the land of their ancient enslavement to seek jobs in the war plants of the West and North. Forever after, race relations constituted a national, not a regional, issue. Explosive tensions developed over employment, housing, and segregated facilities. Black leader A. Philip Randolph, head of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, threatened a massive “Negro March on Washington” in 1941 to demand

Wartime Migrations
 The war also proved to be a demographic cauldron, churning and shifting the American population. Many of the 15 million men and women in uniform, having seen new sights and glimpsed new horizons, chose not to go home again at war’s end. War industries sucked people into boomtowns like Los Angeles, Detroit, Seattle, and Baton Rouge. Cal i fornia’s population grew by nearly 2 million. The South experienced especially dramatic changes. Franklin Roosevelt had called the South “the nation’s number one economic problem” in 1938; when war came, he seized the opportunity to accelerate the region’s economic development. The states of the old Confederacy received a disproportionate share of defense contracts, including nearly

 Segregation in the Military A white ofﬁcer reviews the 99th Pursuit Squadron, the famed “Tuskegee Airmen.” They ﬂew more than sixteen hundred ﬁghtersupport missions in North Africa and compiled an outstanding record, never losing a bomber to enemy aircraft. But these ﬂiers were among the few African Americans who saw combat duty in World War II, when a still strictly segregated military assigned most blacks to construction, longshoreman, and mess-hall service.

Population Shifts


 equal opportunities for blacks in war jobs and in the armed forces. Roosevelt’s response was to issue an executive order forbidding discrimination in defense industries. In addition, the president established the Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC) to monitor compliance with his edict. Blacks were also drafted into the armed forces, though they were still generally assigned to ser vice branches rather than combat units and subjected to petty degradations such as segregated blood banks for the wounded. But in general the war helped to embolden blacks in their long struggle for equality. They rallied behind the slogan “Double V”—victory over the dictators abroad and over racism at home. Membership in the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) shot up almost to the half-million mark, and a new

,0


NORTH WEST

“


 Why is it we Negro soldiers who are as much a part of Uncle Sam’s great military machine as any cannot be treated with equality and the respect due us? The same respect which white soldiers expect and demand from us? . . . There is great need for drastic change in this man’s Army! How can we be trained to protect America, which is called a free nation, when all around us rears the ugly head of segregation?

”


Detroit
New York




Washington, D.C.
Denver




64 0


0,0


San Francisco


 An African American soldier angrily complained about segregation in the armed forces during World War II:



910,000


,000


Los Angeles
San Diego


,0




Memphis
,00




 SOUTH

Fort Worth
Dallas


 Average population increase of fast-growing cities, 1940–1950

Baton
Rouge




Mobile


Houston


Over 400,000
200,000–400,000
100,000–200,000
50,000–100,000


Map 35.1 Internal Migration in the United States During World War II
 Few events in American history have moved the American people about so massively as World War II. The West and the South boomed, and several warindustry cities grew explosively. A majority of migrants from the South were blacks; 1.6 million African Americans left the region in the 1940s. (Source: United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.) Interactive Map



Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 arms. More than 90 percent of Indians resided on reservations in 1940; six decades later more than half lived in cities, with a large concentration in southern Cal i fornia. Some twenty-ﬁve thousand Native American men served in the armed forces. Comanches in Europe and Navajos in the Paciﬁc made especially valuable contributions as “code talkers.” They transmitted radio messages in their native languages, which were incomprehensible to the Germans and the Japa nese. The sudden rubbing against one another of unfamiliar peoples produced some distressingly violent friction. In 1943 young “zoot-suit”–clad Mexicans and Mexican Americans in Los Angeles were viciously attacked by Anglo sailors who cruised the streets in taxicabs searching for victims. Order was restored only Navajo Code Talkers, 1943 One of the best-kept secrets of World War II was the use of the Navajo language in a Marine Corps code designed to confuse the Japanese. Two marines in the leatherneck unit made up of Native Americans from Arizona and New Mexico transmitted in code during the battle for Bougainville Island in the South Paciﬁc in 1943.

 militant organization committed to nonviolent “direct action,” the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), was founded in 1942. The northward migration of African Americans accelerated after the war, thanks to the advent of the mechanical cotton picker—an invention whose impact rivaled that of Eli Whitney’s cotton gin. Introduced in 1944, this new mechanical marvel did the work of ﬁ fty people at about one-eighth the cost. Overnight, the Cotton South’s historic need for cheap labor disappeared. Their muscle no longer required in Dixie, some 5 million black tenant farmers and sharecroppers headed north in the three decades after the war. Theirs was one of the great migrations in American history, comparable in size to the immigrant ﬂoods from Ireland, Italy, and Poland. Within a single generation, a near-majority of African Americans gave up their historic homeland and their rural way of life. By 1970 half of all blacks lived outside the South, and urban had become almost a synonym for black. The speed and scale of these changes jolted the migrants and sometimes convulsed the communities that received them. The war also prompted an exodus of Native Americans from the reservations. Thousands of Indian men and women found war work in the major cities, and thousands more answered Uncle Sam’s call to

 “Let John Henry Go” This image from the cover of the National Urban League’s publication Opportunity reﬂects the rising militancy of African Americans in the World War II era. That militancy helped to energize the civil rights movement in the postwar years.

Economics on the Home Front


 after the Mexican ambassador made an emotional plea, pointing out that such outbreaks were grist for Nazi propaganda mills. At almost the same time, an even more brutal race riot that killed twenty-ﬁve blacks and nine whites erupted in Detroit.

Holding the Home Front
 Despite these ugly episodes, Americans on the home front suffered little from the war, compared to the peoples of the other ﬁghting nations. By war’s end much of the planet was a smoking ruin. But in America the war invigorated the economy and lifted the country out of a decade-long depression. The gross national product vaulted from less than $100 billion in 1940 to more than $200 billion in 1945. Corporate proﬁts rose from about $6 billion in 1940 to almost twice that amount four years later. (“If you are going to try to go to war in a capitalist country,” said Secretary of War Henry Stimson, “you have to let business make money out of the process, or business won’t work.”) Despite wage ceilings, overtime pay fattened pay envelopes. Disposable personal income, even after payment of wartime taxes, more than doubled. On December 7, 1944, the third anniversary of Pearl Harbor, Macy’s department store rang up the biggest sales day in its history. Americans had never had it so good—and they wanted it a lot better. When price controls were ﬁnally lifted in 1946, America’s pent-up lust to consume pushed prices up 33 percent in less than two years. The rest of the world, meanwhile, was still clawing its way out from under the rubble of war.



 The hand of government touched more American lives more intimately during the war than ever before. The war, perhaps even more than the New Deal, pointed the way to the post-1945 era of big-government interventionism. Every household felt the constraints of the rationing system. Millions of men and women worked for Uncle Sam in the armed forces. Millions more worked for him in the defense industries, where their employers and unions were monitored by the FEPC and the NWLB, and their personal needs were cared for by government-sponsored housing projects, day-care facilities, and health plans. The Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research and Development channeled hundreds of millions of dollars into university-based scientiﬁc research, establishing the partnership between the government and universities that underwrote America’s technological and economic leadership in the postwar era. The ﬂood of war dollars—not the relatively modest rivulet of New Deal spending—at last swept the plague of unemployment from the land. War, not enlightened social policy, cured the depression. As the postwar economy continued to depend dangerously on military spending for its health, many observers looked back to the years 1941–1945 as the origins of a “warfare-welfare state.” The conﬂ ict was phenomenally expensive. The wartime bill amounted to more than $330 billion—ten times the direct cost of World War I and twice as much as all previous federal spending since 1776. Roosevelt would have preferred to follow a pay-as-you-go policy to ﬁ nance the war, but the costs were simply too gigantic. The income-tax net was expanded to catch about

 Billions of dollars $269b $252b



 $257b

 $201b



 $72b $16b

 $19b





 $27b

 $33b

 $37b





 $42b















Figure 35.1 The National Debt,
 1930–1950 Contrary to much popular mythology, it was World War II, not the New Deal, that ﬁrst ballooned the national debt. The debt accumulated to still greater amounts in the 1980s and 1990s (see Figure 40.1 on p. 1042). (Source: Historical Statistics of the United States.)



Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 four times as many people as before, and maximum tax rates rose as high as 90 percent. But despite such drastic mea sures, only about two-ﬁ fths of the war costs were paid from current revenues. The remainder was borrowed. The national debt skyrocketed from $49 billion in 1941 to $259 billion in 1945 (see Figure 35.1). When production ﬁ nally slipped into high gear, the war was costing about $10 million an hour. This was the price of victory over such implacable enemies.

April, 1942
Route of Bataan
Death March


Luzon
BATAAN 119°E PENINSULA N

Mariveles


Manila


Manila
Bay


Lamon
Bay


Corregidor
Island




 The Rising Sun in the Paciﬁc Early successes of the efﬁcient Japa nese militarists were breathtaking: they realized that they would have to win quickly or lose slowly. Seldom, if ever, has so much territory been conquered so rapidly with so little loss. Simultaneously with the assault on Pearl Harbor, the Japa nese launched widespread and uniformly successful attacks on various Far Eastern bastions. These included the American outposts of Guam, Wake, and the Philippines. In a dismayingly short time, the Japanese invader seized not only the British-Chinese port of Hong Kong but also British Malaya, with its critically important supplies of rubber and tin. Nor did the Japa nese tide stop there. The overambitious soldiers of the emperor, plunging into the snakeinfested jungles of Burma, cut the famed Burma Road. This was the route over which the United States had been trucking a trickle of munitions to the armies of the Chinese generalissimo Jiang Jieshi (Chiang Kaishek), who was still resisting the Japa nese invader in China. Thereafter, intrepid American aviators were forced to ﬂy a handful of war supplies to Jiang “over the hump” of the towering Himalaya mountains from the India-Burma theater. Meanwhile, the Japa nese had lunged southward against the oil-rich Dutch East Indies. The jungle-matted islands speedily fell to the assailants after the combined British, Australian, Dutch, and American naval and air forces had been smashed at an early date by their numerically superior foe. Better news came from the Philippines, which succeeded dramatically in slowing down the mikado’s warriors for ﬁve months. The Japa nese promptly landed a small but effective army, and General Douglas MacArthur, the eloquent and egotistical American commander, withdrew to a strong defensive position at Bataan, not far from Manila. There about twenty thousand American troops, supported by a much larger force of ill-trained Filipinos, held off violent Japa nese

15°N


San Fernando




30 Km.


30 Mi.


14°N


Philippine Is.
Mindoro
120°E


Map 35.2 Corregidor and Bataan
Interactive Map


 attacks until April 9, 1942. The defenders, reduced to eating mules and monkeys, heroically traded their lives for time in the face of hopeless odds. They grimly joked while vainly hoping for reinforcements: We’re the battling bastards of Bataan; No Mamma, no Papa, no Uncle Sam. Before the inevitable American surrender, General MacArthur was ordered by Washington to depart secretly for Australia, there to head the resistance against the Japa nese. Leaving by motorboat and airplane, he proclaimed, “I shall return.” After the battered remnants of his army had hoisted the white ﬂag, they were treated with vicious cruelty in the infamous eightymile Bataan Death March to prisoner-of-war camps— the ﬁ rst in a series of atrocities committed by both sides in the unusually savage Paciﬁc war. The island fortress of Corregidor, in Manila harbor, held out until May 6, 1942, when it too surrendered and left Japa nese forces in complete control of the Philippine archipelago (see Map 35.2).

 Japan’s High Tide at Midway The aggressive warriors from Japan, making hay while the Rising Sun shone, pushed relentlessly southward.

 The Paciﬁc Theater

 They invaded the turtle-shaped island of New Guinea, north of Australia, and landed on the Solomon Islands, from which they threatened Australia itself. Their onrush was ﬁ nally checked by a crucial naval battle fought in the Coral Sea, in May 1942. An American carrier task force, with Australian support, inﬂicted heavy losses on the victory-ﬂushed Japa nese. For the ﬁ rst time in history, the ﬁghting was all done by carrierbased aircraft, and neither ﬂeet saw or ﬁ red a shot directly at the other.



 Japan next undertook to seize Midway Island, more than a thousand miles northwest of Honolulu. From this strategic base, it could launch devastating assaults on Pearl Harbor and perhaps force the weakened American Paciﬁc ﬂeet into destructive combat—possibly even compel the United States to negotiate a ceaseﬁ re in the Paciﬁc. The epochal Battle of Midway was fought on June 3–6, 1942. Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, a high-grade naval strategist, directed a smaller but skillfully maneuvered carrier force, under Admiral Raymond A. Spruance, against the powerful invading ﬂeet. The ﬁghting was all done by aircraft, and the Japa nese broke off action after losing four vitally important carriers. Midway was a pivotal victory. Combined with the Battle of the Coral Sea, the U.S. success at Midway halted Japan’s juggernaut. But the thrust of the Japanese into the eastern Paciﬁc did net them America’s fog-girt islands of Kiska and Attu, in the Aleutian archipelago, off Alaska. This easy conquest aroused fear of an invasion of the United States from the northwest. Much American strength was consequently diverted to the defense of Alaska, including the construction of the “Alcan” Highway through Canada. Yet the Japanese imperialists, overextended in 1942, suffered from “victory disease.” Their appetites were bigger than their stomachs. If they had only dug in and consolidated their gains, they would have been much more difﬁcult to dislodge once the tide turned.

American Leapfrogging
Toward Tokyo


 Hell in the Paciﬁc Assaulting Japanese island fortresses in the Paciﬁc was a bloody, costly business. These American soldiers perished as they stepped ashore at Buna beach in New Guinea in 1942. Their damaged landing craft wallows in the surf behind them. Appearing in Life magazine on September 20, 1943, nearly two years after Pearl Harbor, this was the ﬁrst photograph of dead GIs that the War Department allowed to be published.

 Following the heartening victory at Midway, the United States for the ﬁ rst time was able to seize the initiative in the Paciﬁc. In August 1942 American ground forces gained a toehold on Guadalcanal Island, in the Solomons, in an effort to protect the lifeline from America to Australia through the southwest Paciﬁc. An early naval defeat inﬂ icted by the Japa nese shortened American supplies dangerously, and for weeks the U.S. troops held on to the malarial island by their ﬁ ngernails. After several desperate sea battles for naval control, the Japa nese troops evacuated Guadalcanal in February 1943. Japa nese losses were 20,000, compared to 1,700 for the Americans. That casualty ratio of more than ten to one, Japa nese to American, persisted throughout the Paciﬁc war. American and Australian forces, under General MacArthur, meanwhile had been hanging on courageously



Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 to the southeastern tip of New Guinea, the last buffer protecting Australia. The scales of war gradually began to tip as the American navy, including submarines, inﬂ icted lethal losses on Japa nese supply ships and troop carriers. Conquest of the north coast of New Guinea was completed by August 1944, after General MacArthur had fought his way westward through tropical jungle hells. This hard-won victory was the ﬁrst leg of his long return journey to the Philippines. The U.S. Navy, with marines and army divisions doing the meat-grinder ﬁghting, had meanwhile been “leapfrogging” the Japa nese-held islands in the Paciﬁc. Old-fashioned strategy dictated that the American forces, as they drove toward Tokyo, should reduce the fortiﬁed Japa nese outposts on their ﬂank. This course would have taken many bloodstained months, for the holed-in defenders were prepared to die to the last man in their caves. The new strategy of island hopping called for bypassing some of the most heavily fortiﬁed Japa nese posts, capturing nearby islands,

 setting up airﬁelds on them, and then neutralizing the enemy bases through heavy bombing. Deprived of essential supplies from the homeland, Japan’s outposts would slowly wither on the vine—as they did. Brilliant success crowned the American attacks on the Japa nese island strongholds in the Paciﬁc, where Admiral Nimitz skillfully coordinated the efforts of naval, air, and ground units. In May and August of 1943, Attu and Kiska in the Aleutians were easily retaken. In November 1943 “bloody Tarawa” and Makin, both in the Gilbert Islands, fell after suicidal resistance. In January and February 1944, the key outposts of the Marshall Islands group succumbed after savage ﬁghting. Especially prized were the Marianas, including America’s conquered Guam. From bases in the Marianas, the United States’ new B-29 superbombers could carry out round-trip bombing raids on Japan’s home islands. The assault on the Marianas opened on June 19, 1944, with what American pilots called the

1. Defeating the Japanese in
 China by funneling supplies over the Himalayan “hump” from India. 2. Carrying the war into Southeast Asia (a proposal much favored by the British, who could thus regain Singapore). 3. Heavy bombing of Japan from Chinese air bases. 4. “Island hopping” from the South Paciﬁc to within striking distance of the Japanese home islands. This strategy, favored by General Douglas MacArthur, was the one ﬁnally emphasized. Interactive Map

 tia

Kiska I.


.)


 u A l e (U Is.

.S


Map 35.3 United States
 Thrusts in the Paciﬁc, 1942–1945 American strategists had to choose among four proposed plans for waging the war against Japan:

60°N


SI B ER IA

 n

 ALASKA

SOVI ET U N IO N

MONGOLIA MA

Attu
I.


 IA

N


40°


Hiroshima
Aug. 6, 1945


CH I NA INDIA

 NC

R
 HU

(Gr. Br.)
(Gr. Br.)


Hong
Kong


 THAILAND

(Gr. Br.)


 INDOCHINA (Vichy Fr.)

 MALAYA (Gr. Br.)

Singapore


PAC I F I C

(U.S.)


N
20°


Saipan
June 1944


Philippine Sea
June 1944


(U.S.)


Marshall
Is.


Caroline Is.


(Gr. Br.)


Tarawa
Nov. 1943


New Guinea


 Major battle Limit of Japanese conquest Japanese-held areas, 1942 U.S. advance

Solomon
Is.




160°W


AUSTRALIA 140°E 600 1,200
Km. 
1,200 Mi.


(Gr. Br.)


Guadalcanal
0°S
Aug. 1942–Feb. 1943 2


Coral Sea
May 1942


80°E


120°E


 tor Equa

Gilbert Is.


NETHERLANDS EAST INDIES

INDIAN OCEAN

Pearl Harbor
Dec. 7, 1941


Wake I.


Guam
July 1944


Leyte
Oct. 1944


O C E A N


Iwo Jima
March 1945


Philippine Is.


100°E


Hawaiian Is.
(U.S.)


Okinawa
June


 BURMA

Midway Is.
June 1942


JAPAN
Tokyo 
Nagasaki
Aug. 9, 1945


180°
160°E


40°S


0°


Battles Above and Below the Sea


 “Great Marianas Turkey Shoot.” A combination of the combat superiority of the recently developed American “Hellcat” ﬁghter plane and the new technology of the antiaircraft proximity fuse destroyed nearly 250 Japa nese aircraft, with a loss of only 29 American planes. The following day, in the Battle of the Philippine Sea, U.S. naval forces sank several Japa nese carriers. The Japa nese navy never recovered from these massive losses of planes, pilots, and ships. After fanatical resistance, including a mass suicide leap of surviving Japa nese soldiers and civilians from “Suicide Cliff” on Saipan, the major islands of the Marianas fell to the U.S. attackers in July and August 1944. With these unsinkable aircraft carriers now available, virtual round-the-clock bombing of Japan began in November 1944 (see Map 35.3).

The Allied Halting of Hitler
 Early setbacks for America in the Paciﬁc were paralleled in the Atlantic. Hitler had entered the war with a formidable ﬂeet of ultramodern submarines, which ultimately operated in “wolf packs” with frightful effect, especially in the North Atlantic, the Caribbean, and the Gulf of Mexico. During ten months of 1942 more than 500 merchant ships were reported lost— 111 in June alone—as ship destruction far outran construction. The tide of subsea battle turned with agonizing slowness. Old techniques, such as escorting convoys of merchant vessels and dropping depth bombs from destroyers, were strengthened by air patrol, the newly invented technology of radar, and the bombing of submarine bases. “Keep ’Em Sailing” was the motto of oil-begrimed merchant seamen, hundreds of whom perished as unsung heroes in icy seas. Eventually Allied antisubmarine tactics improved substantially, thanks especially to British code breakers, who had cracked the Germans’ “Enigma” codes and could therefore pinpoint the locations of the U-boats lurking in the North Atlantic. Not until the spring of 1943 did the Allies clearly have the upper hand against the U-boat. If they had not won the Battle of the Atlantic, Britain would have been forced under, and a second front could not have been launched from its island springboard. Victory over the undersea raiders was nerve-rackingly narrow. When the war ended, Hitler was about to massproduce a fearsome new submarine—one that could remain underwater indeﬁ nitely and cruise at seventeen knots when submerged.



 British prime minister Winston Churchill (1874– 1965) observed in a speech in May 1943,

“


 The proud German Army has by its sudden collapse, sudden crumbling and breaking up . . . once again proved the truth of the saying, ‘The Hun [German] is always either at your throat or at your feet.’

”


 Meanwhile, the turning point of the land-air war against Hitler had come late in 1942. The British had launched a thousand-plane raid on Cologne in May. In August 1942 they were joined by the American air force and were cascading bombs on German cities. The Germans under Marshal Erwin Rommel—the “Desert Fox”—had driven eastward across the hot sands of North Africa into Egypt, perilously close to the Suez Canal. A breakthrough would have spelled disaster for the Allies. But late in October 1942, British general Bernard Montgomery delivered a withering attack at El Alamein, west of Cairo. With the aid of several hundred hastily shipped American Sherman tanks, he speedily drove the enemy back to Tunisia, more than a thousand miles away. On the Soviet front, the unexpected successes of the red army gave a new lift to the Allied cause. In September 1942 the Russians stalled the German steamroller at rubble-strewn Stalingrad, graveyard of Hitler’s hopes. More than a score of invading divisions, caught in an icy noose, later surrendered or were “mopped up.” In November 1942 the resilient Russians unleashed a crushing counteroffensive, which was never seriously reversed. A year later Stalin had regained about twothirds of the blood-soaked Soviet motherland wrested from him by the German invader.

A
Second Front from North Africa to Rome Soviet losses were already staggering in 1942: millions of soldiers and civilians lay dead, and Hitler’s armies had overrun most of the western USSR. AngloAmerican losses at this time could be counted only in the thousands. By war’s end, the grave had closed over some 20 million Soviets, and a great swath of their country, equivalent in the United States to the area from Chicago to the Atlantic seaboard, had been laid waste. Small wonder that Kremlin leaders clamored 


Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 for a second front to divert the German strength westward. Many Americans, including FDR, were eager to begin a diversionary invasion of France in 1942 or 1943. They feared that the Soviets, unable to hold out forever against Germany, might make a separate peace as they had in 1918 and leave the Western Allies to face Hitler’s fury alone. Roosevelt rashly promised the Soviets in early 1942 that he would open a second front on the European continent by the end of the year—a promise that proved utterly impossible to keep. British military planners, remembering their appalling losses in 1914–1918, were not enthusiastic about a frontal assault on German-held France. It might end in disaster. They preferred to attack Hitler’s Fortress Europe through the “soft underbelly” of the Mediterranean. Faced with British boot-dragging and a woeful lack of resources, the Americans reluctantly agreed to postpone a massive invasion of Europe. An assault on French-held North Africa was a compromise second front, and a far cry from what the badly battered Soviets were demanding. The highly secret

 Women at War Members of the Women’s Army Corps disembark in North Africa in 1944. (Note: “Auxillary” was dropped from the name in 1943)

 attack, launched in November 1942, was headed by a gifted and easy-smiling American general, Dwight D. (“Ike”) Eisenhower, a master of orga ni zation and conciliation. As a joint Allied operation ultimately involving some 400,000 men (British, Canadian, French, and chieﬂy American) and about 850 ships, the invasion was the mightiest waterborne effort up to that time in history. After savage ﬁghting, the remnants of the German-Italian army were ﬁ nally trapped in Tu nisia and surrendered in May 1943. New blows were now planned by the Allies. At Casablanca, in newly occupied French Morocco, President Roosevelt, who had boldly ﬂown the Atlantic, met in a historic conference with Winston Churchill in January 1943. The Big Two agreed to step up the Paciﬁc war, invade Sicily, increase pressure on Italy, and insist upon an “unconditional surrender” of the enemy, a phrase earlier popularized by General Ulysses S. Grant during the Civil War. Such an unyielding policy would presumably hearten the ultrasuspicious Soviets, who professed to fear separate Allied peace negotiations. It would also forestall charges of broken armistice terms, such as had come after 1918. Paradoxically, the tough-sounding unconditional surrender declaration was an admission of the weakness of the Western Allies. Still unable in 1943 to mount the kind of second front their Soviet partner desperately demanded, the British and the Americans had little but words to offer Stalin. “Unconditional surrender” proved to be one of the most controversial moves of the war. The main criticism was that it steeled the enemy to ﬁght to a lastbunker resistance, while discouraging antiwar groups in Germany from revolting. Although there was some truth in these charges, no one can prove that “unconditional surrender” either shortened or lengthened the war. But this is known: by helping to destroy the German government utterly, the harsh policy forced a thorough postwar reconstruction. The Allied forces, victorious in Africa, now turned against the not-so-soft underbelly of Europe. Sicily fell in August 1943 after sporadic but sometimes bitter resistance. Shortly before the conquest of the island, Mussolini was deposed, and Italy surrendered unconditionally soon thereafter, in September 1943. President Roosevelt, referring to the three original Axis countries—Germany, Italy, and Japan—joked grimly that it was now one down and two to go. But if Italy dropped out of the war, the Germans did not drop out of Italy. Hitler’s well-trained troops stubbornly resisted the Allied invaders now pouring

The Road to D-Day




 sand Axis troops in Italy laid down their arms and became prisoners of war. While the Italian second front opened the Mediterranean and diverted some German divisions from the blazing Soviet and French battle lines, it also may have delayed the main Allied invasion of Europe, from Eng land across the Eng lish Channel to France, by many months—allowing more time for the Soviet army to advance into Eastern Europe.

D-Day: June 6, 1944


 The Big Two British prime minister Winston Churchill and U.S. president Franklin D. Roosevelt meet at the Casablanca conference in Morocco, January 1943.

 into the toe of the Italian boot. They also unleashed their fury against the Italians, who had turned their coats and declared war on Germany in October 1943. “Sunny Italy” proceeded to belie its name, for in the snow-covered and mud-caked mountains of its elongated peninsula occurred some of the ﬁ lthiest, bloodiest, and most frustrating ﬁghting of the war. For many months Italy appeared to be a dead end, as the Allied advance was halted by a seemingly impregnable German defense centered on the ancient monastery of Monte Cassino. After a touch-and-go assault on the Anzio beachhead, Rome was ﬁ nally taken on June 4, 1944. The tremendous cross-channel invasion of France begun two days later turned Italy into a kind of sideshow, but the Allies, limited in manpower, continued to ﬁght their way slowly and painfully into northern Italy. On May 2, 1945, only ﬁve days before Germany’s ofﬁcial surrender, several hundred thou-

 The Soviets had never ceased their clamor for an allout second front, and the time rapidly approached for Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin to meet in person to coordinate the promised effort. Marshal Joseph Stalin, with a careful eye on Soviet military operations, balked at leaving Moscow. President Roosevelt, who jauntily remarked in private, “I can handle that old buzzard,” was eager to confer with him. The president seemed conﬁdent that Rooseveltian charm could woo the hardened conspirator of the Kremlin from his nasty communist ways. Tehran, the capital of Iran (Persia), was ﬁnally chosen as the meeting place. To this ancient city Roosevelt riskily ﬂew, after a stopover conference in Cairo with Britain’s Churchill and China’s Jiang Jieshi regarding the war against Japan. At Tehran the discussions among Stalin, Roosevelt, and Churchill— from November 28 to December 1, 1943—progressed smoothly. Perhaps the most important achievement was agreement on broad plans, especially those for launching Soviet attacks on Germany from the east simultaneously with the prospective Allied assault from the west. Preparations for the cross-channel invasion of France were gigantic. Britain’s fast-anchored isle virtually groaned with munitions, supplies, and troops, as nearly 3 million ﬁghting men were readied. Because the United States was to provide most of the Allied warriors, the overall command was entrusted to an American, General Eisenhower. He had already distinguished himself in the North African and Mediterranean campaigns, not only for his military capacity but also for his gifts as a conciliator of clashing Allied interests. French Normandy, less heavily defended than other parts of the European coast, was pinpointed for the invasion assault. On D-Day, June 6, 1944, the enormous operation, which involved some forty-six hundred vessels, unwound. Stiff resistance was encountered from



Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


Allies Landing in
Normandy, June 6, 1944
 Nine-foot ocean swells on invasion day made loading the assault landing craft, such as the one pictured here, treacherous business. Many men were injured or tossed into the sea as the bathtublike amphibious vessels bobbed wildly up and down alongside the troop transports. As the vulnerable boats churned toward the beach, some ofﬁcers led their tense, grim-faced troops in prayer. One major, recalling the remarkable Battle of Agincourt in 1415, quoted from Shakespeare’s Henry V: “He that outlives this day, and comes safe home / Will stand a tip-toe when this day is named.”

 the Germans, who had been misled by a feint into expecting the blow to fall farther north. The Allies had already achieved mastery of the air over France. They were thus able to block reinforcements by crippling the railroads, while worsening German fuel shortages by bombing gasoline-producing plants. The Allied beachhead, at ﬁrst clung to with ﬁ ngertips, was gradually enlarged, consolidated, and reinforced. After desperate ﬁghting, the invaders ﬁ nally broke out of the German iron ring that enclosed the Normandy landing zone. Most spectacular were the lunges across France by American armored divisions, brilliantly commanded by blustery and profane General George S. (“Blood ’n’ Guts”) Patton. The retreat of the German defenders was hastened when an American-French force landed in August 1944 on the southern coast of France and swept northward. With the assistance of the French “underground,” Paris was liberated in August 1944, amid exuberant manifestations of joy and gratitude. Allied forces rolled irresistibly toward Germany, and many of the Americans encountered places, like Château-Thierry, familiar to their fathers in 1918. “Lafayette, we are here again,” quipped some of the American soldiers. The ﬁ rst important German city

 Liberating France A GI from Des Moines, Iowa, receives a kiss of welcome from an elderly French couple after American troops liberated their town of St. Sauveur in August 1944.

40˚E


20˚E


0˚


60˚E


60˚N


N O R W AY


Leningrad
 besieged Sept. 1941– Jan. 19, 1944

SWEDEN N. IRELAND

 DENMARK

Battle of
 the Bulge Dec. 16, 1944– UNITED KINGDOM Jan. 31,1945

Elb
 e

 NETH.

D-Day
June 6, 1944


 BELG.

R


R.
 ine

Stalingrad
Aug. 21, 1942–
Jan. 31, 1943


 UKRAINE

C


Sea


 US

S


 ea

Balearic Is.


Monte Cassino
Salerno


Bla c k


Danube R.


˚N




 n

 Rome liberated June 4, 1944

 CAS

 ia

Aug


 p

 SERBIA

 ITALY

 CAU

 ROMANIA

 CROATIA

Corsica


Vo
 lga R.

Don


 s

VICHY FRANCE

SPAI N



 g.



March 1944


SLOVAKIA HUNGARY
Dec. 19 
 ALPS

 (occupied Nov. 1942)



Au




Moscow:
Germans
 repulsed Dec. 1941

 a

 SWITZ.

J uly 19


Od
 er Warsaw R

Germany
 surrendered May 7, 1945

Rh


F R ANCE

 v.

 POLAND

 945 GERMANY ril 1 Ap

 LUX.

No


 UNION

.


 NORMANDY

 PORTUGAL

O V I E T
. 19


 PRUSSIA (Ger.)

Berlin


Dunkirk


 Paris liberated Aug. 23, 1944

Sept


 LITHUANIA

.


London


 LATVIA

R.


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

 B altic Sea

 a R. Volg

. 19


 IRELAND

N


 ESTONIA

North
Sea


 BULGARIA

 ALBANIA (It.)

T U R K E Y


Sardinia


GREECE SPANISH MOROCCO

Casablanca


Sicily


Tunis


FRENCH MOROCCO

Kasserine Pass
Feb. 14–17, 1943


(Vichy France)


FRENCH NORTH AFRICA

July 1943
 TUNISIA

(Vichy France)
 (joined Allies Nov. 1942)

M


(Gr.)


 ed ite rran ean

(Fr.)


(Gr. Br.)


 PALESTINE

S ea


(Gr. Br.)


 l



L I B YA




500 Km.


 d Se a

Map 35.4 World War II in Europe and North Africa, 1939–1945


 The presidential campaign of 1944, which was bound to divert energy from the war program, came most awkwardly as the awful conﬂ ict roared to its climax. But the normal electoral processes continued to function, despite some loose talk of suspending them “for the duration.”

SAU DI A R A B IA

Re


(Gr. Br.)


.


R


 EGYPT

 e Nil

(Italy)


FDR:
The FourthTermite of 1944 
 TRANSJORDAN (Gr. Br.)

El Alamein
Oct. 23–Nov. 5, 1942


 Allied advances

 (Aachen) fell to the Americans in October 1944, and the days of Hitler’s “thousand-year Reich” were numbered (see Map 35.4).

Suez
Canal


 ll ll

Nov.


 IRAQ

 LEBANON

Alexandria


 Neutral nations

 Major battle

SYR IA
Cyprus 
 ll ll ll

Axis Powers
 and their Allies Axis-held, early Nov. 1942 Allied Powers and their allies

Malta
(Gr. Br.)


Rhodes
Crete (It.)






500 Mi.


Interactive Map


 Victory-starved Republicans met in Chicago with hopeful enthusiasm. They quickly nominated the short, mustachioed, and dapper Thomas E. Dewey, popular vote-getting governor of New York. Regarded as a liberal, he had already made a national reputation as a prosecutor of grafters and racketeers in New York City. His shortness and youth—he was only forty-two— had caused one veteran New Dealer to sneer that the candidate had cast his diaper into the ring. To offset Dewey’s mild internationalism, the convention nominated for the vice presidency a strong isolationist, handsome and white-maned Senator John W. Bricker of Ohio. Yet the platform called for an unstinted prosecution of the war and for the creation of a new international orga ni zation to maintain peace.



Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 FDR, aging under the strain, was the “indispensable man” of the Democrats. No other major ﬁgure was available, and the war was apparently grinding to its ﬁ nale. He was nominated at Chicago on the ﬁ rst ballot by acclamation. But in a sense he was the “forgotten man” of the convention, for in view of his age, an unusual amount of attention was focused on the vice presidency. The scramble for the vice-presidential plum turned into something of a free-for-all. Henry A. Wallace, onetime “plow ’em under” secretary of agriculture, had served four years as vice president and desired a renomination. But conser vative Democrats distrusted him as an ill-balanced and unpredictable liberal. A “ditch Wallace” move developed tremendous momentum, despite the popularity of Wallace with large numbers of voters and many of the delegates. With Roosevelt’s blessing, the vice-presidential nomination ﬁ nally went to smiling and self-assured Senator Harry S Truman of Missouri (“the new Missouri Compromise”). Hitherto inconspicuous, he had recently attained national visibility as the efﬁcient chairman of a Senate committee conducting an investigation of wasteful war expenditures. Nobody had much against him or on him.

Roosevelt Defeats Dewey
 A dynamic Dewey took the offensive, for Roosevelt was too consumed with directing the war to spare much time for speechmaking. The vigorous young “crime buster,” with his beautiful baritone voice and polished diction, denounced the tired and quarrelsome “old men” in Washington. He proclaimed repeatedly that after “twelve long years” of New Dealism, it was “time for a change.” As for the war, Dewey would not alter the basic strategy but would ﬁght it better—a type of “metooism” ridiculed by the Democrats. The fourth-term issue did not ﬁgure prominently, now that the ice had been broken by Roosevelt’s third term. But “Deweyeyed” Republicans half-humorously professed to fear ﬁ fth and sixth terms by the “lifer” in the White House. In the closing weeks of the campaign, Roosevelt left his desk for the stump. He was stung by certain Republican charges, including criticism that he had sent a U.S. Navy destroyer to retrieve his pet Scottie dog, Fala. He was also eager to show himself, even in chilling rains, to spike well-founded rumors of failing health. Substantial assistance came from the new political action committee of the CIO, which was orga nized

 to get around the law banning the direct use of union funds for political purposes. Zealous CIO members, branded as communists by the Republicans, rang countless doorbells and asked, with pointed reference to the recent depression, “What were you doing in 1932?” At times Roosevelt seemed to be running again against Hoover. As in every one of his previous three campaigns, FDR was opposed by a majority of the newspapers, which were owned chieﬂy by Republicans. Roosevelt, as customary, won a sweeping victory: 432 to 99 in the Electoral College; 25,606,585 to 22,014,745 in the popular vote. Elated, he quipped that “the ﬁ rst twelve years are the hardest.” Roosevelt won primarily because the war was going well. A winning pitcher is not ordinarily pulled from the game. Foreign policy was a decisive factor with untold thousands of voters, who concluded that Roosevelt’s experienced hand was needed in fashioning a future orga ni zation for world peace. The dapper Dewey, cruelly dubbed “the little man on top of the wedding cake,” had spoken smoothly of international cooperation, but his isolationist running mate, Bricker, had implanted serious doubts. The Republican party was still suffering from the taint of isolationism fastened on it by the Hardingites.

The Last Days of Hitler
 By mid-December 1944, the month after Roosevelt’s fourth-term victory, Germany seemed to be wobbling on its last legs. The Soviet surge had penetrated eastern Germany. Allied aerial “blockbuster” bombs, making the “rubble bounce” with around-the-clock attacks, were falling like giant explosive hailstones on cities, factories, and transportation arteries. The German western front seemed about to buckle under the sledgehammer blows of the United States and its Allies. Hitler then staked every thing on one last throw of his reserves. Secretly concentrating a powerful force, he hurled it, on December 16, 1944, against the thinly held American lines in the heavily befogged and snowshrouded Ardennes Forest. His objective was the Belgian port of Antwerp, key to the Allied supply operation. Caught off guard, the outmanned Americans were driven back, creating a deep “bulge” in the Allied line. The ten-day penetration was ﬁ nally halted after the 101st Airborne Division had stood ﬁ rm at the vital bastion of Bastogne. The commander, Brigadier General A. C. McAuliffe, deﬁantly answered the German demand for surrender with one word: “Nuts.” Rein-

Franklin Roosevelt at Tehran, 1943
 n late 1943 the “Big Three” wartime leaders— British prime minister Winston Churchill, American president Franklin Roosevelt, and Soviet leader Joseph Stalin—gathered together for the ﬁ rst time. They met amid growing Soviet frustration with the British and Americans for their failure thus far to open a “second front” against Germany in Western Europe, while the Soviets continued to suffer horrendous losses in the savage ﬁghting in Eastern Europe. American military planners were eager to open a second front as soon as possible, but the British, who would necessarily have to supply most of the troops until America was fully mobilized, balked. Tension among the three leaders over the second-front plan— code-named OVERLORD, the operation that resulted in the Anglo-American invasion of Normandy on “D-Day,” June 6, 1944—is evident in this report of their discussions in the Iranian city of Tehran on

I


FIRST PLENARY MEETING, NOVEMBER 28, 1943, 4 P. M., CONFERENCE ROOM, SOVIET EMBASSY
Bohlen Minutes SECRET 
THE PRESIDENT
said as the youngest of the three present he ventured to welcome his elders. He said he wished to welcome the new members to the family circle and tell them that meetings of this character were conducted as between friends with complete frankness on all sides with nothing that was said to be made public. . . . Chief of Staff Minutes MARSHAL STALIN asked who will be the commander in this Operation Overlord. (THE PRESIDENT and PRIME MINISTER interpolated this was not yet decided.) MARSHAL STALIN continued, “Then nothing will come out of these operations.” . . . THE PRESIDENT said we again come back to the problem of the timing for OVERLORD. It was believed that it would be good for OVERLORD to take place about 1 May, or certainly not later than 15 May or 20 May, if possible. THE PRIME MINISTER said that he could not agree to that. . . . . . . He said he (the Prime Minister) was going to do everything in the power of His Majesty’s Government to begin OVERLORD at the earliest possible moment. However, he did not think that the 
 November 28, 1943. The excerpts printed here are actually taken from two separate accounts: one composed by the American diplomat and Roosevelt’s ofﬁcial translator Charles Bohlen, the other written by a military ofﬁcer on behalf of the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff. Both versions were published in Foreign Relations of the United States, a compilation of American diplomatic records since 1861. The Soviets and the British also kept their own records of the Tehran meetings, giving historians remarkably rich sources with which to reconstruct the crucial negotiations and decisions that shaped wartime diplomacy. Why might the history of diplomacy be so lavishly documented? At this meeting, what were the principal objectives that each leader pursued? How did each man address his task? In what ways was the future of the war—and the postwar world— here foreshadowed? many great possibilities in the Mediterranean should be ruthlessly cast aside as valueless merely on the question of a month’s delay in OVERLORD. MARSHAL STALIN said all the Mediterranean operations are diversions, . . . THE PRESIDENT said he found that his staff places emphasis on OVERLORD. While on the other hand the Prime Minister and his staff also emphasize OVERLORD, nevertheless the United States does not feel that OVERLORD should be put off. THE PRESIDENT questioned whether it would not be possible for the ad hoc committee to go ahead with their deliberations without any further directive and to produce an answer by tomorrow morning. MARSHAL STALIN questioned, “What can such a committee do?” He said, “We Chiefs of State have more power and more authority than a committee. General Brooke cannot force our opinions and there are many questions which can be decided only by us.” He said he would like to ask if the British are thinking seriously of OVERLORD only in order to satisfy the U.S.S.R. THE PRIME MINISTER replied that if the conditions specified at Moscow regarding OVERLORD should exist, he firmly believed it would be England’s duty to hurl every ounce of strength she had across the Channel at the Germans. THE PRESIDENT observed that in an hour a very good dinner would be awaiting all and people would be very hungry. He suggested that the staffs should meet tomorrow morning and discuss the matter. . . .





Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 forcements were rushed up, and the last-gasp Hitlerian offensive was at length bloodily stemmed in the Battle of the Bulge (see Map 35.5). In March 1945, forward-driv ing American troops reached Germany’s Rhine River, where, by incredibly good luck, they found one strategic bridge undemolished. Pressing their advantage, General Eisenhower’s troops reached the Elbe River in April 1945. There, a short distance south of Berlin, American and Soviet advance guards dramatically clasped hands amid cries of “Amerikanskie tovarishchi” (American comrades). The conquering Americans were horriﬁed to ﬁ nd blood-spattered and still-stinking concentration camps, where the German Nazis had engaged in the scientiﬁc mass murder of “undesirables,” including an estimated 6 million Jews. The Washington government had long been informed about Hitler’s campaign of genocide against the Jews and had been reprehensibly slow to take steps against it. Roosevelt’s administra-

52°N


North
Sea


4°E


American and Soviet Soldiers Meet in Germany, 1945
 Such friendly sights soon became rare as mutual suspicion deepened.

6°E


5°E


N ETH ER L AN D S


Antwerp
7°E
51°N


Brussels
Aachen


B ELG I U M


Rh
 e in

N


 s Meu

R.


 Liège

.
 eR

GERMANY
Bastogne 
50°N


F R AN C E


Th e
B u l ge
 LUX.

 Initial German line Area of maximum German advance Allied counteradvances





40 Km.


40 Mi.


Map 35.5 Battle of the Bulge, December 1944–
January 1945


Interactive Map


 tion had bolted the door against large numbers of Jewish refugees, and his military commanders declined even to bomb the rail lines that carried the victims to the camps. But until the war’s end, the full dimensions of the “Holocaust” had not been known. When the details were revealed, the whole world was aghast. The vengeful Soviets, clawing their way forward from the east, reached Berlin in April 1945. After desperate house-to-house ﬁghting, followed by an orgy of pillage and rape, they captured the bomb-shattered city. Adolf Hitler, after a hasty marriage to his mistress, committed suicide in an underground bunker on April 30, 1945. Tragedy had meanwhile struck the United States. President Roosevelt, while relaxing at Warm Springs, Georgia, suddenly died from a massive cerebral hemorrhage on April 12, 1945. The crushing burden of twelve depression and war years in the White House had ﬁnally taken its toll. Knots of confused, leaderless citizens gathered to discuss the future anxiously, as a bewildered, unbriefed Vice President Truman took the helm. On May 7, 1945, what was left of the German government surrendered unconditionally. May 8 was

German Defeat




The Horror of the Holocaust
 Although the outside world had some knowledge of the Nazi death camps before the war’s end, the full revelation of Hitler’s atrocities as the Allies overran Germany in the spring of 1945 stunned and sickened the invading troops. At General Eisenhower’s orders, German civilians were compelled to view the evidence of the Nazi regime’s genocidal crimes—though these witnesses at Buchenwald tried to look the other way, as many had done during the war itself.

 ofﬁcially proclaimed V-E (Victory in Europe) Day and was greeted with frenzied rejoicing in the Allied countries.

Japan Dies Hard
 Japan’s rickety bamboo empire meanwhile was tottering to its fall. American submarines—“the silent service”—were sending the Japa nese merchant marine to the bottom so fast they were running out of prey. All told, these “undersea craft” destroyed 1,042 ships, or about 50 percent of Japan’s entire life-sustaining merchant ﬂeet. Giant bomber attacks were more spectacular. Launched from Saipan and other captured Mariana Islands, they were reducing the enemy’s fragile cities to cinders. The massive ﬁ rebomb raid on Tokyo, March 9–10, 1945, was annihilating. It destroyed over 250,000 buildings, gutted a quarter of the city, and

 killed an estimated 83,000 people—a loss comparable to that later inﬂ icted by the atomic bombs. General MacArthur was also on the move. Completing the conquest of jungle-draped New Guinea, he headed northwest for the Philippines, en route to Japan, with 600 ships and 250,000 men. In a scene well staged for the photographers, he splashed ashore at Leyte Island on October 20, 1944, with the sum mons, “People of the Philippines, I have returned. . . . Rally to me.” Japan’s navy—still menacing—now made one lastchance effort to destroy MacArthur by wiping out his transports and supply ships. A gigantic clash at Leyte Gulf, fought on the sea and in the air, was actually three battles (October 23–26, 1944). The Americans won all of them, though the crucial engagement was almost lost when Admiral William F. (“Bull”) Halsey was decoyed away by a feint. Japan was through as a sea power: it had lost about sixty ships in the greatest naval battle of all time.



Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 The Flag Raising at Iwo Jima Atop Mount Suribachi, press photographer Joe Rosenthal snapped this dramatic picture, probably the most famous of the war.

 American ﬂeets, numbering more than four thousand vessels, now commanded the western Paciﬁc. Several battleships, raised from the mud of Pearl Harbor, were exacting belated but sweet revenge. Overrunning Leyte, MacArthur next landed on the main Philippine island of Luzon in January 1945. Manila was his major objective; the ravaged city fell in March, but the Philippines were not conquered until July. Victory was purchased only after bitter ﬁghting against holed-in Japa nese, who took a toll of over sixty thousand American casualties. America’s steel vise was tightening mercilessly around Japan. The tiny island of Iwo Jima, needed as a haven for damaged American bombers returning from Japan, was captured in March 1945. This desperate twenty-ﬁve-day assault cost over four thousand American dead. Okinawa, a well-defended Japa nese island, was next on the list: it was needed for closer bases from

 which to blast and burn enemy cities and industries. Fighting dragged on from April to June of 1945. Japanese soldiers, ﬁghting with incredible courage from their caves, ﬁ nally sold Okinawa for ﬁ fty thousand American casualties, while suffering far heavier losses themselves. The U.S. Navy, which covered the invasion of Okinawa, sustained severe damage. Japa nese suicide pilots (“kamikazes”) in an exhibition of mass hara-kiri for their god-emperor, crashed their bomb-laden planes onto the decks of the invading ﬂeet. All told, the death squads sank over thirty ships and badly damaged scores more.

The Atomic Bombs
 Strategists in Washington were meanwhile planning an all-out invasion of the main islands of Japan—an

The Atomic Age


 invasion that presumably would cost hundreds of thousands of American (and even more Japa nese) casualties. Tokyo, recognizing imminent defeat, had secretly sent peace feelers to Moscow, which had not yet entered the Far Eastern war. The Americans, having broken the secret Japa nese radio codes, knew of these feelers. But bomb-scorched Japan still showed no outward willingness to surrender unconditionally to the Allies. The Potsdam conference, held near Berlin in July 1945, sounded the death knell of the Japa nese. There President Truman, still new on his job, met in a seventeen-day parley with Joseph Stalin and the British leaders. The conferees issued a stern ultimatum to Japan: surrender or be destroyed. American bombers showered the dire warning on Japan in tens of thousands of leaﬂets, but no encouraging response was forthcoming. America had a fantastic ace up its sleeve. Early in 1940, after Hitler’s wanton assault on Poland, Roosevelt was persuaded by American and exiled scientists, notably German-born Albert Einstein, to push



 The scientiﬁc director of the Manhattan Project, J. Robert Oppenheimer (1904–1967), recalled his reaction as he witnessed the detonation of the ﬁrst atomic bomb at the Trinity test site in Alamogordo, New Mexico, in July 1945. He was not only awed by the extraordinary force of this new weapon. He also feared the power to do harm that it gave to humans:

“


 I remembered the line from the Hindu scripture, the Bhagavad-Gita: ‘Now I am become Death, the destroyer of Worlds.’

”


 ahead with preparations for unlocking the secret of an atomic bomb. Congress, at Roosevelt’s blank-check request, blindly made available nearly $2 billion. Many military minds were skeptical of this “damned professor’s nonsense,” but fears that the Germans might ﬁ rst acquire such an awesome weapon provided a

 Hiroshima, Japan, August 1945 Two stunned survivors walk through the unbelievable destruction. The single atomic blast at Hiroshima killed an estimated 130,000 Japanese.



Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 powerful spur to action. Ironically, Germany eventually abandoned its own atomic project as too costly. And as it happened, the war against Germany ended before the American weapon was ready. In a cruel twist of fate, Japan—not Germany, the original target— suffered the fate of being the ﬁ rst nation subjected to atomic bombardment. What was called the Manhattan Project pushed feverishly forward, as American know-how and industrial power were combined with the most advanced scientiﬁc knowledge. Much technical skill was provided by British and refugee scientists, who had ﬂed to

 America to escape the torture chambers of the dictators. Finally, in the desert near Alamogordo, New Mexico, on July 16, 1945, the experts detonated the ﬁ rst awesome and devastating atomic device. With Japan still refusing to surrender, the Potsdam threat was fulﬁ lled. On August 6, 1945, a lone American bomber dropped one atomic bomb on the city of Hiroshima, Japan. In a blinding ﬂash of death, followed by a funnel-shaped cloud, about 180,000 people were left killed, wounded, or missing. Some 70,000 of them died instantaneously. Sixty thousand more soon perished from burns and radiation disease.

 The Japanese Surrender Representatives of the Japanese government arrived to sign the surrender document on the deck of the battleship Missouri in Tokyo harbor, September 2, 1945. General Douglas MacArthur then made a conciliatory address, expressing hope “that from this solemn occasion a better world shall emerge . . . a world founded on faith and understanding.” A Japanese diplomat attending wondered “whether it would have been possible for us, had we been victorious, to embrace the vanquished with a similar magnanimity.” Soon thereafter General MacArthur took up his duties as director of the U.S. occupation of Japan.

The End of the War


 Two days later, on August 8, Stalin entered the war against Japan, exactly on the deadline date previously agreed upon with his allies. Soviet armies speedily overran the depleted Japa nese defenses in Manchuria and Korea in a six-day “victory parade” that involved several thousand Russian casualties. Stalin was evidently determined to be in on the kill, lest he lose a voice in the ﬁ nal division of Japan’s holdings. Fanatically resisting Japa nese, though facing atomization, still did not surrender. American aviators, on August 9, dropped a second atomic bomb on the city of Nagasaki. The explosion took a horrible toll of about eighty thousand people killed or missing. (See “Varying Viewpoints.”) The Japa nese nation could endure no more. On August 10, 1945, Tokyo sued for peace on one condition: that Hirohito, the bespectacled Son of Heaven, be allowed to remain on his ancestral throne

V-J
Day: Crowds Cheering at Times Square, by  Edward Dancig, 1947 Russian-born American artist Edward Dancig captured the feelings of triumph and relief that Americans felt at the end of World War II. His painting shows the V-J (Victory in Japan) Day celebration of August 15, 1945, in New York’s Times Square.



 as nominal emperor. Despite their “unconditional surrender” policy, the Allies accepted this condition on August 14, 1945. The Japa nese, though losing face, were able to save both their exalted ruler and what was left of their native land. The formal end came, with dramatic force, on September 2, 1945. Ofﬁcial surrender ceremonies were conducted by General MacArthur on the battleship Missouri in Tokyo Bay. At the same time, Americans at home hysterically celebrated V-J (Victory in Japan) Day after the most horrible war in history had ended in mushrooming atomic clouds.

The Allies Triumphant
 World War II proved to be terribly costly. American forces suffered some 1 million casualties, more than one-third of which were deaths. Compared with other wars, the proportion killed by wounds and disease was sharply reduced, owing in part to the use of blood plasma and “miracle” drugs, notably penicillin. Yet heavy though American losses were, the Soviet allies suffered casualties many times greater—more than 25 million people killed. In grim testimony to the nature of modern warfare, World War II was the ﬁ rst war that killed more civilians than armed combatants (see “Thinking Globally: America and the World in Depression and War: A Study in Contrasts”). America was fortunate in emerging with its mainland virtually unscathed. Two Japa nese submarines, using shells and bombers, had rather harmlessly attacked the Cal i fornia and Oregon coast, and a few Japa nese ﬁ re-bomb balloons had drifted across the Paciﬁc, kill ing six civilians in Oregon. But that was about all. Much of the rest of the world was utterly destroyed and destitute. America alone was untouched and healthy—oiled and muscled like a prize bull, standing astride the world’s ruined landscape. This complex conﬂ ict was the best-fought war in America’s history. Though unprepared for it at the outset, the nation was better prepared than for the others, partly because it had begun to buckle on its armor about a year and a half before the war ofﬁcially began. It was actually ﬁghting German submarines in the Atlantic months before the explosion in the Paciﬁc at Pearl Harbor. In the end the United States showed itself to be resourceful, tough, adaptable—able to accommodate itself to the tactics of an enemy who was relentless and ruthless.

THINKING GLOBALLY

America and the World in Depression and War:
A
Study in Contrasts 

T


 he Great Depression of the 1930s was a monstrous, planetary-scale economic hurricane that wreaked havoc around the globe. All nations were walloped by its destructive force, but two were especially hard hit: the United States and Germany. In both countries production of goods declined by nearly 50 percent, and unemployment approached 25 percent. Also in both countries the depression discredited existing political regimes and created opportunities for new leadership to emerge. Fatefully, Germany got Adolf Hitler, while the United States got Franklin D. Roosevelt. Roosevelt and Hitler were of the same generation, both born in the 1880s. They came to power within weeks of each other—Hitler as Germany’s chancellor on January 30, 1933, and Roosevelt as U.S. president on March 4, 1933. Both achieved ofﬁce through democratic elections, though democracy soon withered under one’s hand and ﬂourished under the other’s. Roosevelt’s entire presidency unfolded under the looming threat, and eventually the armed challenge, of Hitler’s Nazi regime. FDR’s record, as well as the very character of American democracy in the mid-twentieth century, can only be properly understood in that larger context. Consider: In the spring of 1933, Roosevelt was coaxing legislation out of the Hundred Days Congress, forging labor unions and sundry ethnic and racial minorities into a long-lasting Democratic party coalition, and making innovative use of the radio to outﬂank the hostile media magnates who controlled the nation’s newspapers. In those same months, Hitler was dissolving German labor unions and ruthlessly censoring the German press. Soon he declared the Nazis the only legal political party in Germany and proceeded to impose on the German people a reign of terror cruelly enforced by the Gestapo, the Nazis’ grimly efﬁcient secret police. A year later, while Roosevelt worried about a possible political challenge from the swashbuckling Louisiana senator Huey P. Long, Hitler dispatched with his main Nazi rival, Ernst Röhm, by ordering his execution. The following year, 1935, Roosevelt shepherded his sweeping reform program through Congress, notably including the Social Security Act, which helped to usher millions of Americans into the mainstream of American life, especially members of the great immigrant communities that had arrived a generation or so earlier. “We are going to make a country,” Roosevelt said, “in which no one is left out.” That same year Hitler codiﬁed the Nazis’ viciously



 anti-Semitic policies in the notorious Nuremberg Laws, stripping German Jews of their citizenship, barring them from the professions and military ser vice, and prohibiting marriage between Jews and “Aryans” (deﬁned by the Nazis as a master race of non-Jewish Caucasians, especially those having Nordic features)—all gruesome steps on the road to the genocidal war-time Holocaust, which would eventually murder some six million Jews. Meanwhile, Hitler was relentlessly building his war machine, while FDR’s America clung stubbornly to its traditional isolationism. And when the great conﬂict of World War II ﬁnally erupted, Hitler’s Germany and Roosevelt’s America fought decidedly different wars. Indeed the United States’ experience in the war stands in vivid contrast to the experience of all other combatants, including not only Germany but also America’s allies in the “Grand Alliance.” Hitler’s vaunted “thousand-year Reich” lay in smoldering ruins at war’s end, his people dazed, demoralized, and starving. The strutting Führer had brewed a catastrophe

 Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Thirty-second President of the United States

Table 35.1 The Comparative Costs of World War II
Country
China
France
Poland
USSR
United Kingdom United States Germany (including Austria) Italy Japan 
Military Deaths


Civilian Deaths


2,000,000
250,000
123,000
10,000,000
300,000
405,399


7,750,000
350,000
6,000,000
17,000,000
60,600
6*


3,500,000
242,000
2,000,000


1,600,000
60,000
650,000


Government
Expenditures


Damage to
Civilian Property


 $192 billion $120 billion $317 billion

 $128 billion $5 billion

 $272 billion $94 billion

 $50–$75 billion

 *In the forty-eight states; additional civilian deaths occurred in Hawaii, Alaska, and the Philippines. Sources: World War II casualty estimates vary widely. The ﬁgures here are largely taken from David M. Kennedy, ed., The Library of Congress World War II Companion; I. C. B. Dear, ed., The Oxford Companion to the Second World War; Louis L. Snyder, Historical Guide to World War II; and John Ellis, World War II: A Statistical Survey.

 so vast that its conclusion seemed to sunder the web of time itself. Germans remember the moment of their surrender on May 7, 1945, as the Stunde null, or “zero hour,” when history’s clock came to a fearful halt. Elsewhere, even

 America’s main wartime partners, Great Britain and the Soviet Union, had paid a far greater price in blood and treasure than the United States. Uniquely among all the belligerents in World War II—perhaps uniquely in the history of warfare—the United States had managed to grow its civilian economy even while waging a hugely costly war. In Germany, Britain, and the Soviet Union, the civilian standard of living had gone down by approximately one-third. In the United States, the civilian economy had actually expanded by 15 percent, preparing the way for phenomenal prosperity in the postwar decades. And though 405,399 brave American ser vice members died in World War II, proportionate to population American losses were about one-third those of Britain and about one-sixtieth those of the Soviet Union, where some 10 million soldiers and a staggering 17 million civilians perished (see Table 35.1). By glaring contrast, in the forty-eight continental American states that had a star on the ﬂag in 1945, the U.S. civilian death toll due to enemy action was just six persons, all of them the victims of a crude Japanese balloon-borne ﬁrebomb that exploded in their faces near the hamlet of Bly, Oregon, on May 5, 1945. For all the misery that depression and war visited upon the United States, Americans could count their blessings that fortune had spared them the enormous deprivations and horrors that were all too common elsewhere. Yet some observers worried that America was now assuming leadership in a world where the depths of other peoples’ wounds and woes could scarcely be imagined.

German Chancellor Adolf Hitler






Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 American military leadership proved to be of the highest order. A new crop of war heroes emerged in brilliant generals like Eisenhower, MacArthur, and Marshall (chief of staff) and in imaginative admirals like Nimitz and Spruance. President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill, as kindred spirits, collaborated closely in planning strategy. “It is fun to be in the same decade with you,” FDR once cabled Churchill. Industrial leaders were no less skilled, for marvels of production were performed almost daily. Assembly lines proved as important as battle lines, and victory went again to the side with the most smokestacks. The enemy was almost literally smothered by bayonets, bullets, bazookas, and bombs. Hitler and his Axis coconspirators had chosen to make war with machines, and the ingenious Yankees could ask for nothing bet-

 ter. They demonstrated again, as they had in World War I, that the American way of war was simply more— more men, more weapons, more machines, more technology, and more money than any enemy could hope to match. From 1940 to 1945, the output of American factories was simply phenomenal. As Winston Churchill remarked, “Nothing succeeds like excess.” Hermann Goering, a Nazi leader, had sneered, “The Americans can’t build planes—only electric iceboxes and razor blades.” Democracy had given its answer, as the dictators, despite long preparation, were overthrown and discredited. It is true that an unusual amount of direct control was exercised over the individual by the Washington authorities during the war emergency. But the American people preserved their precious liberties without serious impairment.

 CHRONOLOGY





 United States declares war on Japan Germany declares war on United States Randolph plans black march on Washington Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC) established Roosevelt delivers “Four Freedoms” speech Japa nese Americans sent to internment camps Japan conquers the Philippines Battle of the Coral Sea Battle of Midway United States invades North Africa Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) founded Allies hold Casablanca conference Allies invade Italy Smith-Connally Anti-Strike Act “Zoot-suit” riots in Los Angeles Race riot in Detroit Japa nese driven from Guadalcanal Tehran conference



Korematsu v. U.S.
 D-Day invasion of France Battle of the Marianas Roosevelt defeats Dewey for presidency

1944–


Battle of the Bulge




 Roosevelt dies; Truman assumes presidency Germany surrenders Battles of Iwo Jima and Okinawa Potsdam conference Atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki Yalta conference Japan surrenders

Varying Viewpoints


KEY TERMS ABC-1
agreement (875) Executive Order No. 9066 (876) War Production Board (WPB) (877) Ofﬁce of Price Administration (OPA) (880) National War Labor Board (NWLB) (880) Smith-Connally AntiStrike Act (880) WAACs (Women’s Army Auxiliary Corps) (881) WAVES (Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service) (881) SPARs (U.S. Coast Guard Women’s Reserve) (881) 


PEOPLE TO KNOW
Bracero program (881) Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC) (883) Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) (884) Navajo code talkers (884) Midway, Battle of (887) D-Day (891) V-E (Victory in Europe) Day (897) Potsdam conference (899) Manhattan Project (900) V-J (Victory in Japan) Day (901) 
 Douglas MacArthur Chester Nimitz Dwight D. “Ike” Eisenhower

Harry S Truman
Albert Einstein


 The Atomic Bombs: Were They Justiﬁed?

N


 o episode of the World War II era has provoked sharper controversy than the atomic bombings of Japan in August 1945. Lingering moral misgivings about the nuclear incineration of Hiroshima and Nagasaki have long threatened to tarnish America’s crown of military victory. Some critics have accused the United States of racist motives because the bombs were dropped on a nonwhite people. Other commentators note that the Japa nese were already reeling on the verge of collapse by 1945, and therefore history’s most awful weapons—especially the second bomb, on Nagasaki—were unnecessary to bring the war to a conclusion. Still other scholars, notably Gar Alperovitz, have further charged that the atomic attacks on

 Hiroshima and Nagasaki were not the last shots of World War II, but the ﬁ rst salvos in the emerging Cold War. Alperovitz argues that President Truman willfully ignored Tokyo’s attempts to negotiate a surrender in the summer of 1945 and rejected all alternatives to dropping the bomb because he wanted to intimidate and isolate the Soviet Union. He unleashed his horrible new weapons, so this argument goes, not simply to defeat Japan, but to end the Far Eastern conﬂ ict before the Soviets could enter it, and thereby freeze them out of any role in formulating postwar reconstruction policy in Asia. Each of these accusations has been vigorously rebutted. Richard Rhodes’s exhaustive history of the



Chapter 35 America in World War II, 1941–1945


 making of the atomic bomb emphasizes that the Anglo-American atomic project began as a race against the Germans, who were known to be actively pursuing a nuclear weapons program. (Unknown to the Americans, Germany effectively terminated its effort in 1942, just as the Anglo-American project went into high gear.) From the outset both British and American planners believed that the bomb, if successful, would be not just another weapon, but the ultimate instrument of destruction that would decisively deliver victory into the hands of whoever possessed it. They consequently assumed that it would be used at the earliest possible moment. There is, therefore, no credible reason to conclude that German cities would not have suffered the fate of Hiroshima and Nagasaki if nuclear weapons had become available sooner or if the European phase of the war had lasted longer. It is true that American intelligence sources in the early summer of 1945 reported that some Japanese statesmen were trying to enlist the still-neutral Russians’ good ofﬁces to negotiate a surrender. But as R. J. C. Butow’s ﬁ ne-grained study of Japan’s decision to surrender demonstrates, it was unclear whether those initiatives had the full backing of the Japa nese government. Moreover, the Japa nese clung to several unacceptable conditions, including protection for their imperial system of government, the right to disarm and repatriate their own troops, no military occupation of the home islands, no international trials of alleged war criminals, and possible retention of some of their conquered territories. All this ﬂew squarely in the face of America’s repeatedly declared intention to settle for nothing less than unconditional surrender. As for the Nagasaki bomb (dropped on August 9), Butow also notes that it conclusively dispelled the Japa nese government’s original assessment that the Hiroshima attack (on Aug ust 6) was a one-time-only stunt, with little likelihood of further nuclear strikes to follow. (Even then, some diehard military ofﬁcers, refusing to ac-

 knowledge defeat, tried, on the night of August 14, to storm the Imperial Palace to seize the recording of the emperor’s surrender announcement before it could be broadcast the following day.) Could the use of the atomic bombs have been avoided? Studies by Martin J. Sherwin, Barton J. Bernstein, and McGeorge Bundy have shown that few policymakers at the time seriously asked that question. As Winston Churchill later wrote, “The decision whether or not to use the atomic bomb to compel the surrender of Japan was never even an issue. There was unanimous, automatic, unquestioned agreement around our table; nor did I ever hear the slightest suggestion that we should do otherwise.” In fact, the “decision” to use the bomb was not made in 1945, but in 1942, when the United States committed itself to a crash program to build—and use—a nuclear weapon as swiftly as possible. Intimidating the Soviets might have been a “bonus” to using the bomb against Japan, but inﬂuencing Soviet behavior was never the primary reason for the fateful decision. American leaders wanted to end the war as soon as possible. To that end they had always assumed the atomic bomb would be dropped as soon as it was available. That moment came on August 6, 1945. Doubt and remorse about the atomic conclusion of World War II have plagued the American conscience ever since. Less often remarked on are the deaths of four times more Japa nese noncombatants than died at Hiroshima and Nagasaki in the so-called conventional ﬁ rebombing of some ﬁve dozen Japa nese cities in 1945. Those deaths suggest that the deeper moral question should perhaps be addressed not to the particular technology of nuclear weaponry and the fate of those two unfortunate Japa nese cit ies, but to the quite deliberate decision, made by several combatants—including the Germans, the British, the Americans, and the Japanese themselves—to designate civilian populations as legitimate military targets.

To Learn More




To Learn More
Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin, American Prometheus: The
Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer (2005)
John M. Blum, V Was for Victory: Politics and American
Culture During World War II (1976)
Roger Daniels, Prisoners Without Trial: Japanese Americans
 in World War II (1993) Norman Davies, No Simple Victory: World War II in Europe, 1939–1945 (2007) John W. Dower, War Without Mercy: Race and Power in the Paciﬁc War (1986) Sherna Gluck, Rosie the Riveter Revisited: Women, the War, and Social Change (1988) Nelson Lichtenstein, Labor’s War at Home: The CIO in World War II (1982)

Richard Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb (1986)
Ronald H. Spector, Eagle Against the Sun: The American
 War with Japan (1985) Ronald T. Takaki, Double Victory: A Multicultural History of America in World War II (2000)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

 PART

 SIX

Making Modern
America





1945 to the Present


W


 orld War II broke the back of the Great Depression in the United States and also ended the century-and-a-half-old Amer ican tradition of isolationism in foreign affairs. Alone among the warring powers, the United States managed to emerge from the great conﬂ ict physically unscarred, economically healthy, and diplomatically strengthened. Yet if Americans faced a world full of promise at the war’s end, it was also a world full of dangers, none more disconcerting than Soviet communism. These two themes of promise and menace mingled uneasily throughout the nearly ﬁve decades of the Cold War era, from the end of World War II in 1945 to the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. At home unprecedented prosperity in the post war quarter-century nourished a robust sense of national self-conﬁdence and fed a revolution of rising expectations. Invigorated by the prospect of endlessly spread-

 ing afﬂuence, Americans in the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s had record numbers of babies, aspired to everhigher standards of liv ing, generously expanded the welfare state (especially for the elderly), widened opportunities for women, welcomed immigrants, and even found the will to grapple at long last with the nation’s grossest legacy of injustice, its treatment of African Amer icans. With the exception of Dwight Eisenhower’s presidency in the 1950s, Americans elected liberal Democratic presidents (Harry Truman in 1948, John F. Kennedy in 1960, and Lyndon Johnson in 1964). The Democratic party, the party of the liberal New Deal at home and of an activist foreign policy abroad, comfortably remained the nation’s majority party. Americans trusted their government and had faith in the American dream that their children would lead a richer life than their parents had done. Anything and every thing seemed possible.

The Suburban Society
 In the phenomenally afﬂuent post–World War II years, newly prosperous Americans ﬂocked to the freshly built suburbs.

Making Modern America


 The rising curve of ascending expectations, propelled by exploding economic growth, bounded upward throughout the 1950s. It peaked in the 1960s, an exceptionally stormy decade during which faith in government, in the wisdom of American foreign policy, and in the American dream itself, began to sour. Lyndon Johnson’s “Great Society” reforms, billed as the completion of the unﬁ nished work of the New Deal, foundered on the rocks of ﬁscal limitations and stubborn racial resentments. Johnson, the most ambitious reformer in the White House since Franklin Roosevelt, eventually saw his presidency destroyed by the furies unleashed over the Vietnam War. When economic growth ﬂattened in the 1970s, the horizon of hopes for the future seemed to sink as well. The nation entered a frustrating period of stalled expectations, increasingly rancorous racial tensions, disillusion with government, and political stalemate, although in one important arena idealism survived. As “second-wave feminism” gathered steam, women burst through barriers that had long excluded them from male domains operating every where from the factory ﬂoor to the U.S. Army to the Ivy League. Not content with private victories, they also called on the government for help—to ensure women equal opportunity as workers, fair treatment as consumers, and the right to choose an abortion. Beginning in 1968, Americans stopped sending New Deal–style liberals to the White House, electing moderate Republicans (Richard Nixon in 1968 and 1972, succeeded by the unelected Gerald Ford after Watergate), moderate southern Democrats (Jimmy Carter in 1976 and Bill Clinton in 1992 and 1996), and conser vative Republicans (Ronald Reagan in 1980 and 1984, George H. W. Bush in 1992, and George W. Bush in 2000 and 2004). Throughout most of these years, Congress remained mostly under the Democrats’ control, until the “Republican revolution” of 1994 put a new generation of conser vative legislators in power. Only with popular discontent over the Iraq War did the Democrats narrowly regain control of both houses in 2006. As the twenty-ﬁrst century dawned, the Democratic party teetered on a tightrope between liberal policies and conser vative demands for tax cuts, reduced government regulation, and welfare reform.



 The End of an Era? As surely as victory in World War II restored conﬁdence and prosperity to a people demoralized by the Great Depression, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, struck electric fear into the American people— and menaced their historical commitment to an open society and individual liberties.

 And by the 2008 election, a Republican party that had seemed to be solidly uniﬁed around a conser vative agenda started to fracture into defense hawks, social conservatives, and ﬁscal moderates. Abroad the ﬁerce competition with the Soviet Union, and after 1949 with communist China as well, colored almost every aspect of America’s foreign relations and shaped domestic life, too. Unreasoning fear of communists at home unleashed the destructive force of McCarthyism in the 1950s—a modern-day witch hunt in which careers were capsized and lives ruined by reckless accusations of communist sympathizing. The FBI encroached on sacred American liberties in its zeal to uncover communist “subversives.” The Cold War remained cold, in the sense that no shooting conﬂ ict broke out between the great-power rivals. But the United States did ﬁght two shooting wars, in Korea in the 1950s and Vietnam in the 1960s. Vietnam, the only foreign war in which the United States has ever been defeated, cruelly convulsed American society, ending not only Lyndon Johnson’s presidency but the thirty-ﬁve-year era of the Democratic party’s political dominance as well. Vietnam also touched off the most vicious inﬂationary cycle in American history, and embittered and disillusioned an entire generation. Uncle Sam in the Cold War era built a fearsome— and expensive—arsenal of nuclear weapons, great air and missile ﬂeets to deliver them, a two-ocean navy, and, for a time, a large army raised by conscription. When the Cold War ended, Americans turned to the promise of an information age in a global economy. But terrorist attacks on American soil in 2001 shifted the country’s attention back to national defense and international military strategy, launching two wars and fundamentally transforming both foreign and domestic politics.

The Cold War Begins





1945–1952
 The United States stand at this moment at the summit of the world. WINSTON CHURCHILL, 1945

T


 he American people, 140 million strong, cheered their nation’s victories in Europe and Asia at the conclusion of World War II. But before the shouting had even faded, many Americans began to worry about their future. Four ﬁery years of global war had not entirely driven from their minds the painful memories of twelve desperate years of the Great Depression. Still more ominously, victory celebrations had barely ended before America’s crumbling relations with its wartime ally, the Soviet Union, threatened a new and even more terrible international conﬂ ict.

Postwar Economic Anxieties
 The decade of the 1930s had left deep scars. Joblessness and insecurity had pushed up the suicide rate and dampened the marriage rate. Babies went unborn as pinched budgets and sagging self-esteem wrought a sexual depression in American bedrooms. The war had banished the blight of depression, but would the respite last? Grim-faced observers were warning that

 the war had only temporarily lifted the pall of economic stagnation and that peace would bring the return of hard times. Homeward-bound GIs, so the gloomy predictions ran, would step out of the army’s chow lines and back into the breadlines of the unemployed. The faltering economy in the initial postwar years threatened to conﬁ rm the worst predictions of the doomsayers who foresaw another Great Depression. Real gross national product (GNP) slumped sickeningly in 1946 and 1947 from its wartime peak. With the removal of wartime price controls, prices giddily levitated by 33 percent in 1946–1947. An epidemic of strikes swept the country. During 1946 alone some 4.6 million laborers laid down their tools, fearful that soon they could barely afford the autos and other goods they were manufacturing. The growing muscle of orga nized labor deeply annoyed many conser vatives. They had their revenge against labor’s New Deal gains in 1947, when a Republican-controlled Congress (the ﬁ rst in fourteen years) passed the Taft-Hartley Act over President Truman’s vigorous veto. Labor leaders condemned the

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Economic Uncertainty




Going to College on the GI
 Bill Financed by the federal government, thousands of World War II veterans crowded into college classrooms in the late 1940s. Universities struggled to house these older students, many of whom already had families. Pennsylvania State College resorted to setting up hundreds of trailers.

 Taft-Hartley Act as a “slave-labor law.” It outlawed the “closed” (all-union) shop, made unions liable for damages that resulted from jurisdictional disputes among themselves, and required union leaders to take a noncommunist oath. Taft-Hartley was only one of several obstacles that slowed the growth of orga nized labor in the years after World War II. In the heady days of the New Deal, unions had spread swiftly in the industrialized Northeast, especially in huge manufacturing industries like steel and automobiles. But labor’s postwar efforts to organize in the historically antiunion regions of the South and West proved frustrating. The CIO’s Operation Dixie, aimed at unionizing southern textile workers and steelworkers, failed miserably in 1948 to overcome lingering fears of racial mixing. And workers in the rapidly growing ser vice sector of the economy—many of them middle-aged women, often working only part-time in small shops, widely separated from one another—proved much more difﬁcult to organize than the thousands of assembly-line workers who in the 1930s had poured into the auto and steel unions. Union membership would peak in the 1950s and then begin a long, unremitting decline. The Democratic administration meanwhile took some steps of its own to forestall an economic downturn. It sold war factories and other government installations to private businesses at ﬁ re-sale prices. It

 secured passage of the Employment Act of 1946, making it government policy “to promote maximum employment, production, and purchasing power.” The act created a three-member Council of Economic Advisers to provide the president with the data and the recommendations to make that policy a reality. Most dramatic was the passage of the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944—better known as the GI Bill of Rights, or the GI Bill. Enacted partly out of fear that the employment markets would never be able to absorb 15 million returning veterans at war’s end, the GI Bill made generous provisions for sending the former soldiers to school. In the postwar decade, some 8 million veterans advanced their education at Uncle Sam’s expense. The majority attended technical and vocational schools, but colleges and universities were crowded to the blackboards as more than 2 million ex-GIs stormed the halls of higher learning. The total eventually spent for education was some $14.5 billion in taxpayer dollars. The act also enabled the Veterans Administration (VA) to guarantee about $16 billion in loans for veterans to buy homes, farms, and small businesses. By raising educational levels and stimulating the construction industry, the GI Bill powerfully nurtured the robust and long-lived economic expansion that eventually took hold in the late 1940s and that profoundly shaped the entire history of the postwar era.



Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


The Long Economic Boom,
1950–1970
 Gross national product began to climb haltingly in 1948. Then, beginning about 1950, the American economy surged onto a dazzling plateau of sustained growth that was to last virtually uninterrupted for two decades. America’s economic per for mance became the envy of the world. National income nearly doubled in the 1950s and almost doubled again in the 1960s, shooting through the trillion-dollar mark in 1973. Americans, some 6 percent of the world’s people, were enjoying about 40 percent of the planet’s wealth. Nothing loomed larger in the history of the post– World War II era than this fantastic eruption of afﬂuence. It did not enrich all Americans, and it did

Coca-Colonizing the World
 American consumerism—and American products— ﬂooded over the globe after World War II, as this 1950 cover from Time magazine illustrates.

 not touch all people evenly, but it transformed the lives of a majority of citizens and molded the agenda of politics and society for at least two generations. Prosperity underwrote social mobility; it paved the way for the eventual success of the civil rights movement; it funded vast new welfare programs, like Medicare; and it gave Americans the conﬁdence to exercise unprecedented international leadership in the Cold War era. As the gusher of postwar prosperity poured forth its riches, Americans drank deeply from the gilded goblet. Millions of depression-pinched souls sought to make up for the sufferings of the 1930s. They determined to “get theirs” while the getting was good. A people who had once considered a chicken in every pot the standard of comfort and security now hungered for two cars in every garage, swimming pools in their backyards, vacation homes, and gas-guzzling recreational vehicles. The size of the “middle class,” deﬁ ned as households earning between $3,000 and $10,000 a year, doubled from pre–Great Depression days and included 60 percent of the American people by the mid-1950s. By the end of that decade, the vast majority of American families owned their own cars and washing machines, and nearly 90 percent owned a television set—a gadget invented in the 1920s but virtually unknown until the late 1940s. In another revolution of sweeping consequences, almost 60 percent of American families owned their own homes by 1960, compared with less than 40 percent in the 1920s. Of all the beneﬁciaries of postwar prosperity, none reaped greater rewards than women. More than ever, urban ofﬁces and shops provided a bonanza of employment for female workers. The great majority of new jobs created in the postwar era went to women, as the ser vice sector of the economy dramatically outgrew the old industrial and manufacturing sectors. Women accounted for a quarter of the American work force at the end of World War II and for nearly half the labor pool ﬁve decades later. Yet even as women continued their march into the workplace in the 1940s and 1950s, popular culture gloriﬁed the traditional feminine roles of homemaker and mother. The clash between the demands of suburban housewifery and the realities of employment eventually sparked a feminist revolt in the 1960s.

The Roots of Postwar Prosperity
 What propelled this unprecedented economic explosion? The Second World War itself provided a powerful

Advertising Prosperity, 1956
 his Ford advertisement in a popular magazine encouraged readers to buy a second car. By the mid-1950s, once manufacturers had met the demand for cars, homes, appliances, and other consumer goods that a decade and a half of depression and world war had pent up, they worried about how to keep expanding their markets. “Planned obsolescence”—changing design frequently enough to necessitate replacement purchasing—was one strategy. Altering expectations about what consumers needed

T


 was another. This advertisement suggests that the up-to-date family, living in its modern-style suburban home, had no choice but to own two cars, one for the male breadwinner’s business, the other for the wife’s “ferrying the family.” What kinds of gender role prescriptions are reinforced in this advertisement? What assumptions has Ford made about prospective buyers of its cars? How much can mass advertising tell us about the actual values of Americans living at a particular time?





Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952
 OUTLAYS

PERCENTAGE OF FEDERAL BUDGET

1940 1.6


1.7


17.5


5.1


32.2


13.7


52.2


48.1




81.7






3.7
3.0


16.5
495.3




5.2


17.9


294.5




6.4


23.9


272.1




4.9


26.7


299.3




8.1


22.7
252.7




9.3


41.8
134.0






PERCENTAGE OF GNP/GDP*

100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500


4.0


20.0




 Billions of dollars (unadjusted for inflation)

















Percentage














9 10


Percentage


Figure 36.1* National Defense Budget, 1940–2005
 *Gross national product (GNP) was used before 1960. It includes income from overseas investment and excludes proﬁts generated in the United States but accruing to foreign accounts. Gross domestic product (GDP), used thereafter, excludes overseas proﬁts owed to American accounts but includes the value of all items originating in the United States, regardless of the destination of the proﬁts. Until recent years those factors made for negligible differences in the calculation of national and domestic product, but most economists now prefer the latter approach. (Sources: Congressional Budget Ofﬁce, Historical Tables; Statistical Abstract of the United States, relevant years; http://www .whitehouse.gov/omb/ budget/fy2007/ budget.html.)

 stimulus. While other countries had been ravaged by years of ﬁghting, the United States had used the war crisis to ﬁ re up its smokeless factories and rebuild its depression-plagued economy. Invigorated by battle, America had almost effortlessly come to dominate the ruined global landscape of the postwar period. Ominously, much of the glittering prosperity of the 1950s and 1960s rested on the underpinnings of colossal military budgets, leading some critics to speak of a “permanent war economy” (see Figure 36.1). The economic upturn of 1950 was fueled by massive appropriations for the Korean War, and defense spending accounted for some 10 percent of the GNP throughout the ensuing decade. Pentagon dollars primed the pumps of high-technology industries such as aerospace, plastics, and electronics—areas in which the United States reigned supreme over all foreign competitors. The military budget also ﬁ nanced much scientiﬁc research and development (“R and D”—hence the name of one of the most famous “think tanks,” the Rand Corporation). More than ever before, unlocking the secrets of nature was the key to unleashing economic growth. Cheap energy also fed the economic boom. American and European companies controlled the ﬂow of

 abundant petroleum from the sandy expanses of the Middle East, and they kept prices low. Americans doubled their consumption of inexpensive and seemingly inexhaustible oil in the quarter-century after the war. Anticipating a limitless future of low-cost fuels, they ﬂung out endless ribbons of highways, installed airconditioning in their homes, and engineered a sixfold increase in the country’s electricity-generating capacity between 1945 and 1970. Spidery grids of electrical cables carried the pent-up power of oil, gas, coal, and falling water to activate the tools of workers on the factory ﬂoor. With the forces of nature increasingly harnessed in their hands, workers chalked up spectacular gains in productivity—the amount of output per hour of work. In the two decades after the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950, productivity increased at an average rate of more than 3 percent per year. Gains in productivity were also enhanced by the rising educational level of the work force. By 1970 nearly 90 percent of the school-age population was enrolled in educational institutions—a dramatic contrast with the opening years of the century, when only half of this age group had attended school. Better educated and

The Rise of the Sunbelt


 better equipped, American workers in 1970 could produce nearly twice as much in an hour’s labor as they had in 1950. Productivity was the key to prosperity. Rising productivity in the 1950s and 1960s virtually doubled the average American’s standard of living in the postwar quarter-century. Also contributing to the vigor of the postwar economy were some momentous changes in the nation’s basic economic structure. Conspicuous was the accelerating shift of the work force out of agriculture, which achieved productivity gains virtually unmatched by any other economic sector. The family farm nearly became an antique artifact as consolidation produced giant agribusinesses able to employ costly machinery. Thanks largely to mechanization and to rich new fertilizers—as well as to government subsidies and price supports—one farmworker by the century’s end could

 Agribusiness Expensive machinery of the sort shown here made most of American agriculture a capitalintensive, phenomenally productive big business by the twenty-ﬁrst century—and sounded the death knell for many small-scale family farms.



 produce food for over ﬁfty people, compared with about ﬁ fteen people in the 1940s. Farmers whose forebears had busted sod with oxen or horses now plowed their ﬁelds in air-conditioned tractor cabs, listening on their stereophonic radios to weather forecasts or the latest Chicago commodities market quotations. Once the mighty backbone of the agricultural Republic, and still some 15 percent of the labor force at the end of World War II, farmers made up a slim 2 percent of working Americans by the turn of the twenty-ﬁ rst century—yet they fed much of the world.

The Smiling Sunbelt
 The convulsive economic changes of the post-1945 period shook and shifted the American people, amplifying the population redistribution set in motion by World War II. As immigrants and westward-trekking pioneers, Americans had always been a people on the move, but they were astonishingly footloose in the postwar years. For some three decades after 1945, an average of 30 million people changed residences every year. Families especially felt the strain, as distance divided parents from children, and brothers and sisters from one another. One sign of this sort of stress was the phenomenal popularity of advice books on child-rearing, especially Dr. Benjamin Spock’s The Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care. First published in 1945, it instructed millions of parents during the ensuing decades in the kind of homely wisdom that was once transmitted naturally from grandparent to parent, and from parent to child. In ﬂuid postwar neighborhoods, friendships were also hard to sustain. Mobility could exact a high human cost in loneliness and isolation. Especially striking was the growth of the Sunbelt— a ﬁ fteen-state area stretching in a smiling crescent from Virginia through Florida and Texas to Arizona and Cal i fornia. This region increased its population at a rate nearly double that of the old industrial zones of the Northeast (the “Frostbelt”). In the 1950s Cal ifornia alone accounted for one-ﬁ fth of the entire nation’s population growth and by 1963 had outdistanced New York as the most populous state—a position it still holds in the early years of the twenty-ﬁrst century, with more than 36 million people, or more than one out of every eight Americans. The South and Southwest were a new frontier for Americans after World War II. These modern pioneers



Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


 WA

NH VT 146% ME

164%


 MT

 ND

58%


 OR

65%


44%


3%


 MN

139%


 ID

72%


 SD

142%


75%


 CA

 UT

258%


241%


 IL

46%


 KS

44%


 AZ

956%


 PA

 IA

 CO

252%


 MI

13%


33%


 OK

 NM

59%


183%


114%


81%


 MS

196%


 NC

 TN

34%


 TX

 VA

128%


42%


 AL

49%


 SC

 GA

101%


163%


 LA

69%


 FL

542%


 States growing faster than national rate of 97%, 1950–2005

 AK

415%


 HI

214%


 States growing slower than national rate of 97%, 1950–2005

 came in search of jobs, a better climate, and lower taxes. Jobs they found in abundance, especially in the Cal ifornia electronics industry, in the aerospace complexes in Florida and Texas, and in the huge military installations that powerful southern congressional representatives secured for their districts (see Map 36.1). A Niagara of federal dollars accounted for much of the Sunbelt’s prosperity, though, ironically, southern and western politicians led the cry against govern-

 NJ 75%

80%


165%


 WV

-9%


 KY

 AR

 RI

36%


 CT

 DE

44%


59%


47%


18%


 OH

 IN

 MO

45%


36%


 NY

30%


59%


 NE

 NV

1,409%


 MA

 WI

61%


19%


 WY

 MD

139%


 DC

-31%


Map 36.1 Distribution of
Population Increase, 1950–
 2005 States with ﬁgures higher than 97 percent were growing faster than the national average between 1950 and 2005. Note that much of the growth was in the “Sunbelt,” a loose geographical concept, as some Deep South states had very little population growth, whereas the mountain and Paciﬁc states were booming. (Sources: Statistical Abstract of the United States and U.S. Census, relevant years.) Interactive Map

 ment spending. By the early twenty-ﬁ rst century, states in the South and West were annually receiving some $444 billion more in federal funds than those in the Northeast and Midwest. A new economic war between the states seemed to be shaping up. Northeasterners and their allies from the hard-hit heavy-industry region of the Ohio Valley (the “Rustbelt”) tried to rally political support with the sarcastic slogan “The North shall rise again.”

Sunbelt Prosperity
The old and new West are
 evident in this view of booming Dallas.

The Growth of the Suburbs


 These dramatic shifts of population and wealth further broke the historic grip of the North on the nation’s political life. Every elected occupant of the White House from 1964 to 2008 hailed from the Sunbelt, and the region’s congressional representation rose as its population grew.

The Rush to the Suburbs
 In all regions America’s modern migrants—if they were white—ﬂed from the cities to the burgeoning new suburbs (see “Makers of America: The Suburbanites,” pp. 918–919). While other industrial countries struggled to rebuild their war-ravaged cities, government policies in the United States encouraged movement away from urban centers. Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and Veterans Administration (VA) homeloan guarantees made it more economically attractive to own a home in the suburbs than to rent an apartment in the city. Tax deductions for interest payments on home mortgages provided additional ﬁnancial incentive. And government-built highways that sped commuters from suburban homes to city jobs further facilitated this mass migration. By 1960 one in every four Americans dwelt in suburbia, and a half-century later, more than half the nation’s population did. The construction industry boomed in the 1950s and 1960s to satisfy this demand. Pioneered by innovators like the Levitt brothers, whose ﬁ rst Levittown sprouted on New York’s Long Island in the 1940s, builders revolutionized the techniques of home construction. Erecting hundreds or even thousands of dwellings in a single project, specialized crews work ing from standardized plans laid foundations, while others raised factory-assembled framing modules, put on roofs, strung wires, installed plumbing, and ﬁ n ished the walls in record time and with cost-cutting efﬁciency. Snooty critics wailed about the aesthetic monotony of the suburban “tract” developments, but eager home buyers nevertheless moved into them by the millions. “White ﬂ ight” to the leafy green suburbs left the inner cities—especially those in the Northeast and Midwest—black, brown, and broke. Migrating blacks from the South ﬁ lled up the urban neighborhoods that were abandoned by the departing white middle class (see “Makers of America: The Great African American Migration,” pp. 954–955). In effect, the incoming blacks imported the grinding poverty of the rural South into the inner cores of northern cities. Taxpaying businesses ﬂed with their afﬂuent customers from



 downtown shops to suburban shopping malls (another post–World War II invention). Government policies sometimes aggravated this spreading pattern of residential segregation. FHA administrators, citing the “risk” of making loans to blacks and other “unharmonious racial or nationality groups,” often refused them mortgages for private home purchases, thus limiting black mobility out of the inner cities and driv ing many minorities into public housing projects. Even public housing programs frequently followed a so-called neighborhood composition rule, which effectively built housing for blacks in neighborhoods that were already identiﬁed as predominantly black—thus solidifying racial separation.

The Postwar Baby Boom
 Of all the upheavals in postwar America, none was more dramatic than the baby boom—the huge leap in the birthrate in the decade and a half after 1945. Conﬁdent young men and women tied the nuptial knot in record numbers at war’s end, and they began immediately to ﬁ ll the nation’s empty cradles. They thus touched off a demographic explosion that added more than 50 million bawling babies to the nation’s population by the end of the 1950s. The soaring birthrate ﬁ nally crested in 1957 and was followed by a deepening birth dearth. By 1973 fertility rates had dropped below the point necessary to maintain existing population ﬁgures without further immigration. This boom-or-bust cycle of births begot a bulging wave along the American population curve. As the oversize postwar generation grew to maturity, it was destined—like the fabled pig passing through the python—to strain and distort many aspects of American life. Elementary-school enrollments, for example, swelled to nearly 34 million pupils in 1970. Then began a steady decline, as the onward-marching age group left in its wake closed schools and unemployed teachers. The maturing babies of the postwar boom sent economic shock waves undulating through the decades. As tykes and toddlers in the 1940s and 1950s, they made up a lucrative market for manufacturers of canned food and other baby products. As teenagers in the 1960s, the same youngsters spent an estimated $20 billion a year for clothes and recorded rock music—and their sheer numbers laid the basis of the much-ballyhooed “youth culture” of that tumultuous decade. In the 1970s the consumer tastes of the aging

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Suburbanites American Migration 
F


 ew images evoke more vividly the prosperity of the postwar era than aerial photographs of sprawling suburbs. Neat rows of look-alike tract houses, each with a driveway and lawn and here and there a backyard swimming pool, came to symbolize the capacity of the economy to deliver the “American dream” to millions of families. Suburbanization was hardly new. Well-off city dwellers had beaten paths to leafy outlying neighborhoods since the nineteenth century. But after 1945 the steady ﬂow became a stampede. The baby boom, new highways, government guarantees for mortgage lending, and favorable tax policies all made suburbia blossom. Who were the Americans racing to the new postwar suburbs? War veterans led the way in the late 1940s, aided by Veterans Administration mortgages that featured tiny down payments and low interest rates. The general public soon followed. The Federal Housing Administration (FHA) offered insured mortgages with low down payments and 2 to 3 percent interest rates on thirty-year loans. With deals like this, it was hardly surprising that American families ﬂocked into “Levittowns,” built by William and Alfred Levitt, and other similar suburban developments. People of all kinds found their way to suburbia, heading for neighborhoods that varied from the posh to the plain. Yet for all this diversity, the overwhelming majority of suburbanites were white and middle-class. In 1967 sociologist Herbert Gans published The Levittowners, based on his own move to a Levitt-built community outside Philadelphia. He described suburban families in tract developments as predominantly thirdor fourth-generation Americans with some college education and at least two children. Men tended to work in either white-collar jobs or upper-level blue-collar positions such as foremen. Women usually worked in the home, so much so that suburbia came to symbolize the domestic conﬁ nement that feminists in the 1960s and 1970s decried in their campaign for women’s rights. The house itself became more important than ever as postwar suburbanites built their leisure lives around television, home improvement projects, and barbecues



 on the patio. The center of family life shifted to the fenced-in backyard, as neighborly city habits of visiting on the front stoop, gabbing on the sidewalk, and strolling to local stores disappeared. Institutions that had thrived as social centers in the city—churches, women’s clubs, fraternal orga ni zations, and taverns—had a tougher time attracting patrons in the privatized world of postwar suburbia. Life in the suburbs was a boon to the automobile, as parents jumped behind the wheel to shuttle children, groceries, and golf clubs to and fro. The second car, once an unheard-of luxury, became a practical “necessity” for suburban families constantly “on the go.” A car culture sprang up with new destinations, like drive-thru restaurants and drive-in movies. Roadside shopping centers edged out downtowns as places to shop. Meanwhile, the new interstate highway system enabled breadwinners to live farther and farther from their jobs and still commute to work daily.

 Drive-in Café in Los Angeles, the Mother and Model of All Suburbias

 Middle-class African Americans began to move to the suburbs in substantial numbers by the 1980s, but even that migration failed to alter dramatically the racial divide of metropolitan America. Black suburbanites settled in towns like Rolling Oaks outside Miami or Brook Glen near Atlanta—black middle-class towns in white-majority counties. By the end of the twentieth century, suburbia as a whole was more racially diverse than at midcentury. But old patterns of urban “white ﬂ ight” and residential segregation endured.

 Aerial View of the On-ramps to a Typical New Interstate Highway, 1950s

 Many suburbanites continued to depend on cities for jobs, though by the 1980s the suburbs themselves became important sites of employment. Wherever they worked, suburbanites turned their backs on the city and its problems. They fought to maintain their communities as secluded retreats, independent municipalities with their own taxes, schools, and zoning restrictions designed to keep out public housing and the poor. Even the naming of towns and streets reﬂected a pastoral ideal. Poplar Terrace and Mountainview Drive were popular street names; East Paterson, New Jersey, was renamed Elmwood Park in 1973. With a majority of Americans living in suburbs by the 1980s, cities lost their political clout. Bereft of state and federal aid, cities festered with worsening social problems: poverty, drug addiction, and crime.

Moving to the Suburbs After World War II, Americans
 by the millions moved to suburban housing developments like this one. Although criticized for their architectural monotony and cultural barrenness, the suburbs provided inexpensive and spacious housing for growing families seeking to escape the crowded conﬁnes of the cities.





Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


 baby boomers changed again, and the most popular jeans maker began marketing pants with a fuller cut for those former “kids” who could no longer squeeze into their size-thirty Levi’s. In the 1980s the horde of baby boomers bumped and jostled one another in the job market, struggling to get a foothold on the crowded ladder of social mobility. As the boomers entered middle age, a “secondary boom” of children peaked in the early 1990s—a faint demographic echo of the post war population explosion. The impact of the huge postwar generation will continue to ripple through American society well into the twenty-ﬁrst century, when its members pass eventually into retirement, placing enormous strains on the Social Security system.

Truman: The “Gutty” Man
 from Missouri Presiding over the opening of the postwar period was an “accidental president”—Harry S Truman. “The moon, the stars, and all the planets” had fallen on him, he remarked when he was called upon to shoulder the dead Roosevelt’s awesome burdens of leadership. Trim and owlishly bespectacled, with his graying hair and friendly, toothy grin, Truman was called “the average man’s average man.” Even his height—ﬁve feet eight inches—was average. The ﬁ rst president in many years without a college education, he had farmed, served as an artillery ofﬁcer in France during World War I, and failed as a haberdasher. He then tried his hand at precinct-level Missouri politics, through which he rose from a judgeship to the U.S. Senate. Though a protégé of a notorious political machine in Kansas City, he had managed to keep his own hands clean. The problems of the postwar period were staggering, and the suddenly burdened new president at ﬁ rst approached his tasks with humility. But gradually he evolved from a shrinking pipsqueak into a scrappy little cuss, gaining conﬁdence to the point of cockiness. When the Soviet foreign minister complained, “I have never been talked to like that in my life,” Truman shot back, “Carry out your agreements and you won’t get talked to like that.” Truman later boasted, “I gave him the one-two, right to the jaw.” A smallish man thrust suddenly into a giant job, Truman permitted designing old associates of the “Missouri gang” to gather around him and, like Grant, was stubbornly loyal to them when they were caught with cream on their whiskers. On occasion he would send critics hot-tempered and profane “s.o.b.” letters.

 Most troubling, in trying to demonstrate to a skeptical public his decisiveness and power of command, he was inclined to go off half-cocked or stick mulishly to a wrongheaded notion. “To err is Truman,” cynics jibed. But if he was sometimes small in the small things, he was often big in the big things. He had down-home authenticity, few pretensions, rock-solid probity, and a lot of that old-fashioned character trait called moxie. Not one to dodge responsibility, he placed a sign on his White House desk that read, “The buck stops here.” Among his favorite sayings was “If you can’t stand the heat, get out of the kitchen.”

Yalta: Bargain or Betrayal?
 Vast and silent, the Soviet Union continued to be the great enigma. The conference at Tehran in 1943, where Roosevelt ﬁ rst met Joseph Stalin man to man, had cleared the air somewhat, but much remained unresolved—especially questions about the postwar fates of Germany, Eastern Europe, and Asia. The Yalta conference, the ﬁ nal fateful conference of the Big Three, took place in February 1945. At this former tsarist resort on the relatively warm shores of the Black Sea, Stalin, Churchill, and the fast-failing Roosevelt reached momentous agreements, after pledging their faith with vodka. Final plans were laid for smashing the buckling German lines and assigning occupation zones in Germany to the victorious powers. Stalin agreed that Poland, with revised boundaries, should have a representative government based on free elections—a pledge he soon broke. Bulgaria and Romania were likewise to have free elections—a promise also ﬂouted. The Big Three further announced plans for fashioning a new international peacekeeping organi zation—the United Nations. Of all the grave decisions at Yalta, the most controversial concerned the Far East. The atomic bomb had not yet been tested, and Washington strategists expected frightful American casualties in the projected assault on Japan. From Roosevelt’s standpoint it seemed highly desirable that Stalin should enter the Asian war, pin down Japa nese troops in Manchuria and Korea, and lighten American losses. But Soviet casualties had already been enormous, and Moscow presumably needed inducements to bring it into the Far Eastern conﬂagration. Horse trader Stalin was in a position at Yalta to exact a high price. He agreed to attack Japan within three months after the collapse of Germany, and he

The Big Three at Yalta




 The Big Three From left to right, Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin sit somberly at their fateful meeting at Yalta in February 1945. Roosevelt was only weeks away from death.

 later redeemed this pledge in full. In return, the Soviets were promised the southern half of Sakhalin Island, lost by Russia to Japan in 1905, and Japan’s Kurile Islands as well. The Soviet Union was also granted joint control over the railroads of China’s Manchuria and special privileges in the two key seaports of that area, Dairen and Port Arthur. These concessions evidently would give Stalin control over vital industrial centers of America’s weakening Chinese ally. As it turned out, Moscow’s muscle was not necessary to knock out Japan. Critics charged that Roosevelt had sold Jiang Jieshi (Chiang Kai-shek) down the river when he conceded control of Manchuria to Stalin. The consequent undermining of Chinese morale, so the accusation ran, contributed powerfully to Jiang’s overthrow by the communists four years later. The critics also assailed the “sellout” of Poland and other Eastern European countries. Roosevelt’s defenders countered that Stalin, with his mighty red army, could have secured much more of China if he wished and that the Yalta conference really set limits on his ambitions. Apologists for Roosevelt also contended that if Stalin had kept his promise to support free elections in Poland and the liberated Balkans, the sorry sequel would have been different. Actually, Soviet troops had then occupied

 much of Eastern Europe, and a war to throw them out was unthinkable. The fact is that the Big Three at Yalta were not drafting a comprehensive peace settlement; at most they were sketching general intentions and testing one another’s reactions. Later critics who howled about broken promises overlooked that fundamental point. In the case of Poland, Roosevelt admitted that the Yalta agreement was “so elastic that the Russians can stretch it all the way from Yalta to Washington without ever technically breaking it.” More speciﬁc understandings among the wartime allies—especially the two emerging superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union—awaited the arrival of peace.

The United States and
 the Soviet Union History provided little hope that the United States and the Soviet Union would reach cordial understandings about the shape of the postwar world. Mutual suspicions were ancient, abundant, and abiding. Communism and capitalism were historically hostile social philosophies. The United States had refused ofﬁcially to recognize the Bolshevik revolutionary government



Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


 The Communist Menace First appearing in the New York Daily News on January 6, 1946, this map reﬂected Americans’ rising anxiety after World War II that the Soviet Union was an aggressively expansionist power, relentlessly gobbling up territory and imposing its will across both Europe and Asia.

 in Moscow until it was sixteen years old, in 1933. Soviet skepticism toward the West was nourished by the British and American delays in opening up a second front against Germany, while the Soviet army paid a grisly price to roll the Nazi invaders back across Russia and Eastern Europe. Britain and America had also frozen their Soviet “ally” out of the project to develop atomic weapons, further feeding Stalin’s mistrust. The Washington government rubbed salt in Soviet wounds when it abruptly terminated vital lend-lease aid to a battered USSR in 1945 and spurned Moscow’s plea for a $6 billion reconstruction loan—while approving a similar loan of $3.75 billion to Britain in 1946.

 Different visions of the postwar world also separated the two superpowers. Stalin aimed above all to guarantee the security of the Soviet Union. The USSR had twice in the twentieth century been stabbed in its heartland by attacks across the windswept plains of Eastern Europe. Stalin made it clear from the outset of the war that he was determined to have friendly governments along the Soviet western border, especially in Poland. By maintaining an extensive Soviet sphere of inﬂuence in Eastern and Central Europe, the USSR could protect itself and consolidate its revolutionary base as the world’s leading communist country. To many Americans, that “sphere of inﬂuence”

The New United Nations


 looked like an ill-gained “empire.” Doubting that Soviet goals were purely defensive, they remembered the earlier Bolshevik call for world revolution. Stalin’s emphasis on “spheres” also clashed with Franklin Roosevelt’s Wilsonian dream of an “open world,” decolonized, demilitarized, and democratized, with a strong international orga ni zation to oversee global peace. Even the ways in which the United States and the Soviet Union resembled each other were troublesome. Both countries had been largely isolated from world affairs before World War II—the United States through choice, the Soviet Union through rejection by the other powers. Both nations also had a history of conducting a kind of “missionary” diplomacy—of trying to export to all the world the political doctrines precipitated out of their respective revolutionary origins. Unaccustomed to their great-power roles, unfamiliar with or even antagonistic to each other, and each believing in the universal applicability of its own particular ideology, America and the USSR suddenly found themselves staring eyeball-to-eyeball over the prostrate body of a battered Europe—a Europe that had been the traditional center of international affairs. In these circumstances some sort of confrontation was virtually unavoidable. The wartime “Grand Alliance” of the United States, the Soviet Union, and Britain had been a misbegotten child of necessity, kept alive only until the mutual enemy was crushed. When the hated Hitler fell, suspicion and rivalry between communistic, despotic Russia and capitalistic, democratic America were all but inevitable. In a fateful progression of events, marked often by misperceptions as well as by genuine conﬂ icts of interest, the two powers provoked each other into a tense standoff known as the Cold War. Enduring four and a half decades, the Cold War not only shaped Soviet-American relations; it overshadowed the entire postwar international order in every corner of the globe. The Cold War also molded societies and economies and the lives of individual people all over the planet.

Shaping the Postwar World
 Despite these obstacles, the United States did manage at war’s end to erect some of the structures that would support Roosevelt’s vision of an open world. At the Bretton Woods Conference in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in 1944, the Western Allies established the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to encourage world trade by regulating currency exchange rates.



 They also founded the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank) to promote economic growth in war-ravaged and underdeveloped areas. In contrast to its behavior after World War I, the United States took the lead in creating these important international bodies and supplied most of their funding. The stubborn Soviets declined to participate (see “Thinking Globally: The Era of Globalization,” pp. 924–925). As ﬂags wept at half-mast, the United Nations Conference opened on schedule, April 25, 1945, despite Roosevelt’s dismaying death thirteen days earlier. Unlike Woodrow Wilson, Roosevelt had shrewdly moved to establish the new international body before the war’s conclusion, so as to capitalize on the wartime spirit of cooperation and insulate planning for the United Nations from the potentially divisive issue of the peace settlement. Meeting at the San Francisco War Memorial Opera House, representatives from ﬁ fty nations fashioned the United Nations Charter. The United Nations (U.N.) was a successor to the old League of Nations, but it differed from its predecessor in signiﬁcant ways. Born in a moment of idealism and designed to prevent another great-power war, the League had adopted rules denying the veto power to any party to a dispute. The U.N., by contrast, more realistically provided that no member of the Security Council, dominated by the Big Five powers (the United States, Britain, the USSR, France, and China), could have action taken against it without its consent. The League, in short, presumed great-power conﬂ ict; the U.N. presumed great-power cooperation. Both approaches had their liabilities. The U.N. also featured the General Assembly, which could be controlled by smaller countries. In contrast to the chilly American reception of the League in 1919, the Senate overwhelmingly approved the U.N. Charter on July 28, 1945, by a vote of 89 to 2—not least because it provided safeguards for American sovereignty and freedom of action. The United Nations, setting up its permanent glass home in New York City, had some gratifying initial successes. It helped preserve peace in Iran, Kashmir, and other trouble spots. It played a large role in creating the new Jewish state of Israel. The U.N. Trusteeship Council guided former colonies to independence. Through such arms as UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc, and Cultural Organization), FAO (Food and Agricultural Organization), and WHO (World Health Organization), the U.N. brought beneﬁts to peoples the world over.

THINKING GLOBALLY

The Era of Globalization


W


 oodrow Wilson had envisioned a world order organized around the principles of self-determination and free trade—a world “made safe for democracy.” But Wilson’s dream perished in the turbulent aftermath of World War I. The United States retreated into a selﬁsh and shortsighted isolationism: hiking tariffs to record levels, refusing to join the new League of Nations, and stoutly asserting its neutrality, even as the Great Depression plunged the planet into economic chaos and World War II eventually wreathed the globe in ﬁre and destruction. Franklin Roosevelt had served Wilson as assistant secretary of the navy. He had shared his chief’s idealistic goals, as well as Wilson’s bitter disappointment when they failed to be achieved. FDR also believed that many of the ills that beset the world in the post–World War I era could have been avoided if only the United States had played an international role commensurate with its power and its own highest ideals. He resolved not to squander another opportunity for American international leadership. So on August 9, 1941, as much of Europe writhed under the Nazi jackboot, President Roosevelt rendezvoused with British prime minister Winston Churchill aboard two warships anchored off the coast of Newfoundland. After three days of talks, they publicly announced their vision of the postwar world. What came to be called the “Atlantic Charter” proclaimed for all nations the rights to selfdetermination and free access to trade. It also foresaw the creation of a new international organization to replace the defunct League of Nations. And it declared that a postwar peace must ensure “freedom from fear and want” for all individuals, every where—the ﬁrst time global economic prosperity was formally declared to be an objective of any country’s foreign policy. Roosevelt and Churchill had drafted the charter for a new era in American diplomacy and for a new phase of world history as well. After World War II, the United States, victorious and robust at the end of a conﬂict that had laid waste all the traditional great powers, was uniquely positioned to shape the world order after World War II. To a remarkable degree, it followed the Wilsonian principles embodied in the Atlantic Charter. It gave birth to an array of multilateral institutions to promote trade and international investment, support the rule of law, and nurture democracy. They included the World Bank, to fund postwar reconstruction; the International Monetary Fund (IMF), to stabilize world currencies; and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), to lower barriers to international commerce. In the ensuing decades, 102 nations, accounting



 Great Hopes for World Peace with the United Nations, 1947 The achievements of the new international regime were dramatic. International trade doubled in the 1950s and again in the 1960s. By century’s end, the volume of global commerce was ten times larger than in 1950 (see Table 36.1).Increased trade fueled postwar recovery in Europe and Japan and set several underdeveloped countries—notably Taiwan, Singapore, South Korea, India, and China—on the path to modernization and prosperity.

 for 80 percent of world trade, signed GATT (succeeded by the World Trade Organization, or WTO, in the 1990s). The United States also took the lead in founding and funding the United Nations (U.N.), which worked to arbitrate international disputes, improve standards of living worldwide, and encourage decolonization, particularly in Asia and Africa. As Roosevelt and Churchill anticipated, the beneﬁts of trade extended far beyond rising incomes. As goods ﬂowed across borders, so too did advances in medicine and nutri-

Table 36.1


International Trade, 1948–2005


 Total volume of world trade (in billions of U.S. dollars) Total volume of U.S. exports (in billions of U.S. dollars) Share of world exports (%) United States Europe Africa Middle East Asia GATT/ WTO members

























1,838


3,675


7,369


10,159


































 (Sources: All data except total volume of U.S. exports are from World Trade Organization, International Trade Statistics, 2005. U.S. export data for 1948–1993 are from United States Historical Statistics of the United States, vol. 5; data for 2003 and 2005 are from Foreign Exports Division, U.S. Census Bureau. Because different or ganizations rely on different methodologies for estimating total exports, WTO estimates used to compute the U.S. share of world exports differ slightly from those presented in this table.)

 tion. Since 1950 the average life expectancy worldwide has increased by twenty years, with the biggest gains in the developing world. Rising prosperity and improved standards of living also strengthened the middle classes in developing countries, with democracy often following in the footsteps of globalization. The number of electoral democracies increased from 44 in 1950 to 120 in 2000. Recent studies conﬁrm that states with open trade policies are three times more likely to protect civil liberties than those without such policies. For some four decades, the full effects of this liberalized world order were mufﬂed by the Cold War. Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union in particular were conspicuous nonparticipants in the emerging global economy, and the United States often supported repressive, undemocratic regimes simply to keep them out of the Soviet camp. But the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet bloc in the early 1990s unleashed the full force of globalization. International trade, investment, and migration exploded.

 More than ﬁfty new electoral democracies, notably in Eastern Europe, Asia, and Latin America, emerged in the last decade of the twentieth century. Global trade, already at record levels, doubled between 1990 and 2003. Despite these gains, problems persist. Critics decry the job insecurity, exploitative labor practices, inﬂationary pressures, widening income disparities both within and between nations, and environmental degradation that have accompanied worldwide industrial growth. Many African nations have proved chronically unable to overcome political instability, systemic poverty, and devastating epidemics. Africa’s woes, and those of many Middle Eastern states as well, demonstrate that many parts of the world are still very far from safe for democracy. Yet the liberalized world order that the United States took the lead in building after World War II left an impressive legacy of international stability, burgeoning prosperity, and freedom from fear and want for millions of human beings—a lasting testament to Wilson’s vision and to Roosevelt’s leadership.





Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


In June 1946 Bernard Baruch (1870–1965), in
 presenting his plan for the control of atomic energy to the United Nations, said,

“


 We are here to make a choice between the quick and the dead. That is our business. Behind the black portent of the new atomic age lies a hope which, seized upon with faith, can work our salvation. If we fail, then we have damned every man to be the slave of fear. Let us not deceive ourselves; we must elect world peace or world destruction.

”


 The fearsome new technology of the atom put to an early test the spirit of cooperation on which the U.N. had been founded. The new orga ni zation failed badly. U.S. delegate Bernard Baruch called in 1946 for a U.N. agency, free from the great-power veto, with worldwide authority over atomic energy, weapons, and research. The Soviet delegate countered that the possession of nuclear weapons simply be outlawed by every nation. President Truman said that it would be folly to “throw away our gun until we are sure the rest of the world can’t arm against us.” The suspicious Soviets felt the same way and used their veto power to scuttle the proposals. A priceless opportunity to tame

The Nuremberg War Crimes
Trial, 1946 Of the Nazi
 defendants pictured here, from left to right in the ﬁrst row, Hermann Goering committed suicide during the trial; Rudolf Hess was sentenced to life in prison and died of an apparent suicide in his cell in 1987; Joachim von Ribbentrop, Wilhelm Keitel, and Ernest Kaltenbrunner were executed; in the second row, Karl Doenitz was sentenced to ten years in prison; Erich Raeder was sentenced to life in prison but released in 1955; Baldur von Schirach was sentenced to twenty years in prison; and Fritz Sauckel was executed.

 the nuclear monster in its infancy was lost. The atomic clock ticked ominously on for the next forty-ﬁve years, shadowing all relations between the Soviet Union and the United States and threatening the very future of the human race.

The Problem of Germany
 Hitler’s ruined Reich posed especially thorny problems for all the wartime Allies. They agreed only that the cancer of Nazism had to be cut out of the German body politic, which involved punishing Nazi leaders for war crimes. The Allies joined in trying twenty-two top culprits at the Nuremberg war crimes trial dur ing 1945–1946. Accusations included committing crimes against the laws of war and humanity and plotting aggressions contrary to solemn treaty pledges. Justice, Nuremberg-style, was harsh. Twelve of the accused Nazis swung from the gallows, and seven were sentenced to long jail terms. “Foxy Hermann” Goering, whose blubbery chest had once blazed with ribbons, cheated the hangman a few hours before his scheduled execution by swallowing a hidden cyanide capsule. The trials of several small-fry Nazis continued for years. Legal critics in America and elsewhere condemned these proceedings as judicial lynchings, because the victims were tried for offenses that had not been clear-cut crimes when the war began.

The Division of Germany


DENMARK 10°E

North
Sea


Baltic
Sea


Berlin


Hannover
Braunschweig


Frankfurt


 CE

 ZE

To U.S.S.R.,


 OS

 FR

Munich


BERLIN EAST GERMANY

 LO

West
Berlin


VA K

East
Berlin


 IA

Vienna


Potsdam
Airport


 AUSTRIA

 SWITZERLAND

 POLAND

Prague


 CH

 AN

W EST
 GERMANY (1948 –1990)

C


 LUX.

To Poland,


EAST GERMANY
(1949 –1990) 
Bonn
50°N


20°E


Hamburg
Bremen


 NETH.

Berlin Wall (1961–1989)


 HUNGARY



N


200 Km.


 Prewar (1937) boundary of Germany

200 Mi.


Ad


 ria tic

I T A LY


Se
 a

Map 36.2 Postwar
Partition of Germany
 Germany lost much of its territory in the east to Poland and the Soviet Union. The military occupation zones were the bases for the formation of two separate countries in 1949, when the British, French, and American zones became West Germany, and the Soviet zone became East Germany. (The two Germanys were reunited in 1990.) Berlin remained under joint four-power occupation from 1945 to 1990 and became a focus and symbol of Cold War tensions.



 Military occupation zones

 Territory lost by Germany

U.S.


 Boundary between East and West Germany, 1949 –1990

British


 Airlift route

Soviet


French


Interactive Map


 Beyond punishing the top Nazis, the Allies could agree on little about postwar Germany. Some American Hitler-haters, noting that an industrialized Germany had been a brutal aggressor, at ﬁrst wanted to dismantle German factories and reduce the country to a potato patch. The Soviets, denied American economic assistance, were determined to rebuild their shattered land by extracting enormous reparations from the Germans. Both these desires clashed headlong with the reality that an industrial, healthy German economy was indispensable to the recovery of Europe. The Americans soon came to appreciate that fact. But the Soviets, deeply fearful of another blitzkrieg, resisted all efforts to revitalize Germany. Along with Austria, Germany had been divided at war’s end into four military occupation zones, each assigned to one of the Big Four powers (France, Britain, America, and the USSR) (see Map 36.2). The Western Allies refused to allow Moscow to bleed their zones of the reparations that Stalin insisted he had been promised at Yalta. They also began to promote the idea of a reunited Germany. The communists responded by

 tightening their grip on their Eastern zone. Before long, it was apparent that Germany would remain indeﬁnitely divided. West Germany eventually became an independent country, wedded to the West. East Germany, along with other Soviet-dominated Eastern European countries, such as Poland and Hungary, became nominally independent “satellite” states, bound to the Soviet Union. Eastern Europe virtually disappeared from Western sight behind the “iron curtain” of secrecy and isolation that Stalin clanged down across

 Former British prime minister Winston Churchill (1874–1965), in a highly controversial speech at Fulton, Missouri (March 1946), warned of Soviet expansionism:

“


From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the
 Adriatic an iron curtain has descended across the Continent.

”




Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


 Europe from the Baltic to the Adriatic. The division of Europe would endure for more than four decades. With Germany now split in two, there remained the problem of the rubble heap known as Berlin. Lying deep within the Soviet zone, this beleaguered isle in a red sea had been broken, like Germany as a whole, into sectors occupied by troops of each of the four victorious powers. In 1948, following controversies over German currency reform and four-power control, the Soviets abruptly choked off all rail and highway access to Berlin. They evidently reasoned that the Allies would be starved out. Berlin became a hugely symbolic issue for both sides. At stake was not only the fate of the city but a test of wills between Moscow and Washington. The Americans orga nized the gigantic Berlin airlift in the midst of hair-trigger tension. For nearly a year, ﬂying some of the very aircraft that had recently dropped bombs on Berlin, American pilots ferried thousands of tons

 Berlin, 1948 Grateful city residents watch a U.S. airplane ﬂy in much-needed supplies.

 of supplies a day to the grateful Berliners, their former enemies. Western Europeans took heart from this vivid demonstration of America’s determination to honor its commitments in Europe. The Soviets, their bluff dramatically called, ﬁ nally lifted their blockade in May 1949. In the same year, the governments of the two Germanys, East and West, were formally established. The Cold War had icily congealed.

The Cold War Congeals
 A crafty Stalin also probed the West’s resolve at other sensitive points, including oil-rich Iran. Seeking to secure oil concessions similar to those held by the British and Americans, Stalin in 1946 broke an agreement to remove his troops from Iran’s northernmost province, which the USSR had occupied, with British and American approval, during World War II. Instead he used the troops to aid a rebel movement. Truman sent off a stinging protest, and the Soviet dictator backed down. Moscow’s hard-line policies in Germany, Eastern Europe, and the Middle East wrought a psychological Pearl Harbor. The eyes of Americans were jarred wide-open by the Kremlin’s apparent unwillingness to continue the wartime partnership. Any remaining goodwill from the period of comradeship-in-arms evaporated in a cloud of dark distrust. “I’m tired of babying the Soviets,” Truman remarked privately in 1946, as attitudes on both sides began to harden frostily. Truman’s piecemeal responses to various Soviet challenges took on intellectual coherence in 1947, with the formulation of the containment doctrine. Crafted by a brilliant young diplomat and Soviet specialist, George F. Kennan, this concept held that Russia, whether tsarist or communist, was relentlessly expansionary. But the Kremlin was also cautious, Kennan argued, and the ﬂow of Soviet power into “every nook and cranny available to it” could be stemmed by “ﬁ rm and vigilant containment.” Truman embraced Kennan’s advice when he formally and publicly adopted a “get-tough-with-Russia” policy in 1947. His ﬁ rst dramatic move was triggered by word that heavily burdened Britain could no longer bear the ﬁnancial and military load of defending Greece against communist pressures. If Greece fell, Turkey would presumably collapse, and the strategic eastern Mediterranean would pass into the Soviet orbit. In a surprise appearance, the president went before Congress on March 12, 1947, and requested sup-

The Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan


 port for what came to be known as the Truman Doctrine. Speciﬁcally, he asked for $400 million to bolster Greece and Turkey, which Congress quickly granted. More generally, he declared that “it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures”—a sweeping and openended commitment of vast and worrisome proportions. Critics then and later charged that Truman had overreacted by promising unlimited support to any tinhorn despot who claimed to be resisting “Communist aggression.” Critics also complained that the Truman Doctrine needlessly polarized the world into pro-Soviet and pro-American camps and unwisely construed the Soviet threat as primarily military in nature. Apologists for Truman have explained that it was Truman’s fear of a revived isolationism that led him to exaggerate the Soviet threat and to pitch his message in the charged language of a holy global war against god less communism—a description of the Cold War that straightjacketed future policymakers who would seek to tone down Soviet-American competition and animosity. Truman found support for casting the Cold War as a battle between good and evil from theologians like the inﬂuential liberal Protestant clergyman Reinhold Niebuhr (1892–1971). For over ﬁve decades after World War I, Niebuhr crusaded against what he perceived as the drift away from Christian foundations. A vocal enemy of fascism, paciﬁsm, and communism in

 In February 1946 Kremlin specialist George F. Kennan (1904–2005) sent his landmark “Long Telegram” to the State Department. In the eightthousand-word, eighteen-page message, Kennan assessed the Soviet threat and called for a new kind of response, which would eventually become known as the “containment doctrine”:

“


 In summary, we have here a political force [Stalin’s regime] committed fanatically to the belief that with [the] US there can be no permanent modus vivendi, that it is desirable and necessary that the internal harmony of our society be disrupted, our traditional way of life be destroyed, the international authority of our state be broken, if Soviet power is to be secure.

”




 Where To? 1947 As this satirical view of the Truman Doctrine shows, not all Americans were sure where the country’s new foreign policy was taking them.

 the 1940s and 1950s, Niebuhr divided the world into two polarized camps: the “children of light” and the “children of darkness.” For Niebuhr, Christian justice, including force if necessary, required a “realist” response to “children of darkness” like Hitler and Stalin. A threat of a different sort loomed in Western Europe—especially France, Italy, and Germany. These key nations were still suffering from the hunger and economic chaos spawned by war. They were in grave danger of being taken over from the inside by Communist parties that could exploit these hardships. President Truman responded with a bold policy. In a commencement address at Harvard University on June 5, 1947, Secretary of State George C. Marshall invited the Europeans to get together and work out a joint plan for their economic recovery. If they did so, then the United States would provide substantial ﬁ nancial assistance. This forced cooperation constituted a powerful nudge on the road to the eventual creation of the European Community (EC). The democratic nations of Europe rose enthusiastically to the life-giving bait of the so-called Marshall Plan. They met in Paris in July 1947 to thrash out the



Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


OTHER ASIA AND PACIFIC

 EUROPE

 $8.9 billion

UNITED STATES

 CHINA

 bi l

 $0.6 billio n

 o illi

$1
.0


 1b $ 1.

 n lio

 n billio $35.3

 n

ALL OTHERS

LATIN AMERICA

 AUSTRALIA

NEAR EAST AND AFRICA

Map 36.3 United States
Foreign Aid, Military and
Economic, 1945–1954
 Marshall Plan aid swelled the outlay for Europe. Note the emphasis on the “developed” world, with relatively little aid going to “developing.” Interactive Map

 details. There Marshall offered the same aid to the Soviet Union and its allies, if they would make political reforms and accept certain outside controls. In fact, the Americans worried that the Russian bear might hug the Marshall Plan to death, and therefore made the terms deliberately difﬁcult for the USSR to accept. Nobody was surprised when the Soviets walked out, denouncing the “Martial Plan” as one more capitalist trick. The Marshall Plan called for spending $12.5 billion over four years in sixteen cooperating countries (see Map 36.3). Congress at ﬁ rst balked at this mam-

 The Marshall Plan Turns Enemies into Friends The poster in this 1950 photograph in Berlin reads, “Berlin Rebuilt with Help from the Marshall Plan.”

 moth sum. It looked even more huge when added to the nearly $2 billion the United States had already contributed to European relief through the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA) and the hefty American contributions to the United Nations, IMF, and World Bank. But a Soviet-sponsored communist coup in Czechoslovakia ﬁ nally awakened the legislators to reality, and they voted the initial appropriations in April 1948. Congress evidently concluded that if Uncle Sam did not get the Europeans back on their feet, they would never get off his back.

Responding to the Soviet Threat




 inﬂuence in the Jewish state and to retain the support of American Jewish voters. Truman’s policy of strong support for Israel would vastly complicate U.S. relations with the Arab world in the decades ahead.

America Begins to Rearm


 American Motor of the Latest Type In this Russian cartoon, the conquering Truman uses U.S. moneybags to induce dollar-hungry European nations to draw the American capitalistic chariot.

 Truman’s Marshall Plan was a spectacular success. American dollars pumped reviving blood into the economic veins of the anemic Western European nations. Within a few years, most of them were exceeding their prewar outputs, as an “economic miracle” drenched Europe in prosperity. The Communist parties in Italy and France lost ground, and these two keystone countries were saved from the westward thrust of communism. A resolute Truman made another fateful decision in 1948. Access to Middle Eastern oil was crucial to the European recovery program and, increasingly, to the health of the U.S. economy, given ﬁ nite American oil reserves. Yet the Arab oil countries adamantly opposed the creation of the Jewish state of Israel in the British mandate territory of Palestine. Should Israel be born, a Saudi Arabian leader warned Truman, the Arabs “will lay siege to it until it dies of famine.” Defying Arab wrath as well as the objections of his own State and Defense Departments and the European Allies, all of them afraid to antagonize the oil-endowed Arabs, Truman ofﬁcially recognized the state of Israel on the day of its birth, May 14, 1948. Humanitarian sympathy for the Jewish survivors of the Holocaust ranked high among his reasons, as did his wishes to preempt Soviet

 The Cold War, the struggle to contain Soviet communism, was not war, yet it was not peace. The standoff with the Kremlin banished the dreams of tax-fatigued Americans that tanks could be beaten into automobiles. The Soviet menace spurred the uniﬁcation of the armed ser vices as well as the creation of a huge new national security apparatus. Congress in 1947 passed the National Security Act, creating the Department of Defense. The department was to be housed in the sprawling Pentagon building on the banks of the Potomac and to be headed by a new cabinet ofﬁcer, the secretary of defense. Under the secretary, but now without cabinet status, were the civilian secretaries of the navy, the army (replacing the old secretary of war), and the air force (a recognition of the rising importance of airpower). The uniformed heads of each service were brought together as the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The National Security Act also established the National Security Council (NSC) to advise the president on security matters and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to coordinate the government’s foreign fact gathering. The “Voice of America,” authorized by Congress in 1948, began beaming American radio broadcasts behind the iron curtain. In the same year, Congress resurrected the military draft, providing for the conscription of selected young men from nineteen to twenty-ﬁve years of age. The forbidding presence of the Selective Service System shaped millions of young people’s educational, marital, and career plans in the following quarter-century. One shoe at a time, a war-weary America was reluctantly returning to a war footing. The Soviet threat was also forcing the democracies of Western Europe into an unforeseen degree of unity. In 1948 Britain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg signed a path-breaking treaty of defensive alliance at Brussels. They then invited the United States to join them. The proposal confronted the United States with a historic decision. America had traditionally avoided entangling alliances, especially in peacetime (if the Cold War could be considered peacetime). Yet American participation in the emerging coalition could serve many purposes: it would strengthen the policy of



Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


Reaching Across the Atlantic in Peacetime,
 1948 When the United States joined with the Western European powers in the North Atlantic Alliance, soon to be called the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, it overcame its historic isolationism in the wake of wars. By 1955 former enemy West Germany would be admitted to NATO to help defend Western Europe against Soviet aggression.

 containing the Soviet Union; it would provide a framework for the reintegration of Germany into the European family; and it would reassure jittery Europeans that a traditionally isolationist Uncle Sam was not about to abandon them to the marauding Russian bear—or to a resurgent and domineering Germany. The Truman administration decided to join the European pact, called the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in recognition of its transatlantic character. With white-tie pageantry, the NATO treaty was signed in Washington on April 4, 1949. The twelve original signatories pledged to regard an attack on one as an attack on all and promised to respond with “armed force” if necessary. Despite last-ditch howls from immovable isolationists, the Senate approved the treaty on July 21, 1949, by a vote of 82 to 13. Membership was boosted to fourteen in 1952 by the inclusion of Greece and Turkey, to ﬁ fteen in 1955 by the addition of West Germany. The NATO pact was epochal. It marked a dramatic departure from American diplomatic convention, a gigantic boost for European uniﬁcation, and a signiﬁcant step in the militarization of the Cold War. NATO became the cornerstone of all Cold War American policy toward Europe. With good reason pundits summed up NATO’s threefold purpose: “to keep the Russians out, the Germans down, and the Americans in.”

Reconstruction and
Revolution in Asia
 Reconstruction in Japan was simpler than in Germany, primarily because it was largely a one-man show. The occupying American army, under the supreme Allied commander, ﬁve-star general Douglas MacArthur, sat in the driver’s seat. In the teeth of violent protests from Soviet ofﬁcials, MacArthur went inﬂexibly ahead with his program for the democratization of Japan. Following the pattern in Germany, top Japa nese “war criminals” were tried in Tokyo from 1946 to 1948. Eighteen of them were sentenced to prison terms, and seven were hanged. General MacArthur, as a kind of Yankee mikado, enjoyed stunning success. The Japa nese cooperated to an astonishing degree. They saw that good behavior and the adoption of democracy would speed the end of the occupation—as it did. A MacArthur-dictated constitution was adopted in 1946. It renounced militarism, provided for women’s equality, and introduced Western-style democratic government—paving the way for a phenomenal economic recovery that within a few decades made Japan one of the world’s mightiest industrial powers.

The Cold War in Asia


In August 1949 Secretary of State Dean Acheson
 (1893–1971) explained publicly why America had “dumped” Jiang Jieshi:

“


 The unfortunate but inescapable fact is that the ominous result of the civil war in China was beyond the control of the government of the United States. Nothing that this country did or could have done within the reasonable limits of its capabilities could have changed that result; nothing that was left undone by this country has contributed to it. It was the product of internal Chinese forces, forces which this country tried to inﬂuence but could not.

”


 If Japan was a success story for American policymakers, the opposite was true in China, where a bitter civil war had raged for years between Nationalists and communists. Washington had halfheartedly supported the Nationalist government of Generalissimo Jiang Jieshi in his struggle with the communists under Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung). But ineptitude and corruption within the generalissimo’s regime gradually began to corrode the conﬁdence of his people. Communist armies swept south overwhelmingly, and late in 1949 Jiang was forced to ﬂee with the remnants of his once-powerful force to the last-hope island of Formosa (Taiwan). The collapse of Nationalist China was a depressing defeat for America and its allies in the Cold War—the worst to date. At one fell swoop, nearly one-fourth of the world’s population—some 500 million people—was swept into the communist camp. The so-called fall of China became a bitterly partisan issue in the United States. The Republicans, seeking “goats” who had “lost China,” assailed President Truman and his bristly mustached, British-appearing secretary of state, Dean Acheson. They insisted that Democratic agencies, wormy with communists, had deliberately withheld aid from Jiang Jieshi so that he would fall. Democrats heatedly replied that when a regime has forfeited the support of its people, no amount of outside help will save it. Truman, the argument ran, did not “lose” China, because he never had China to lose. Jiang himself had never controlled all of China. More bad news came in September 1949 when President Truman shocked the nation by announcing



 that the Soviets had exploded an atomic bomb— approximately three years earlier than many experts had thought possible. American strategists since 1945 had counted on keeping the Soviets in line by threats of a one-sided aerial attack with nuclear weapons. But atomic bombing was now a game that two could play. To outpace the Soviets in nuclear weaponry, Truman ordered the development of the “H-bomb” (hydrogen bomb)—a city-smashing thermonuclear weapon that was a thousand times more powerful than the atomic bomb. J. Robert Oppenheimer, former scientiﬁc director of the Manhattan Project and current chair of the Atomic Energy Commission, led a group of scientists in opposition to the crash program to design thermonuclear weapons. The H-bomb, these scientists warned, was so deadly that “it becomes a weapon which in practical effect is almost one of genocide.” Famed physicist Albert Einstein, whose theories had helped give birth to the atomic age, declared that “annihilation of any life on earth has been brought within the range of technical possibilities.” But Einstein and Oppenheimer, the nation’s two most famous scientists, could not persuade Truman, anxious over communist threats in East Asia. The United States exploded its ﬁ rst hydrogen device on a South Paciﬁc atoll in 1952. Not to be outdone, the Soviets countered with their ﬁ rst H-bomb explosion in 1953, and the nuclear arms race entered a perilously competitive cycle. Nuclear “superiority” became a dangerous and delusive dream, as each side tried to outdo the other in the scramble to build more destructive Atomic scientist Edward Condon (1902–1974) warned as early as 1946—three years before the Soviets exploded their own atomic bomb—that Americans’ conﬁdence in their nuclear monopoly was a dangerous delusion that could unleash vicious accusations and scapegoating:

“


 The laws of nature, some seem to think, are ours exclusively. . . . Having created an air of suspicion and distrust, there will be persons among us who think our nations can know nothing except what is learned by espionage. So, when other countries make atom bombs, these persons will cry ‘treason’ at our scientists, for they will ﬁnd it inconceivable that another country could make a bomb in any other way.

”




Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


The Hydrogen Bomb, 1954
 This test blast at Bikini Atoll in the Marshall Islands was so powerful that one Japanese ﬁsherman was killed and all twenty-two of his crewmates were seriously injured by radioactive ash that fell on their vessel some eighty miles away. Fishing boats a thousand miles from Bikini later brought in radioactively contaminated catches.

 weapons. If the Cold War should ever blaze into a hot war, there might be no world left for the communists to communize or the democracies to democratize—a chilling thought that constrained both camps. Peace through mutual terror brought a shaky stability to the superpower standoff.

Ferreting Out Alleged
Communists
 One of the most active Cold War fronts was at home, where a new anti-red chase was in full cry. Many nervous citizens feared that communist spies, paid with Moscow gold, were undermining the government and treacherously misdirecting foreign policy. In 1947 Truman launched a massive “loyalty” program. The attorney general drew up a list of ninety supposedly disloyal orga ni zations, none of which was given the opportunity to prove its innocence. The Loyalty Review Board investigated more than 3 million federal employees, some 3,000 of whom either resigned or were dismissed, none under formal indictment. Individual states likewise became intensely security-conscious. Loyalty oaths in increasing numbers were demanded of employees, especially teachers. The gnawing question for many earnest Americans

 was, Could the nation continue to enjoy traditional freedoms—especially freedom of speech, freedom of thought, and the right of political dissent—in a Cold War climate? In 1949 eleven communists were brought before a New York jury for violating the Smith Act of 1940, the ﬁ rst peacetime antisedition law since 1798. Convicted of advocating the overthrow of the American government by force, the defendants were sent to prison. The Supreme Court upheld their convictions in Dennis v. United States (1951). The House of Representatives in 1938 had established the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) to investigate “subversion.” In 1948 committee member Richard M. Nixon, an ambitious red-catcher, led the chase after Alger Hiss, a prominent ex–New Dealer and a distinguished member of the “eastern establishment.” Accused of being a communist agent in the 1930s, Hiss demanded the right to defend himself. He dramatically met his chief accuser before HUAC in August 1948. Hiss denied every thing but was caught in embarrassing falsehoods, convicted of perjury in 1950, and sentenced to ﬁve years in prison. Was America really riddled with Soviet spies? Soviet agents did inﬁ ltrate certain government agencies, though without severely damaging consequences, and espionage may have helped the Soviets to develop an

The Anti-Communist Crusade at Home




 hunt. In 1950 Truman vetoed the McCarran Internal Secu rity Bill, which among other provisions authorized the president to arrest and detain suspicious people during an “internal security emergency.” Critics protested that the bill smacked of police-state, concentration-camp tactics. But the congressional guardians of the Republic’s liberties enacted the bill over Truman’s veto. The stunning success of the Soviet scientists in developing an atomic bomb was attributed by many to the cleverness of communist spies in stealing American secrets. Notorious among those who had allegedly “leaked” atomic data to Moscow were two American citizens, Julius and Ethel Rosenberg. They were convicted in 1951 of espionage and went to the electric chair in 1953—the only people in American history ever executed in peacetime for espionage. Their sensational trial and electrocution, combined with sympathy for their two orphaned children, began to sour some sober citizens on the excesses of the red-hunters.

Democratic Divisions in 1948


 Richard Nixon, Red-hunter Congressman Nixon examines the microﬁlm that ﬁgured as important evidence in Alger Hiss’s conviction for perjury in 1950.

 atomic bomb somewhat sooner than they would have otherwise. Truman’s loyalty program thus had a basis in reality. But for many ordinary Americans, the hunt for communists was not just about fending off the military threat of the Soviet Union. Unsettling dangers lurked closer to home. While men like Nixon and Senator Joseph McCarthy led the search for communists in Washington, conser vative politicians at the state and local levels discovered that all manner of real or perceived social changes—including declining religious sentiment, increased sexual freedom, and agitation for civil rights— could be tarred with a red brush. Anticommunist crusaders ransacked school libraries for “subversive” textbooks and drove debtors, drinkers, and homosexuals, all alleged to be security risks, from their jobs. Some Americans, including President Truman, realized that the red hunt was turning into a witch

 Attacking high prices and “High-Tax Harry” Truman, the Republicans had won control of Congress in the congressional elections of 1946. Their prospects had seldom looked rosier as they gathered in Philadelphia to choose their 1948 presidential candidate. They noisily renominated warmed-over New York governor Thomas E. Dewey, still as debonair as if he had stepped out of a bandbox. Also gathering in Philadelphia, Democratic politicos looked without enthusiasm on their hand-medown president and sang, “I’m Just Mild About Harry.” But their “dump Truman” movement collapsed when war hero Dwight D. Eisenhower refused to be drafted. The peppery president, unwanted but undaunted, was then chosen in the face of vehement opposition by southern delegates, who had been alienated by his strong stand in favor of civil rights for blacks, especially his decision in 1948 to desegregate the military. Truman’s nomination split the party wide-open. Embittered southern Democrats from thirteen states, like their ﬁ re-eating forebears of 1860, next met in their own convention, in Birmingham, Alabama, with Confederate ﬂags brashly in evidence. Amid scenes of heated deﬁance, these “Dixiecrats” nominated Governor J. Strom Thurmond of South Carolina on a States’ Rights party ticket.



Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


 To add to the confusion within Democratic ranks, former vice president Henry A. Wallace threw his hat into the ring. Having parted company with the administration over its get-tough-with-Russia policy, he was nominated at Philadelphia by the new Progressive party—a bizarre collection of disgruntled former New Dealers, starry-eyed paciﬁsts, well-meaning liberals, and communist-fronters. Wallace, a vigorous if misguided liberal, assailed Uncle Sam’s “dollar imperialism” from the stump. This so-called Pied Piper of the Politburo took an apparently pro-Soviet line that earned him drenchings with rotten eggs in hostile cities. But to many Americans, Wallace raised the only hopeful voice in the deepening gloom of the Cold War. With the Democrats ruptured three ways and the Republican congressional victory of 1946 just past, Dewey’s victory seemed assured. Succumbing to overconﬁdence engendered by his massive lead in publicopinion polls, the cold, smug Dewey conﬁ ned himself to dispensing soothing-syrup trivialities like “Our future lies before us.”

 The Harried Piano Player, 1948 Besieged by the left and right wings of his own party, and by a host of domestic and foreign problems, Truman was a long shot for reelection in 1948. But the scrappy president surprised his legions of critics by handily defeating his opponent, Thomas E. Dewey.

 That Ain’t the Way I Heard It!

 Truman wins.

 The seemingly doomed Truman, with little money and few active supporters, had to rely on his “gutﬁghter” instincts and folksy personality. Traveling the country by train to deliver some three hundred “give ’em hell” speeches, he lashed out at the Taft-Hartley “slavelabor” law and the “do-nothing” Republican Congress, while whipping up support for his program of civil rights, improved labor beneﬁts, and health insurance. “Pour it on ’em, Harry!” cried increasingly large and enthusiastic crowds, as the pugnacious president rained a barrage of verbal uppercuts on his opponent. On election night the Chicago Tribune ran off an early edition with the headline “DEWEY DEFEATS TRUMAN.” But in the morning, it turned out that “President” Dewey had embarrassingly snatched defeat from the jaws of victory. Truman had swept to a stunning triumph, to the complete bewilderment of politicians, pollsters, prophets, and pundits. Even though Thurmond took away 39 electoral votes in the South, Truman won 303 electoral votes, primarily from the South, Midwest, and West. Dewey’s 189 electoral votes came principally from the East. The popular vote was 24,179,345 for Truman, 21,991,291 for Dewey, 1,176,125 for Thurmond, and 1,157,326 for Wallace. To make the victory sweeter, the Democrats regained control of Congress as well. Truman’s victory rested on farmers, workers, and blacks, all of whom were Republican-wary. Republican overconﬁdence and Truman’s lone-wolf, never-say-die

The Election of 1948


 In his inaugural address in January 1949, President Harry S Truman (1884–1972) said,

“


 Communism is based on the belief that man is so weak and inadequate that he is unable to govern himself, and therefore requires the rule of strong masters. . . . Democracy is based on the conviction that man has the moral and intellectual capacity, as well as the inalienable right, to govern himself with reason and justice.

”


 campaign also won him the support of many Americans who admired his “guts.” No one wanted him, someone remarked, except the people. Dewey, in contrast, struck many voters as arrogant, evasive, and wooden. When Dewey took the platform to give a speech, said one commentator, “he comes out like a man who has been mounted on casters and given a tremendous shove from behind.” Smiling and self-assured, Truman sounded a clarion note in the fourth point of his inaugural address, when he called for a “bold new program” (known thereafter as “Point Four”). The plan was to lend U.S. money and technical aid to underdeveloped lands to help them help themselves. Truman wanted to spend millions to keep underprivileged peoples from becoming communists rather than spend billions to shoot them after they had become communists. This farseeing program was ofﬁcially launched in 1950, and it brought badly needed assistance to impoverished countries, notably in Latin America, Africa, the Near East, and the Far East. At home Truman outlined a sweeping Fair Deal program in his 1949 message to Congress. It called for

 As Truman’s Fair Deal was rebuffed by a hostile Congress, critics like the conservative New York Daily News gloated that the odious New Deal was ﬁnally vanquished:

“


 The New Deal is kaput like the Thirty Years’ War or the Black Plague or other disasters. . . . [Its demise] is like coming out of the darkness into sunlight. Like feeling clean again after a long time in the muck.

”




 improved housing, full employment, a higher minimum wage, better farm price supports, new TVAs, and an extension of Social Security. But most of the Fair Deal fell victim to congressional opposition from Republicans and southern Democrats. The only major successes came in raising the minimum wage, providing for public housing in the Housing Act of 1949, and extending old-age insurance to many more beneﬁciaries in the Social Security Act of 1950.

The Korean Volcano Erupts
 Korea, the Land of the Morning Calm, heralded a new and more disturbing phase of the Cold War—a shooting phase—in June 1950. When Japan collapsed in 1945, Soviet troops had accepted the Japa nese surrender north of the thirty-eighth parallel on the Korean peninsula, and American troops had done likewise south of that line. Both superpowers professed to want the reuniﬁcation and independence of Korea, a Japanese colony since 1910. But, as in Germany, each helped to set up rival regimes above and below the parallel. By 1949, when the Soviets and Americans had both withdrawn their forces, the entire peninsula was a bristling armed camp, with two hostile regimes eyeing each other suspiciously. Secretary of State Acheson seemed to wash his hands of the dispute early in 1950, when he declared in a memorable speech that Korea was outside the essential United States defense perimeter in the Paciﬁc. The explosion came on June 25, 1950. Spearheaded by Soviet-made tanks, North Korean army columns rumbled across the thirty-eighth parallel. Caught ﬂatfooted, the South Korean forces were shoved back southward to a dangerously tiny defensive area around Pusan, their weary backs to the sea. President Truman sprang quickly into the breach. The invasion seemed to provide devastating proof of a fundamental premise in the “containment doctrine” that shaped Washington’s foreign policy: that even a slight relaxation of America’s guard was an invitation to communist aggression somewhere. The Korean invasion prompted a massive expansion of the American military. A few months before, Truman’s National Security Council had issued its famous National Security Council Memorandum Number 68 (NSC-68), recommending that the United States quadruple its defense spending. Ignored at ﬁ rst because it seemed politically impossible to implement, NSC-68 got a new lease on life from the Korean crisis.



Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


 “Korea saved us,” Secretary of State Acheson later commented. Truman now ordered a massive military buildup, well beyond what was necessary for Korea. Soon the United States had 3.5 million men under arms and was spending $50 billion per year on the defense budget—some 13 percent of the GNP. NSC-68 was a key document of the Cold War period, not only because it marked a major step in the militarization of American foreign policy, but also because it vividly reﬂected the sense of almost limitless possibility that pervaded postwar American society. NSC-68 rested on the assumption that the enormous American economy could bear without strain the huge costs of a gigantic rearmament program. Said one NSC-68 planner, “There was practically nothing the country could not do if it wanted to do it.” Truman took full advantage of a temporary Soviet absence from the United Nations Security Council on June 25, 1950, to obtain a unanimous condemnation of North Korea as an aggressor. (Why the Soviets were absent remains controversial. Scholars once believed that the Soviets were just as surprised as the Americans by the attack. It now appears that Stalin had given his reluctant approval to North Korea’s strike plan but believed that the ﬁghting would be brief and that the United States would take little interest in it.) The Security Council also called upon all U.N. members, including the United States, to “render every assistance” to restore peace. Two days later, without consulting Congress, Truman ordered American air and naval units to support South Korea. Before the week was out, he also ordered General Douglas MacArthur’s Japan-based occupation troops into action alongside the beleaguered South Koreans. So began the ill-fated Korean War. Ofﬁcially, the United States was simply participating in a United Nations “police action.” But in fact, the United States made up the overwhelming bulk of the U.N. contingents, and General MacArthur, appointed U.N. commander of the entire operation, took his orders from Washington, not from the Security Council.

 Korea to its former borders, but the pursuing South Koreans had already crossed the thirty-eighth parallel, and there seemed little point in permitting the North Koreans to regroup and come again. The U.N. General Assembly tacitly authorized a crossing by MacArthur, whom President Truman ordered northward, provided that there was no intervention in force by the Chinese or Soviets (see Map 36.4). USSR

June 25, 1950


 MANCHURIA

 CHINA

 CHINA

 l Ya

.
 uR

NORTH KOREA

 USSR

Sept. 14, 1950


 MANCHURIA

 lu Ya

40°N


R.


NORTH KOREA

 P‘yongyang

40°N


 P‘yongyang

38°N


38°N


Seoul


Seoul


SOUTH KOREA

35°N


35°N


Pusan


125°E


130°E


130°E


 North Korean attack

 USSR

 MANCHURIA

 MANCHURIA

 CHINA

R.


 lu Ya

40°N


 P‘yongyang

NORTH KOREA

Seoul


Pusan


125°E


130°E


38°N


SOUTH KOREA

35°N


Pusan


125°E


40°N


 P‘yongyang

38°N


SOUTH KOREA

35°N


R.


NORTH KOREA

Seoul
Inchon


 USSR

July 27, 1953


 CHINA lu Ya

Pusan


125°E


 North Korean attack

Nov. 25, 1950


SOUTH KOREA

130°E


 Chinese counterattack Armistice line

 MacArthur attack

N


The Military Seesaw in Korea
 Rather than ﬁght his way out of the southern Pusan perimeter, MacArthur launched a daring amphibious landing behind the enemy’s lines at Inchon. This bold gamble on September 15, 1950, succeeded brilliantly; within two weeks the North Koreans had scrambled back behind the “sanctuary” of the thirty-eighth parallel. Truman’s avowed intention was to restore South

 Territory held by South Korean forces Territory held by North Korean forces Front



100 200 Km.


200 Mi.


Map 36.4 The Shifting Front in Korea
Interactive Map


The Korean War


 The Americans thus raised the stakes in Korea, and in so doing they quickened the fears of another potential player in this dangerous game. The Chinese communists had publicly warned that they would not sit idly by and watch hostile troops approach the strategic Yalu River boundary between Korea and China. But MacArthur pooh-poohed all predictions of an effective intervention by the Chinese and reportedly boasted that he would “have the boys home by Christmas.” MacArthur erred badly. In November 1950 tens of thousands of Chinese “volunteers” fell upon his rashly overextended lines and hurled the U.N. forces reeling back down the peninsula. The ﬁghting now sank into a frostbitten stalemate on the icy terrain near the thirty-eighth parallel. An imperious MacArthur, humiliated by this rout, pressed for drastic retaliation. He favored a blockade of the Chinese coast and bombardment of Chinese bases in Manchuria. He even suggested that the United States use nuclear weapons on the advancing Chinese and their supply lines. But Washington policymakers, with anxious eyes on Moscow, refused to enlarge the already costly conﬂ ict. The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff declared that a wider clash in Asia would be “the wrong war, at the wrong place, at the wrong time, and with the wrong enemy.” Europe, not Asia, was the administration’s ﬁ rst concern; and the USSR, not China, loomed as the more sinister foe. Two-ﬁsted General MacArthur felt that he was being asked to ﬁght with one hand tied behind his back. He sneered at the concept of a “limited war” and insisted that “there is no substitute for victory.” Truman bravely resisted calls for nuclear escalation, a rare example of a military commander refusing to use the most powerful weapons at his disposal. When MacArthur began to criticize the president’s policies publicly, Truman had no choice but to remove the insubordinate MacArthur from command on April 11, 1951.



Truman Takes the Heat


 MacArthur, a legend in his own mind, returned to an uproarious welcome, whereas Truman was condemned as a “pig,” an “imbecile,” a “Judas,” and an appeaser of “Communist Russia and Communist China.” In July 1951 truce discussions began in a rude ﬁeld tent near the ﬁ ring line but were almost immediately snagged on the issue of prisoner exchange. Talks dragged on unproductively for nearly two years while men continued to die.



Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


 CHRONOLOGY

 Spock publishes The Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care Yalta conference United States ends lend-lease to USSR United Nations established

 Israel founded; United States recognizes it “Voice of America” begins radio broadcasts behind iron curtain Alger Hiss case begins Truman defeats Dewey for presidency

1948–


 Berlin blockade

1945–


 Nuremberg war crimes trial in Germany





 NATO established Communists defeat Nationalists in China Soviets explode their ﬁ rst atomic bomb

 Employment Act creates Council of Economic Advisers Iran crisis Kennan’s “Long Telegram” lays out “containment doctrine”



 American economy begins postwar growth McCarthy red hunt begins McCarran Internal Security Bill passed by Congress over Truman’s veto



 Servicemen’s Readjustment Act (GI Bill) Bretton Woods economic conference



1946–


 Tokyo war crimes trials

1950–


Korean War




Truman Doctrine
Marshall Plan
Taft-Hartley Act
 National Security Act creates Department of Defense, National Security Council (NSC), and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)



 Truman ﬁ res MacArthur Rosenbergs convicted of treason



 United States explodes ﬁ rst hydrogen bomb



 Postwar peak of U.S. birthrate



 U.S. birthrate falls below replacement level

KEY TERMS
Taft-Hartley Act (910) Operation Dixie (911) Employment Act of 1946 (911) GI Bill (911) Sunbelt (915) Levittown (917) baby boom (917) Yalta conference (920) Cold War (923) Bretton Woods Conference (923) United Nations (U.N.) (923) Nuremberg war crimes trial (926) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Berlin airlift (928) containment doctrine (928) Truman Doctrine (929) Marshall Plan (929) North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) (932) House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) (934) Fair Deal (937) National Security Council Memorandum Number 68 (NSC-68) (937) Korean War (938) 
Benjamin Spock
Joseph Stalin
Jiang Jieshi


George F. Kennan
Reinhold Niebuhr
George C. Marshall


Varying Viewpoints




Who Was to Blame for the Cold War?


W


 hose fault was the Cold War? (And, for that matter, who should get credit for ending it?) For two decades after World War II, American historians generally agreed that the aggressive Soviets were solely responsible. This “orthodox” or “ofﬁcial” appraisal squared with the traditional view of the United States as a virtuous, innocent land with an idealistic foreign policy. This point of view also justiﬁed America’s Cold War containment policy, which cast the Soviet Union as the aggressor that must be conﬁ ned by an ever-vigilant United States. America supposedly had only defensive intentions, with no expansionary ambitions of its own. In the 1960s a vigorous revisionist interpretation ﬂowered, powerfully inﬂuenced by disillusion over U.S. involvement in Vietnam. The revisionists stood the orthodox view on its head. The Soviets, they argued, had only defensive intentions at the end of World War II; it was the Americans who had behaved provocatively by brandishing their new atomic weaponry. Some of these critics pointed an accusing ﬁ nger at President Truman, alleging that he abandoned Roosevelt’s conciliatory approach to the Soviets and adopted a bullying attitude, emboldened by the American atomic monopoly. More radical revisionists like Gabriel and Joyce Kolko even claimed to have found the roots of Truman’s alleged belligerence in long-standing American policies of economic imperialism—policies that eventually resulted in the tragedy of Vietnam (see pp. 959–960). In this view the Vietnam War followed logically from America’s insatiable “need” for overseas markets and raw materials. Vietnam itself may have been economically unimportant, but, so the argument ran, a communist Vietnam represented an intolerable challenge to American hegemony. Revisionists cited their own version of the “domino theory,” which war apologists used to defend America’s military actions in Vietnam. According to the domino theory, if the United States declined to ﬁght in Vietnam, other countries would lose their faith in America’s will (or their fear of American power) and would tumble one after the other like “dominoes” into the Soviet camp. Revisionists stressed what they saw as the economic necessity behind the domino

 theory: losing in Vietnam, they claimed, would unravel the American economy. In the 1970s a “postrevisionist” interpretation emerged that is widely agreed upon today. Historians such as John Lewis Gaddis and Melvyn Lefﬂer poohpooh the economic determinism of the revisionists, while frankly acknowledging that the United States did have vital security interests at stake in the post– World War II era. The postrevisionists analyze the ways in which inherited ideas (like isolationism) and the contentious nature of postwar domestic politics, as well as miscalculations by American leaders, led a nation in search of security into seeking not simply a sufﬁciency but a “preponderance” of power. The American overreaction to its security needs, these scholars suggest, exacerbated U.S.-Soviet relations and precipitated the four-decade-long nuclear arms race that formed the centerpiece of the Cold War. In the case of Vietnam, the postrevisionist historians focus not on economic necessity, but on a failure of political intelligence, induced by the stressful conditions of the Cold War, that made the dubious domino theory seem plausible. Misunderstanding Vietnamese intentions, exaggerating Soviet ambitions, and fearing to appear “soft on communism” in the eyes of their domestic political rivals, American leaders plunged into Vietnam, sadly misguided by their own Cold War obsessions. Most postrevisionists, however, still lay the lion’s share of the blame for the Cold War on the Soviet Union. By the same token, they credit the Soviets with ending the Cold War—a view hotly disputed by Ronald Reagan’s champions, who claim that it was his anti-Soviet policies in the 1980s that brought the Russians to their knees (see pp. 1037–1038). The great unknown, of course, is the precise nature of Soviet thinking in the Cold War years. Were Soviet aims predominantly defensive, or did the Kremlin incessantly plot world conquest? Was there an opportunity for reconciliation with the West following Stalin’s death in 1953? Should Mikhail Gorbachev or Ronald Reagan be remembered as the leader who ended the Cold War? With the opening of Soviet archives, scholars are eagerly pursuing answers to such questions.



Chapter 36 The Cold War Begins, 1945–1952


To Learn More
Dean Acheson, Present at the Creation (1969)
Lizabeth Cohen, A Consumers’ Republic: The Politics of
Mass Consumption in Postwar America (2003)
John Lewis Gaddis, The Cold War: A New History (2005)
Herbert J. Gans, The Levittowners (1967)
Kenneth T. Jackson, Crabgrass Frontier: The
Suburbanization of the United States (1985)
 Kevin Kruse and Thomas Sugrue, eds., The New Suburban History (2006) Marvyn P. Lefﬂer, A Preponderance of Power: National Security, the Truman Administration, and the Cold War, 1945–1950 (1980)

 Thomas McCormick, America’s Half-Century: U.S. Foreign Policy in the Cold War and After (1995) Ellen Schrecker, Many Are the Crimes (1998) Bruce Schulman, From Cotton Belt to Sunbelt: Federal Policy, Economic Development, and the Transformation of the South (1991) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Eisenhower Era





1952–1960
 Every warship launched, every rocket ﬁred signiﬁes . . . a theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who are cold and are not clothed. DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER, APRIL 16, 1953

I


 n President Dwight D. Eisenhower, the man and the hour met. Americans yearned for a period of calm in which they could pursue without distraction their new visions of consumerist afﬂuence. The nation sorely needed a respite from twenty years of depression and war. Yet the American people unexpectedly found themselves in the early 1950s dug into the frontlines of the Cold War abroad and dangerously divided at home over the explosive issues of communist subversion and civil rights. They longed for reassuring leadership. “Ike” seemed ready both to reassure and to lead.

 Afﬂuence and Its Anxieties The continuing post–World War II economic boom wrought wondrous changes in American society in the 1950s. Prosperity triggered a fabulous surge in home construction, as a nation of renters became a nation of homeowners. One of every four homes standing in

 America in 1960 had been built during the 1950s, and 83 percent of those new homes were in suburbia. More than ever, science and technology drove economic growth. The invention of the transistor in 1948 sparked a revolution in electronics, and especially in computers. The ﬁ rst electronic computers assembled in the 1940s were massive machines with hundreds of miles of wiring and thousands of ﬁckle cathode ray tubes. Transistors and, later, printed circuits on silicon wafers made possible dramatic min iaturization and phenomenal computational speed. Computer giant International Business Machines (IBM) expanded robustly, becoming the prototype of the “high-tech” corporation in the dawning “information age.” Eventually personal computers and even inexpensive pocket calculators contained more computing power than room-size early models. Computers transformed ageold business practices like billing and inventory control and opened genuine new frontiers in areas like airline scheduling, high-speed printing, and telecommunications.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 An Early Computer, ca. 1950 Just a few decades later, technological improvements would bring the computing power of this bulky behemoth to the user’s desktop.

 Aerospace industries also grew fantastically in the 1950s, thanks both to Eisenhower’s aggressive buildup of the Strategic Air Command and to a robustly expanding passenger airline business—as well as to

 connections between military and civilian aircraft production. In 1957 the Seattle-based Boeing Company brought out the ﬁ rst large passenger jet, the “707.” Its design owed much to the previous development of SAC’s long-range strategic bomber, the B-52. Two years later Boeing delivered the ﬁrst presidential jet, a specially modiﬁed 707, to its ﬁ rst user, Dwight D. Eisenhower. “Air Force One” dazzled him with its speed and comfort. The nature of the work force was also changing. A quiet revolution was marked in 1956 when “white-collar” workers for the ﬁ rst time outnumbered “blue-collar” workers, signaling the passage from an industrial to a postindustrial, or ser vice-based, economy. Keeping pace with that fundamental transformation, orga nized labor withered along with the smokestack industries that had been its sustenance. Union membership as a percentage of the labor force peaked at about 35 percent in 1954 and then went into steady decline (see p. 843). Some observers concluded that the union movement had played out its historic role of empowering workers and ensuring economic justice, and that unions would eventually disappear altogether in the postindustrial era. The surge in white-collar employment opened special opportunities for women (see Table 37.1). When World War II ended, many women, including those who had worked in war plants, returned to highly conventional female roles as wives and mothers—the remarkably proliﬁc mothers of the huge “baby-boom” generation. A “cult of domesticity” emerged in popular culture to celebrate those eternal feminine functions. When 1950s television programs like “Ozzie and Har-

Table 37.1 Occupational Distribution of Workingwomen,
1900–2000*


 Total white-collar workers† Clerical workers Manual workers Farmworkers Service workers‡













17.8%
4.0
27.8
18.9
35.5


38.8%
18.7
23.8
13.5
23.9


44.9%
21.5
21.6
4.0
29.4


52.5%
28.7
18.0
1.8
21.9


65.6%
30.5
14.8
1.0
18.1


73.0%
36.7
8.7
0.3
18.0


 *Major categories; percentage of all women workers in each category, calculated at fourteen and older until 1970 and then sixteen and older. †Includes clerical, sales, professional, and technical workers, managers, and ofﬁcials. ‡Includes domestic servants. (Sources: Historical Statistics of the United States and Statistical Abstract of the United States, relevant years.)

A
Changing Economy 

 Percentage of women age 16 and over in the labor force since 1900





1920 1930








1970 1980




’00 ’05


Figure 37.1 Women in the Labor Force, 1900–2005
(Sources: Historical Statistics of the United States and Statistical Abstract
 of the United States, relevant years.)

 riet” or “Leave It to Beaver” depicted idyllic suburban families with a working husband, two children, and a wife who did not work outside the home, they did so without irony; much of white, middle-class America really did live that way. But as the 1950s progressed, another quiet revolution was gaining momentum that



 was destined to transform women’s roles and even the character of the American family. Of some 40 million new jobs created in the three decades after 1950, more than 30 million were in clerical and ser vice work. Women ﬁ lled the huge majority of these new positions. They were the principal employment beneﬁciaries of the postwar era, creating an extensive “pink-collar ghetto” of occupations that came to be dominated by women (see Figure 37.1). Exploding employment opportunities for women in the 1950s unleashed a groundswell of social and psychological shocks that mounted to tidal-wave proportions in the decades that followed. From one perspective women’s surge into the workplace was nothing new, only a return to the days when the United States was an agricultural nation, and men and women alike toiled on the family farm. But the urban age was not the agricultural age, and women’s new dual role as both workers and homemakers raised urgent questions about family life and traditional deﬁ nitions of gender differences. Feminist Betty Friedan gave focus and fuel to women’s feelings in 1963 when she published The Feminine Mystique, a runaway best seller and a classic of feminist protest literature that launched the modern women’s movement. Friedan spoke in rousing accents to millions of able, educated women who applauded her indictment of the stiﬂ ing boredom of suburban

The Booming Service Sector
 Services displaced manufacturing as the most dynamic area of the economy in the post–World War II era, and women made up a majority of new workers in the nation’s ofﬁces and classrooms and on sales ﬂoors and hospital wards.



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


The Original Golden
Arches, 1955 Maurice and
 Richard McDonald replaced their original drive-in hamburger stand in San Bernardino, California, with this double-arched design in 1953. McDonald’s soon became one of the largest franchised restaurant chains in the world and a global symbol of American consumerism.

Consumer Culture
 in the Fifties The 1950s witnessed a huge expansion of the middle class and the blossoming of a consumer culture. Diner’s Club introduced the plastic credit card in 1949, just one year after the ﬁ rst “fast-food”–style McDonald’s hamburger stand opened in San Bernardino, Cal ifornia. In 1955 Disneyland opened its doors in Anaheim, Cal i fornia. Easy credit, high-volume “fast-food” production, and new forms of leisure marked an emerging afﬂuent lifestyle that soon moved beyond America’s borders. Manufacturers, retailers, and advertisers spread American-style consumer capitalism throughout much of the noncommunist world. Crucial to the development of that lifestyle was the rapid rise of the new technology of television. Only 6 TV stations were broadcasting in 1946; a decade later 442 stations were operating. TV sets were rich people’s novelties in the 1940s, but 7 million sets were sold in 1951. By 1960 virtually every American home had one, in a stunning display of the speed with which

 new technologies can pervade and transform modern societies (see Figure 37.2). Attendance at movies sank as the entertainment industry changed its focus from the silver screen to the picture tube. By the mid-1950s, advertisers annually spent $10 billion to hawk their wares on television, while critics fumed that the wildly popular new mass medium was degrading the public’s aesthetic, social, moral, political, and educational standards. To the question “Why is television called a medium?” pundits replied, “Because it’s never rare or well done.”

Percentage


 housewifery. Many of those women were already working for wages, but they were also struggling against the guilt and frustration of leading an “unfeminine” life as deﬁ ned by the postwar “cult of domesticity.”















Year


 Figure 37.2 Households with Television Sets, 1946–2009



A
Nation of Consumers 



 The King With his ﬂeshy face, pouting lips, and antic, sexually suggestive gyrations, Elvis Presley became the high priest of rock ’n’ roll in the 1950s, to the chagrin of parents everywhere. Bloated by fame, fortune, and drugs, he died in 1977 at the age of forty-two.

 Even religion capitalized on the powerful new electronic pulpit. “Televangelists” like the Baptist Billy Graham, the Pentecostal Holiness preacher Oral Roberts, and the Roman Catholic Fulton J. Sheen took to the airwaves to spread the Christian gospel. Television also catalyzed the commercialization of professional sports, as viewing audiences that once numbered in the stadium-capacity thousands could now be counted in the couch-potato millions. Sports also reﬂected the shift in population toward the West and South. In 1958 baseball’s New York Giants moved to San Francisco, and the Brooklyn Dodgers abandoned Flatbush for Los Angeles. Those moves touched off a new westward and southward movement of sports franchises. Shifting population and spreading afﬂuence led eventually to substantial expansion of the major baseball leagues and the principal football and basketball leagues as well. Popular music was dramatically transformed in the ﬁ fties. The chief revolutionary was Elvis Presley, a white singer born in 1935 in Tupelo, Mississippi. Fusing black rhythm and blues with white bluegrass and country styles, Elvis created a new musical idiom known forever after as rock ’n’ roll. Rock was “crossover” music, carrying its heavy beat and driv ing rhythms across the cultural divide that separated black and white musical traditions. Listening and dancing to rock

 ’n’ roll became a rite of passage for millions of young people around the world, from Japan to working-class Liverpool, Eng land, where Elvis’s music inspired teenagers John Lennon and Paul McCartney to form a band that would become the Beatles. Traditionalists were repelled by Presley, and they found much more to upset them in the afﬂuent ﬁ fties. Movie star Marilyn Monroe, with her ingenuous smile and mandolin-curved hips, helped to popularize—and commercialize—new standards of sensuous sexuality. So did Playboy magazine, whose ﬁ rst issue Monroe graced in 1953. As the decade closed, Americans were well on their way to becoming free-spending consumers of mass-produced, standardized products, which were advertised on the electronic medium of television and often sold for their alleged sexual allure. Many critics lamented the implications of this new consumerist lifestyle. Harvard sociologist David Riesman portrayed the postwar generation as a pack of conformists in The Lonely Crowd (1950), as did William H. Whyte, Jr., in The Organization Man. Novelist Sloan Wilson explored a similar theme in The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit (1955). Harvard economist John Kenneth Galbraith questioned the relation between private wealth and the public good in a series of books beginning with The Afﬂuent Society (1958). The postwar explosion of prosperity, Galbraith claimed, had



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 produced a troublesome combination of private opulence amid public squalor. Americans had televisions in their homes but garbage in their streets. They ate rich food but breathed foul air. But Galbraith’s call for social spending to match private purchasing fell on mostly deaf ears in the giddily afﬂuent 1950s.

The Advent of Eisenhower
 Democratic prospects in the presidential election of 1952 were blighted by the military deadlock in Korea, Truman’s clash with MacArthur, war-bred inﬂation, and whiffs of scandal from the White House. Dispirited Democrats nominated a reluctant Adlai E. Stevenson, the eloquent and idealistic governor of Illinois. Republicans enthusiastically chose war hero General Dwight D. Eisenhower on the ﬁ rst ballot. “Ike’s” running mate was Cal i fornia senator Richard M. Nixon, who had gained notoriety as a relentless red-hunter. Eisenhower was already the most popular American of his time, as “I Like Ike” buttons every where testiﬁed. Striking a grandfatherly, nonpartisan pose, Eisenhower left the rough campaigning to Nixon, who relished bare-knuckle political combat. The vicepresidential candidate lambasted his opponents with charges that they had cultivated corruption, caved in on Korea, and coddled communists. He particularly blasted the cerebral Stevenson as “Adlai the appeaser,” with a “Ph.D. from [Secretary of State] Dean Acheson’s College of Cowardly Communist Containment.” Nixon himself faltered late in the campaign amid accusations that he had accepted illegal donations. Responding with a self-pitying live address on television, Nixon denied the charges and solemnly declared that the only campaign gift he had ever received was the family cocker spaniel, Checkers. The shameless and mawkish Checkers Speech saved Nixon’s spot on the ticket and spotlighted a fundamental change in American politics. Television was now a formidable political tool that, much more than radio, allowed candidates to bypass traditional party machinery and speak directly to voters. Soon even Eisenhower was reluctantly appearing in short, tightly scripted televised “spots” that foreshadowed the future of political advertising. Devoid of substance, they vastly oversimpliﬁed complicated economic and social issues. They amounted, as one critic observed, to “selling the President like toothpaste.” And given television’s origins in entertainment

The Republicans’ Choice, 1952 Nominee Eisenhower
 and his vice-presidential running mate, Nixon, greet the delegates.

 and advertising, political messages would be increasingly tuned to the standards of show business and commercialism. The outcome of the presidential election of 1952 was never really in doubt. Given an extra prod by Eisenhower’s last-minute pledge to go personally to Korea to end the war, the voters overwhelmingly declared for Ike. He garnered 33,936,234 votes to Stevenson’s 27,314,992, ringing up 442 electoral votes to 89 for his opponent (see Map 37.1). Ike also managed to pull enough Republican legislators into ofﬁce on his military coattails to gain GOP control of the new Congress by a hairbreadth. True to his campaign pledge, president-elect Eisenhower undertook a ﬂying three-day visit to Korea in December 1952. But even a glamorous Ike could not immediately budge the peace negotiations off dead center. Seven long months later, after Eisenhower had hinted that he might use atomic weapons, an armistice was ﬁ nally signed. (Subsequent inquiries suggested that Ike’s hints were so artfully veiled that the Chinese

Ike as President


WA MT

OR ID NV CA

 ND

WY UT

 AZ

 MN

 SD

 IA

NE CO

 WI

KS OK

 NM

 TX

 IL

MI IN

 MO

 LA

OH KY

 MS

 AL

 WV

VA NC

 TN

 AR

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 16 RI PA NJ CT 4 16 8

 GA

DE MD

 Map 37.1 Presidential Election of 1952 (with electoral vote by state) A Democrat quipped that “if the voters liked the Republicans the way they liked Ike, the two-party system would be in bad shape.” Fortunately for Democrats, Eisenhower scored a personal, not a party, victory. Republicans won minuscule majorities in Congress, which disappeared in the congressional elections two years later. Interactive Map

 SC

 FL

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Eisenhower (Republican)




83%


33,936,234


55.1%




17%


27,314,992


44.4%


Stevenson (Democrat)




 never understood them. They agreed to end the war for reasons of their own, especially its burdensome ﬁnancial costs.) The brutal and futile ﬁghting had lasted three years. About ﬁ fty-four thousand Americans lay dead,

 Korean War Scene A grief-stricken American soldier whose buddy has been killed is being comforted, while a medical corpsman ﬁlls out casualty tags.

 joined by perhaps more than a million Chinese, North Koreans, and South Koreans. Tens of billions of American dollars had been poured down the Asian sinkhole. Yet this terrible toll in blood and trea sure bought only a return to the conditions of 1950: Korea remained divided at the thirty-eighth parallel, Communist in the North, Western-looking in the South. Americans took what little comfort they could from the fact that communism had been “contained” and that the bloodletting had been “limited” to something less than full-scale global war. The shooting had ended, but the Cold War still remained frigidly frozen. As a military commander, Eisenhower had cultivated a leadership style that self-consciously projected an image of sincerity, fairness, and optimism. He had been widely perceived during World War II as an “unmilitary” general, and in the White House he similarly struck the pose of an “unpolitical” president, serenely above the petty partisan fray. He also shrewdly knew that his greatest “asset” was his enjoyment of the “affection and respect of our citizenry,” as he conﬁded to his diary in 1949. Ike thus seemed ideally suited to soothe the anxieties of troubled Americans, much as a distinguished and well-loved grandfather brings stability to his family. He played this role well as he presided over a decade of shaky peace and shining prosperity. Yet critics charged that he unwisely hoarded the “asset” of his



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 the Democratic administration. Ohio’s Senator John Bricker reportedly said, “Joe, you’re a dirty s.o.b., but there are times when you’ve got to have an s.o.b. around, and this is one of them.” McCarthy’s rhetoric grew bolder and his accusations spread more wildly after the Republican victory in 1952. McCarthy saw the red hand of Moscow everywhere. The Democrats, he charged, “bent to whispered pleas from the lips of traitors.” Incredibly, he even denounced General George Marshall, former army chief of staff and ex–secretary of state, as “part of a conspiracy so immense and an infamy so black as to dwarf any previous venture in the history of man.” McCarthy—and what became known as McCarthyism—ﬂourished in the seething Cold War at mosphere of suspicion and fear. The senator was neither the ﬁ rst nor the most effective red-hunter, but he was surely the most ruthless, and he did the most damage to American traditions of fair play and free speech. The careers of countless ofﬁcials, writers, and actors were ruined after “Low-Blow Joe” had “named” them, often unfairly, as communists or communist sympathizers. Politicians trembled in the face of such on-

A
Popular President “Ike” exuded grandfatherly graciousness and goodwill. 
 immense popularity, rather than spend it for a good cause (especially civil rights), and that he cared more for social harmony than for social justice.

The Rise and Fall of
 Joseph McCarthy One of the ﬁ rst problems Eisenhower faced was the swelling popularity and swaggering power of an obstreperous anticommunist crusader, Wisconsin Republican senator Joseph R. McCarthy. Elected to the Senate on the basis of a trumped-up war-hero record, McCarthy had crashed into the limelight in February 1950 when he accused Secretary of State Dean Acheson of knowingly employing 205 Communist party members. Pressed to reveal the names, McCarthy later conceded that there were only 57 genuine communists and in the end failed to root out even one. Some of McCarthy’s Republican colleagues nevertheless realized the partisan usefulness of this kind of attack on

 Senator McCarthy Extinguishes the Torch of Liberty While preaching patriotism, McCarthy irresponsibly menaced American traditions of civil liberties.

 The Scourge of McCarthyism

 In a moment of high drama during the ArmyMcCarthy hearings, attorney Joseph Welch (1890– 1960) reproached McCarthy in front of a huge national television audience for threatening to slander a young lawyer on Welch’s staff:

 holism. But “McCarthyism” has passed into the Eng lish language as a label for the dangerous forces of unfairness and fear that a democratic society can unleash only at its peril.

Desegregating American
Society


“


 Until this moment, Senator, I think I never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness. Little did I dream you could be so cruel as to do an injury to that lad. . . . If it were in my power to forgive you for your reckless cruelty, I would do so. I like to think that I am a gentleman, but your forgiveness will have to come from someone other than me. . . . Have you no decency, sir, at long last? Have you left no sense of decency?

”


 slaughts, especially when opinion polls showed that a majority of the American people approved of McCarthy’s crusade. Eisenhower privately loathed McCarthy but publicly tried to stay out of his way, saying, “I will not get in the gutter with that guy.” Trying to appease the brash demagogue from Wisconsin, Eisenhower allowed him, in effect, to control personnel policy at the State Department. One baleful result was severe damage to the morale and effectiveness of the professional foreign ser vice. In particular, McCarthyite purges deprived the government of a number of Asian specialists who might have counseled a wiser course in Vietnam in the fateful decade that followed. McCarthy’s extreme antics also damaged America’s international reputation for fair and open democracy at a moment when it was important to keep Western Europe on the United States’ side in an intensifying Cold War. McCarthy ﬁ nally bent the bow too far when he attacked the U.S. Army. The embattled military men fought back in thirty-ﬁve days of televised hearings in the spring of 1954. The political power of the new broadcast medium was again demonstrated by the Army-McCarthy hearings, as up to 20 million Americans at a time watched in fascination while a boorish, surly McCarthy publicly cut his own throat by parading his essential meanness and irresponsibility. A few months later, the Senate formally condemned him for “conduct unbecoming a member.” Three years later, unwept and unsung, McCarthy died of chronic alco-



 America counted some 15 million black citizens in 1950, two-thirds of whom still made their homes in the South. There they lived bound by the iron folkways of a segregated society. A rigid set of antiquated rules known as Jim Crow laws governed all aspects of their existence, from the schoolroom to the restroom. Every day of their lives, southern blacks dealt with a bizarre array of separate social arrangements that kept them insulated from whites, economically inferior, and politically powerless. Blacks in the South not only attended segregated schools but were compelled to use separate public toilets, drinking fountains, restaurants, and waiting rooms. Trains and buses had “whites only” and “colored only” seating. Only about 20 percent of eligible southern blacks were registered to vote, and fewer than 5 percent were registered in some Deep South states like Mississippi and Alabama. As late as 1960, white southern sensibilities about segregation were so tender that television networks blotted out black speakers at the national political conventions for fear of offending southern stations. Where the law proved insufﬁcient to enforce this regime, vigilante violence did the job. Six black war

 A black woman described the day-in, day-out humiliations of life in a Jim Crow South:

“


 You could not go to a white restaurant; you sat in a special place at the movie house; and Lord knows, you sat in the back of the bus. It didn’t make any difference if you were rich or poor, if you were black you were nothing. You might have a hundred dollars in your pocket, but if you went to the store you would wait at the side until all the clerks got through with all the white folks, no matter if they didn’t have change for a dollar. Then the clerk would ﬁnally look at you and say, ‘Oh, did you want something? I didn’t see you there.’

”




Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 The Face of Segregation These women in the segregated South of the 1950s were compelled to enter the movie theater through the “Colored Entrance.” Once inside, they were restricted to a separate seating section, usually in the rear of the theater.

 veterans, claiming the rights for which they had fought overseas, were murdered in the summer of 1946. A Mississippi mob lynched black fourteen-year-old Emmett Till in 1955 for allegedly leering at a white woman. It is small wonder that a black clergyman declared that “every where I go in the South the Negro is forced to choose between his hide and his soul.” Segregation tarnished America’s international image, much as McCarthyism did. After the war African American entertainers like Paul Robeson and Josephine Baker toured widely in Europe and Latin America, informing audiences about the horrors of Jim Crow and raising doubts about America’s reputation as the beacon of freedom against Soviet communism. In response, the State Department conﬁscated Robeson’s passport, but it had to ﬁ nd other ways to silence Baker,

 who had assumed French citizenship. Intellectuals poured on criticism as well. Swedish scholar Gunnar Myrdal published his landmark book, An American Dilemma, exposing the scandalous contradiction between “The American Creed”—allegiance to the values of “progress, liberty, equality, and humanitarianism”— and the nation’s shameful treatment of black citizens. International pressure combined with grassroots and legal activism to propel some racial progress in the North after World War II. In a growing number of northern cities and states, African Americans battled for—and won—equal access to public accommodations like restaurants, hotels, theaters, and beaches. Jackie Robinson cracked baseball’s color barrier when the Brooklyn Dodgers signed him in 1947. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) pushed the Supreme Court in 1950 to rule in Sweatt v. Painter that separate professional schools for blacks failed to meet the test of equality. The national conscience was slowly awakening from its centurieslong slumber, but black suffering still continued, especially in the South. Increasingly, however, African Americans refused to suffer in silence (see “Makers of America: The Great African American Migration,” pp. 954–955). On a chilly day in December 1955, Rosa Parks, a college-educated black seamstress, made history in Montgomery, Alabama. She boarded a bus, took a seat in the “whites only” section, and refused to give it up. Her arrest for

 Joseph E. Lowery (b. 1923), a Methodist minister and civil rights activist in Mobile, Alabama, reﬂected on the powerful message of the 1955 Montgomery bus boycott for blacks:

“


 You see, what the bus thing did was simply more than withholding patronage from the bus; it was restoring a sense of dignity to the patrons, as best expressed by an oft-quoted black woman in Montgomery who said, ‘Since I’ve been walking, my feet are tired, but my soul’s rested.’ . . . [P]rior to the bus boycotts, the determination of our freedom rested with the courts. With the bus boycott, we determined it. . . . The court could say what it liked, we weren’t gon’ ride—in the back of the bus. We’d walk.

”


The Civil Rights Struggle


 violating the city’s Jim Crow statutes sparked a yearlong black boycott of city buses and served notice throughout the South that blacks would no longer submit meekly to the absurdities and indignities of segregation. The Montgomery bus boycott also catapulted to prominence a young pastor at Montgomery’s Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. Barely twenty-seven years old, King seemed an unlikely champion of the downtrodden and disfranchised. Raised in a prosperous black family in Atlanta and educated partly in the North, he had for most of his life been sheltered from the grossest cruelties of segregation. But his oratorical skill, his passionate devotion to biblical and constitutional conceptions of justice, and his devotion to the nonviolent principles of India’s Mohandas Gandhi were destined to thrust him to the forefront of the black revolution that would soon pulse across the South and the rest of the nation.

Seeds of the Civil Rights
Revolution
 When President Harry Truman heard about the lynching of black war veterans in 1946, he exclaimed, “My God! I had no idea it was as terrible as that.” The horriﬁed Truman responded by commissioning a report titled “To Secure These Rights.” Following the report’s recommendations, Truman in 1948 ended segregation in federal civil ser vice and ordered “equality of treatment and opportunity” in the armed forces. Yet Congress stubbornly resisted passing civil rights legislation, and Truman’s successor, Dwight Eisenhower, showed no real interest in racial issues. It was the Supreme Court that assumed political leadership in the civil rights struggle. Chief Justice Earl Warren, former governor of Cal ifornia, shocked traditionalists with his active judicial intervention in previously taboo social issues. Publicly snubbed and privately scorned by President Eisenhower, Warren courageously led the Court to address urgent issues that Congress and the president preferred to avoid, as “Impeach Earl Warren” signs blossomed along the nation’s highways. The unanimous decision of the Warren Court in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas in May 1954 was epochal. In a forceful opinion, the learned justices ruled that segregation in the public schools



 was “inherently unequal” and thus unconstitutional. The uncompromising sweep of the decision startled conser vatives like an exploding time bomb, for it reversed the Court’s earlier declaration of 1896 in Plessy v. Ferguson (see p. 547) that “separate but equal” facilities were allowable under the Constitution. That doctrine was now dead. Desegregation, the justices insisted, must go ahead with “all deliberate speed.” The Border States generally made reasonable efforts to comply with this ruling, but in the Deep South diehards orga nized “massive resistance” against the Court’s annulment of the sacred principle of “separate but equal.” More than a hundred southern congressional representatives and senators signed the “Declaration of Constitutional Principles” in 1956, pledging their unyielding resistance to desegregation. Several states diverted public funds to hastily created “private” schools, for there the integration order was more difﬁcult to apply. Throughout the South white citizens’ councils, sometimes with ﬁ re and hemp, thwarted attempts to make integration a reality. Ten years after the Court’s momentous ruling, fewer than 2 percent of the eligible blacks in the Deep South were sitting in classrooms with whites. President Eisenhower remained reluctant to promote integration. He shied away from employing his vast popularity and the prestige of his ofﬁce to educate white Americans about the need for racial justice. His personal attitudes may have helped to restrain him. He had grown up in an all-white town, spent his career in a segregated army, and advised against integration of the armed forces in 1948. He complained that the Supreme Court’s decision in Brown v. Board of Education had upset “the customs and convictions of at least two generations of Americans,” and he steadfastly refused to issue a public statement endorsing the Court’s conclusions. “I do not believe,” he explained, “that prejudices, even palpably unjustiﬁable prejudices, will succumb to compulsion.” But in September 1957, Ike was forced to act. Orval Faubus, the governor of Arkansas, mobilized the National Guard to prevent nine black students from enrolling in Little Rock’s Central High School. Confronted with a direct challenge to federal authority, Eisenhower sent troops to escort the children to their classes. In the same year, Congress passed the ﬁ rst Civil Rights Act since Reconstruction days. Eisenhower characteristically reassured a southern senator that the legislation represented “the mildest civil rights bill possible.” It set up a permanent Civil Rights Commission

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
The The Great Great African AfricanAmerican American Migration Migration 
T


 he great social upheavals of World War II continued to transform America well after the guns had fallen silent in 1945. Among the groups most affected by the war were African Americans. Predominantly a rural, southern people before 1940, African Americans were propelled by the war into the cities of the North and West, and by 1970 a majority lived outside the states of the old Confederacy. The results of that massive demographic shift were momentous, for African Americans and for all of American society. So many black southerners took to the roads during World War II that local ofﬁcials lost track of their numbers. Black workers on the move crowded into boardinghouses, camped out in cars, and clustered in the juke joints of roadside America en route to their new lives. Southern cotton ﬁelds and tobacco plantations had historically yielded slender sustenance to African American farmers, most of whom struggled to make ends meet as tenants or sharecroppers. The Great Depression dealt black southerners yet another blow, for when New Deal farm programs paid growers to leave their land fallow, many landlords simply pocketed the

The Migration of the Negro, by
Jacob Lawrence, 1940–1941
 Artist Jacob Lawrence depicted the migration of southern blacks to the North during and after World War II in a series of paintings. The ﬁrst panel of the series bears the description “During the World War there was a great migration north by southern Negroes.”



 money and evicted their tenants—white as well as black—from their now-idle ﬁelds. As the Depression deepened, dispossessed former tenants and sharecroppers toiled as seasonal farmworkers or languished without jobs, without shelter, and without hope. The spanking-new munitions plants and bustling shipyards of wartime America at ﬁrst offered little solace to African Americans, particularly in the South. In 1940 and 1941, the labor-hungry war machine soaked up unemployed white workers but commonly denied jobs to blacks. When the army constructed a training camp near Petersburg, Virginia, it imported white carpenters from all parts of the United States, rather than employ the hundreds of skilled black carpenters who lived nearby. Fed up with such injustices, many African Americans headed for shipyards, factories, foundries, and ﬁelds on the Paciﬁc Coast or north of the Mason-Dixon line, where their willing hands found more work awaiting them. Angered by the racism that was depriving their people of a fair share of jobs, black leaders cajoled President Roosevelt into issuing an executive order in June 1941 declaring that “there shall be no discrim-

 The Home Front Though often confronted by prejudice and discrimination, many African American migrants from the rural South found their ﬁrst industrial jobs in wartime defense plants during World War II.

 ination in the employment of workers in defense industries or government because of race, creed, color, or national origin.” Roosevelt’s action was a tenuous, hesitant step. Yet in its way Executive Order 8802 amounted to a second Emancipation Proclamation, as the federal government for the ﬁ rst time since Reconstruction had committed itself to ensuring justice for African Americans. The entire nation was now forced to face the evil of racism, as bloody wartime riots in Detroit, New York, Philadelphia, and other cities tragically demonstrated. But for the ﬁ rst time, large numbers of blacks secured a foothold in the industrial economy, and they were not about to give it up. By war’s end the great wartime exodus had scattered hundreds of thousands of African Americans to new regions and new ways of life—a second black diaspora comparable in its scale and consequence to the original black dispersal out of Africa. In the postwar decades, blacks continued to pour out of the South in search of economic opportunity and political freedom. In western and northern cities, blacks now com-

Detroit Race Riot, 1943
 from a streetcar.

 A black passenger is dragged

 peted for housing and jobs, and they also voted—many of them for the ﬁ rst time in their lives. As early as 1945, NAACP leader Walter White concluded that the war “immeasurably magniﬁed the Negro’s awareness of the disparity between the American profession and practice of democracy.” After the war, he predicted, African Americans would be “convinced that whatever betterment of their lot is achieved must come largely from their own efforts.” The wartime migration thus set the stage for the success of the civil rights movement that began to stir in the late 1940s and the 1950s. With their new political base outside the Old South, and with new support from the Democratic party, African Americans eventually forced an end to the hated segregationist practices that had kept them from enjoying full rights as citizens.





Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 Integration at Little Rock, 1957 While white mobs jeered at the ﬁrst black students entering Central High School, federal troops, with bayonets ﬁxed, enforced the law.

 to investigate violations of civil rights and authorized federal injunctions to protect voting rights. Blacks meanwhile continued to take the civil rights movement into their own hands. Martin Luther King, Jr., formed the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) in 1957. It aimed to mobilize the vast power of the black churches on behalf of black rights.

 This was an exceptionally shrewd strategy, because the churches were the largest and best-organized black institutions that had been allowed to ﬂourish in a segregated society. More spontaneous was the “sit-in” movement launched on February 1, 1960, by four black college freshmen in Greensboro, North Carolina. Without a

Martin Luther King, Jr., and His
Wife, Coretta, Arrested.
 King and his wife were arrested for the ﬁrst time in Montgomery, Alabama, in 1955 while organizing the bus boycott.

Undertaking Operation Wetback




 detailed plan or institutional support, they demanded ser vice at a whites-only Woolworth’s lunch counter. Observing that “fellows like you make our race look bad,” the black waitress refused to serve them. But they kept their seats and returned the next day with nineteen classmates. The following day, eighty-ﬁve students joined in; by the end of the week, a thousand. The sitin movement rolled swiftly across the South, swelling into a wave of wade-ins, lie-ins, and pray-ins to compel equal treatment in restaurants, transportation, employment, housing, and voter registration. In April 1960 southern black students formed the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC, pronounced “snick”) to give more focus and force to these efforts. Young and impassioned, SNCC members would eventually lose patience with the more stately tactics of the SCLC and the even more deliberate legalisms of the NAACP.

Eisenhower Republicanism
 at Home The balding, sixty-two-year-old General Eisenhower had entered the White House in 1953 pledging his administration to a philosophy of “dynamic conservatism.” “In all those things which deal with people, be liberal, be human,” he advised. But when it came to “people’s money, or their economy, or their form of government, be conser vative.” This balanced, middleof-the-road course harmonized with the depressiondaunted and war-weary mood of the times. Some critics called Eisenhower’s presidency a case of “the bland leading the bland.” Above all, Eisenhower strove to balance the federal budget and guard the Republic from what he called “creeping socialism.” The former supreme Allied commander put the brakes on Truman’s enormous military buildup, though defense spending still soaked up some 10 percent of the GNP. True to his smallgovernment philosophy, Eisenhower supported the transfer of control over offshore oil ﬁelds from the federal government to the states. Ike also tried to curb the TVA (see p. 839) by encouraging a private power company to build a generating plant to compete with the massive public utility spawned by the New Deal. Eisenhower’s secretary of health, education, and welfare condemned the free distribution of the Salk antipolio vaccine as “socialized medicine.” Eisenhower responded to the Mexican government’s worries that illegal Mexican immigration to the United States would undercut the bracero program

 Operation Wetback Thousands of illegal Mexican immigrants were forcibly repatriated to Mexico in the federal government’s 1954 roundup operation, which was promoted in part by the Mexican government. The man in this photograph is being pulled across the border by a Mexican ofﬁcial, while an American spectator tries to pull him back into the United States.

 of legally imported farmworkers inaugurated during World War II (see p. 881). In a massive roundup of il legal immigrants, dubbed Operation Wetback in reference to the migrants’ watery route across the Rio Grande, as many as 1 million Mexicans were apprehended and returned to Mexico in 1954. In yet another of the rude and arbitrary reversals that long have afﬂ icted the government’s relations with Native Americans, Eisenhower also sought to cancel the tribal preservation policies of the “Indian New Deal,” in place since 1934 (see p. 838). He proposed to “terminate” the tribes as legal entities and to revert to the assimilationist goals of the Dawes Severalty Act of 1887 (see p. 639). Most Indians resisted termination, and the policy was abandoned in 1961. Eisenhower obviously could not unscramble all the eggs that had been fried by New Dealers and Fair Dealers for twenty long years. He pragmatically accepted



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 and thereby legitimated many New Dealish programs, stitching them permanently into the fabric of American society. As he told his brother, “Should any political party attempt to abolish Social Security, unemployment insurance, and eliminate labor and farm programs, you would not hear of that party again in our political history.” In some ways Eisenhower even did the New Deal one better. In a public works project that dwarfed any thing the New Dealers had ever dreamed of, Ike backed the Federal Highway Act of 1956, a $27 billion plan to build forty-two thousand miles of sleek, fast motorways. The former general believed that such roads were essential to national defense, allowing U.S. troops to mobilize anywhere in the country in the event of a Soviet invasion. Beyond being a defense strategy, laying down these modern, multilane roads created countless construction jobs and speeded the suburbanization of

 America. The Highway Act offered juicy beneﬁts to the trucking, automobile, oil, and travel industries, while at the same time robbing the railroads, especially passenger trains, of business. The act also exacerbated problems of air quality and energy consumption, and had especially disastrous consequences for cities, whose once-vibrant downtowns withered away while shopping malls and other sites of leisure and consumption ﬂourished in the far-ﬂung suburbs.

A “New Look” in
Foreign Policy
 The 1952 Republican platform called for a “new look” in foreign policy. It condemned mere “containment” of communism as “negative, futile, and immoral.” Incoming secretary of state John Foster Dulles promised not

 Drive-in Movie Theater, Utah, 1958 Going to the movies became one more thing Americans could do in their cars in the 1950s. Here moviegoers watch Charlton Heston as Moses in the Academy Award–winning motion picture The Ten Commandments. It was the last ﬁlm made by famed director Cecil B. DeMille.

The Doctrine of Massive Retaliation


 merely to stem the red tide but to “roll back” its gains and “liberate captive peoples.” At the same time, the new administration promised to balance the budget by cutting military spending. How were these two contradictory goals to be reached? Dulles answered with a policy of boldness in early 1954. Eisenhower would relegate the army and the navy to the backseat and build up an airﬂeet of superbombers (called the Strategic Air Command, or SAC) equipped with city-ﬂattening nuclear bombs. These fearsome weapons would inﬂ ict “massive retaliation” on the Soviets or the Chinese if they got out of hand. The advantages of this new policy were thought



 to be its paralyzing nuclear impact and its cheaper price tag when compared with conventional forces— “more bang for the buck.” At the same time, Eisenhower sought a thaw in the Cold War through negotiations with the new Soviet leaders who came to power after dictator Joseph Stalin’s death in 1953. In the end, the touted “new look” proved illusory. A new Soviet premier, the burly apparatchik Nikita Khrushchev, rudely rejected Ike’s call in 1955 for an “open skies” mutual inspection program over both the Soviet Union and the United States. In 1956 the Hungarians rose up against their Soviet masters and felt badly betrayed when the United States turned a deaf ear to their desperate appeals for aid. The brutally crushed Hungarian uprising revealed the sobering truth that America’s mighty nuclear sledgehammer was too heavy a weapon to wield in such a relatively minor crisis. The rigid futility of the “massive retaliation” doctrine was thus starkly exposed. To his dismay, Eisenhower also discovered that the aerial and atomic hardware necessary for “massive retaliation” was staggeringly expensive.

The Vietnam Nightmare


Hungarian Uprising, October 26, 1956
 Soviet tanks rolled through the streets of Budapest to crush an anticommunist uprising against the Soviets, who had controlled Hungary since World War II. This demonstration of brute force against a grassroots democratic movement turned many communist sympathizers in the West deﬁnitively against the Soviet Union.

 Western Europe, thanks to the Marshall Plan and NATO, seemed reasonably secure by the early 1950s, but Southeast Asia was a different can of worms. In Vietnam and elsewhere, nationalist movements had sought for years to throw off the yoke of French colonial rule. The legendary Vietnamese leader, goateed Ho Chi Minh, had tried to appeal personally to Woodrow Wilson in Paris as early as 1919 to support selfdetermination for the peoples of Southeast Asia. Franklin Roosevelt had likewise inspired hope among Asian nationalists. But Cold War events dampened the dreams of anticolonial Asian peoples. Their leaders—including Ho Chi Minh—became increasingly communist while the United States became increasingly anticommunist. By 1954 American taxpayers were ﬁnancing nearly 80 percent of the costs of a bottomless French colonial war in Indochina. The United States’ share amounted to about $1 billion a year. Despite this massive aid, French forces continued to crumble under pressure from Ho Chi Minh’s nationalist guerrilla forces, called the Viet Minh. In March 1954 a key French garrison was trapped hopelessly in the fortress of Dien Bien Phu in the northwestern corner of Vietnam. The new “policy of boldness” was now



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960




500 1,000 Km.






1,000 Mi.


40°N


NORTH KOREA SOUTH KOREA

 undertook certain social reforms. Change came at a snail’s pace, but American aid continued, as communist guerrillas heated up their campaign against Diem. The Americans had evidently backed a losing horse but could see no easy way to call off their bet.

 JAPAN

Shanghai


PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

Cold War Crises in Europe
 and the Middle East

INDIA
Okinawa 
 BURMA

Tropic of Cancer
TAIWAN
Hong Kong (Nationalist China) (Gr. Br.) 20°N 
Hanoi
LAOS NORTH VIETNAM

Seventeenth Parallel
 THAILAND

 INDOCHINA

 CAMBODIA

SOUTH VIETNAM

Saigon


South
China
Sea


PAC I F IC OCEAN PHILIPPINES

N


M A L AYA
(Gr. Br.)


Singapore
(Gr. Br.)
100°E


 INDONESIA

BORNEO 120°E

Map 37.2 East and Southeast Asia, 1955–1956
Interactive Map


 put to the test. Secretary Dulles, Vice President Nixon, and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff favored intervention with American bombers to help bail out the beleaguered French. But Eisenhower, wary about another war in Asia so soon after Korea and correctly fearing British nonsupport, held back. The Battle of Dien Bien Phu proved a victory for the nationalists, and a multination conference in Geneva roughly halved Vietnam at the seventeenth parallel (see Map 37.2). The victorious Ho Chi Minh in the north consented to this arrangement on the assurance that Vietnam-wide elections would be held within two years. In the south a pro-Western government under Ngo Dinh Diem was soon entrenched at Saigon. The Vietnamese never held the promised elections, primarily because the communists seemed certain to win, and Vietnam remained a dangerously divided country. The United States did not sign the Geneva accords, though Eisenhower promised economic and military aid to the autocratic Diem regime, provided that it

 The United States had initially backed the French in Indochina in part to win French approval of a plan to rearm West Germany. Despite French fears, the Germans were ﬁ nally welcomed into the NATO fold in 1955, with an expected contribution of half a million troops. In the same year, the Eastern European countries and the Soviets signed the Warsaw Pact, creating a red military counterweight to the newly bolstered NATO forces in the West. Despite these hardening military lines, the Cold War seemed to be thawing a bit in 1955. In May the Soviets rather surprisingly agreed to end their occupation of Austria. A summit conference in Geneva in July produced little progress on the burning issues, but it bred a conciliatory “spirit of Geneva” that caused a modest blush of optimism to pass over the face of the Western world. Hopes rose further the following year when Soviet Communist party boss Khrushchev publicly denounced the bloody excesses of Joseph Stalin, the dictator dead since 1953. Violent events late in 1956 ended the post-Geneva lull. When the liberty-loving Hungarians struck for their freedom, they were ruthlessly overpowered by Soviet tanks, while the Western world looked on in horror. Fears of Soviet penetration into the oil-rich Middle East further heightened Cold War tensions. The government of Iran, supposedly inﬂuenced by the Kremlin, began to resist the power of the gigantic Western companies that controlled Iranian petroleum. In response, the American Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) helped to engineer a coup in 1953 that installed the youthful shah of Iran, Mohammed Reza Pahlevi, as a kind of dictator. Though successful in the short run in securing Iranian oil for the West, the American intervention left a bitter legacy of resentment among many Iranians. More than two decades later, they took their revenge on the shah and his American al lies (see pp. 1025–1027). The Suez crisis proved far messier than the swift stroke in Iran. President Nasser of Egypt, an ardent

Problems in the Middle East




Egyptian President Gamal Abdel
 Nasser, 1954 Shown here greeting exuberant supporters after his election as the ﬁrst president of the new Egyptian republic, Nasser was long a thorn in the ﬂesh of American and European policymakers anxious to protect the precious oil resources of the Middle East. “Nassarism,” his version of pan-Arabism, won a great following in the Arab world during the 1950s and 1960s.

 Arab nationalist, was seeking funds to build an immense dam on the upper Nile for urgently needed irrigation and power. America and Britain tentatively offered ﬁ nancial help, but when Nasser began to ﬂ irt openly with the communist camp, Secretary of State Dulles dramatically withdrew the dam offer. Nasser promptly regained face by nationalizing the Suez Canal, owned chieﬂy by British and French stockholders. Nasser’s action placed a razor’s edge at the jugular vein of Western Europe’s oil supply. America’s jittery French and British allies, deliberately keeping Washington in the dark and coordinating their blow with one from Israel, staged a joint assault on Egypt late in October 1956. For a breathless week, the world teetered on the edge of the abyss. The French and British, however, had made a fatal miscalculation—that the United States would supply them with oil while their Middle Eastern supplies were disrupted, as an oil-rich Uncle Sam had done in the two world wars. But to their unpleasant surprise, a furious President Eisenhower resolved to let them “boil in their own oil” and refused to release emergency supplies. The oilless allies resentfully withdrew their troops, and for the ﬁ rst time in history, a United Nations police force was sent to maintain order.

 The Suez crisis also marked the last time in history that the United States could brandish its “oil weapon.” As recently as 1940, the United States had produced two-thirds of the world’s oil, while a scant 5 percent of the global supply ﬂowed from the Middle East. But by 1948 the United States had become a net oil importer. Its days as an “oil power” clearly were numbered as the economic and strategic importance of the Middle East oil region grew dramatically. The U.S. president and Congress proclaimed the Eisenhower Doctrine in 1957, pledging U.S. military and economic aid to Middle Eastern nations threatened by communist aggression. The real threat to U.S. interests in the Middle East, however, was not com munism but nationalism, as Nasser’s wild popularity among the masses of all Arab countries demonstrated. The poor, sandy sheikdoms increasingly resolved to reap for themselves the lion’s share of the enormous oil wealth that Western companies pumped out of the scorching Middle Eastern deserts. In a portentous move, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq, and Iran joined with Venezuela in 1960 to form the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). In the next two decades, OPEC’s stranglehold on the Western economies would tighten to a degree that even Nasser could not have imagined.



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


Round Two for Ike
 The election of 1956 was a replay of the 1952 contest, with President Eisenhower pitted once more against Adlai Stevenson. The Democrats were hard-pressed to ﬁ nd issues with which to attack the genial general in a time of prosperity and peace, and the voters made it clear that they still liked Ike. Eisenhower piled up an enormous majority of 35,590,472 popular votes to Stevenson’s 26,022,752; in the Electoral College, the count was even more unbalanced at 457 for Republicans to 73 for Democrats. Eisenhower made deeper inroads into the traditional bastion of Democratic strength, the once-solid South, than he had in 1952. Louisiana went Republican for the ﬁ rst time since 1876, during Reconstruction days. But the general’s coattails were

The Helicopter Era, 1957 President Eisenhower was
 routinely criticized by liberals, as in this Herblock cartoon in the Washington Post, for his apparent indifference to many seething social problems of the day. His failure to employ his vast prestige on behalf of civil rights was especially conspicuous.

 not so stiff or broad as in 1952. He failed to win for his party either house of Congress—the ﬁ rst time since Zachary Taylor’s election in 1848 that a winning president had headed such a losing ticket. In fragile health, Eisenhower began his second term as a part-time president. Critics charged that he kept his hands on his golf clubs, ﬂy rod, and shotgun more often than on the levers of power. But in his last years in ofﬁce, Ike rallied himself to do less golﬁng and more governing. A key area in which the president bestirred himself was labor legislation. Congressional investigations produced scandalous revelations of gangsterism, fraud, and brass-knuckles tactics in many American unions, especially the Teamsters. The AF of L–CIO, born of a merger of the two giants in 1955, expelled the Teamsters in 1957 for choosing leaders like two-ﬁsted James R. “Jimmy” Hoffa. Convicted of jury tampering, Hoffa served part of his sentence before disappearing without a trace—evidently the victim of gangsters he had crossed. To counter such corruption, Eisenhower persuaded Congress to pass the Landrum-Grifﬁ n Act in 1959. The act was designed to bring labor leaders to book for ﬁ nancial shenanigans and bullying tactics, but it also expanded some of the antilabor strictures of the earlier Taft-Hartley Act (see p. 910). Soviet scientists astounded the world on October 4, 1957, by lofting into orbit around the globe a beep-beeping “baby moon” (Sputnik I) weighing 184 pounds. A month later they topped their own ace by sending aloft a larger satellite (Sputnik II) weighing 1,120 pounds and carrying a dog. This amazing breakthrough rattled American selfconﬁdence. It cast doubts on America’s vaunted scientiﬁc superiority and raised some sobering military questions. If the Soviets could ﬁ re heavy objects into outer space, they certainly could reach America with intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs). “Rocket fever” swept the nation. Eisenhower established the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and directed billions of dollars to missile development. After humiliating and well-advertised failures—notably the Vanguard missile, which blew up on national television just a few feet above the ground in 1957—in February 1958 the United States managed to put into orbit a grapefruit-sized satellite weighing 2.5 pounds. By the end of the decade, several satellites had been launched, and the United States had successfully tested its own ICBMs. The Sputnik success led to a critical comparison of the American educational system, which was already

 Competing with the Soviets



 under ﬁ re as too easygoing, with that of the Soviet Union. A strong move now developed in the United States to replace “frills” with solid subjects—to substitute square roots for square dancing. Congress rejected demands for federal scholarships, but late in 1958 the National Defense and Education Act (NDEA) authorized $887 million in loans to needy college students and in grants for the improvement of teaching the sciences and languages.

The Continuing Cold War
 The fantastic race toward nuclear annihilation continued unabated. Humanity-minded scientists urged that nuclear tests be stopped before the at mosphere became so polluted as to produce generations of deformed mutants. The Soviets, after completing an intensive series of exceptionally “dirty” tests, proclaimed a suspension in March 1958 and urged the Western world to follow. Beginning in October 1958, Washington did halt both underground and atmospheric testing. But attempts to regularize such suspensions by proper inspection sank on the reef of mutual mistrust. Thermonuclear suicide seemed nearer in July 1958, when both Egyptian and communist plottings threatened to engulf Western-oriented Lebanon. After its president had called for aid under the Eisenhower Doctrine, the United States boldly landed several thousand troops and helped restore order without taking a single life. The burly Khrushchev, seeking new propaganda laurels, was eager to meet with Eisenhower and pave the way for a “summit conference” with Western leaders. Despite grave misgivings as to any tangible results, the president invited him to America in 1959. Arriving in New York, Khrushchev appeared before the U.N. General Assembly and dramatically resurrected the ancient Soviet proposal of complete disarmament. But he offered no practical means of achieving this end. A result of this tour was a meeting at Camp David, the presidential retreat in Maryland. Khrushchev emerged saying that his ultimatum for the evacuation of Berlin would be extended indeﬁ nitely. The relieved world gave prayerful but premature thanks for the “spirit of Camp David.” The Camp David spirit quickly evaporated when the follow-up Paris “summit conference,” scheduled for May 1960, turned out to be an incredible ﬁasco. Both Moscow and Washington had taken a ﬁ rm stand on the

 What’s So Funny? 1960 Premier Khrushchev gloats over Ike’s spying discomﬁture.

 burning Berlin issue, and neither could risk backing down publicly. Then, on the eve of the conference, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down deep in the heart of Russia. After bungling bureaucratic denials in Washington, “honest Ike” took the unprecedented step of assuming personal responsibility. Khrushchev stormed into Paris ﬁ lling the air with invective, and the conference collapsed before it could get off the ground. The concord of Camp David was replaced with the grapes of wrath.

 Cuba’s Castroism Spells Communism Latin Americans bitterly resented Uncle Sam’s lavishing of billions of dollars on Europe, while doling out only millions to its poor relations to the south. They also chafed at Washington’s continuing habit of intervening in Latin American affairs—as in a CIA-directed coup that ousted a leftist government in Guatemala in



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 1954. On the other hand, Washington continued to support—even decorate—bloody dictators who claimed to be combating communists. Most ominous of all was the communist beachhead in Cuba. Ironﬁsted dictator Fulgencio Batista, in power since the 1930s, had encouraged huge investments of American capital, and Washington in turn had given him some support. But early in 1959, blackbearded Fidel Castro engineered a revolution that ousted Batista. Castro then denounced the Yankee imperialists and began to expropriate valuable American properties in pursuing a land-distribution program. Washington, ﬁ nally losing patience, released Cuba from “imperialistic slavery” by cutting off the heavy U.S. imports of Cuban sugar. Castro retaliated with further wholesale conﬁscations of Yankee property and in effect made his left-wing dictatorship an economic and military satellite of Moscow, to the Kremlin’s delighted surprise. An exodus of anti-Castro Cubans headed for the United States, especially Florida. Nearly 1 million arrived between 1960 and 2000. Washington broke diplomatic relations with Castro’s government early in 1961 and imposed a strict embargo on trade with Cuba. Strengthened by the HelmsBurton Act in 1996, the embargo has remained in place, even since Castro’s departure from power in 2008. Americans talked seriously of invoking the Monroe Doctrine before the Soviets set up a communist base only ninety miles from their shores. Khrushchev angrily proclaimed that the Monroe Doctrine was dead and indicated that he would shower missiles upon the United States if it attacked his new friend Castro.

 was patrician Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., of Massachusetts (grandson of Woodrow Wilson’s arch-foe). By contrast, the Democratic race for the presidential nomination started as a free-for-all. John F. Kennedy—a youthful, dark-haired millionaire senator from Massachusetts—won impressive victories in the primaries. He then scored a ﬁ rst-ballot triumph in Los Angeles over his closest rival, Senator Lyndon B. Johnson, the Senate majority leader from Texas. A disappointed South was not completely appeased when Johnson accepted second place on the ticket in an eleventh-hour marriage of convenience. Kennedy’s challenging acceptance speech called upon the American people for sacriﬁces to achieve their potential greatness, which he hailed as the New Frontier. Bigotry inevitably showed its snarling face. Senator Kennedy was a Roman Catholic, the ﬁ rst to be nominated since Al Smith’s ill-starred campaign in 1928.

Kennedy Challenges Nixon
 for the Presidency Republicans approached the presidential campaign of 1960 with Vice President Nixon as their heir apparent. To many he was a gifted party leader, to others a ruthless opportunist. The “old” Nixon had been a no-holds-barred campaigner, adept at skewering Democrats and left-wingers. The “new” Nixon was represented as a mature, seasoned statesman. He had gained particular notice in a ﬁ nger-pointing kitchen debate with Khrushchev in Moscow in 1959, where Nixon extolled the virtues of American consumerism over Soviet economic planning. The next year he handily won the Republican nomination. His running mate

John F. Kennedy Campaigning for the Presidency,
 1960 At right is his wife, Jacqueline Kennedy.

The Kennedy-Nixon Contest


WA MT

OR ID NV CA

 ND

 WY

 CO

 NM

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 AZ

 MN

 SD

KS OK R-7/I-1

 TX

 IL

 MI

 LA

 OH

 IN

MO AR

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 16 RI PA NJ CT 4 16 8 WV

 KY

 NC

TN AL MS I-6/D-5

 VA

 GA

DE MD

 SC

 FL

 AK

 HI

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Kennedy (Democrat)




56.50%


34,266,731


49.7%


Nixon (Republican)




40.75%


34,108,157


49.5%


Byrd (Independent)




2.75%


501,643


0.7%


 Smear artists revived the ancient charges about the Pope’s controlling the White House. Kennedy pointed to his fourteen years of ser vice in Congress, denied that he would be swayed by Rome, and asked if some 40 million Catholic Americans were to be condemned to second-class citizenship from birth. Kennedy’s Catholicism aroused misgivings in the Protestant, Bible Belt South, which was ordinarily Democratic. “I fear Catholicism more than I fear communism,” declaimed one Baptist minister in North

 Candidate John F. Kennedy (1917–1963), in a speech to a Houston group of Protestant ministers (September 12, 1960), declared,

“


 I believe in an America where the separation of church and state is absolute— where no Catholic prelate would tell the President, should he be a Catholic, how to act, and no Protestant minister would tell his parishioners for whom to vote . . . and where no man is denied public ofﬁce because his religion differs from the President who might appoint him or the people who might elect him.

”




 Map 37.3 Presidential Election of 1960 (with electoral vote by state) Kennedy owed his hairbreadth triumph to his victories in twenty-six of the forty largest cities— and to Lyndon Johnson’s strenuous campaigning in the South, where Kennedy’s Catholicism may have been a hotter issue than his stand on civil rights. Interactive Map

 Carolina. But the religious issue largely canceled itself out. If many southern Democrats stayed away from the polls because of Kennedy’s Catholicism, northern Democrats in unusually large numbers supported Kennedy because of the bitter attacks on their Catholic faith. Kennedy charged that the Soviets, with their nuclear bombs and circling Sputniks, had gained on America in prestige and power. Nixon retorted that the nation’s prestige had not slipped, although Kennedy was causing it to do so by his unpatriotic talk. Television may well have tipped the scales. Nixon agreed to meet Kennedy in four so-called debates. The contestants crossed words in millions of living rooms before audiences estimated at 60 million or more. Nobody “won” the debates. But Kennedy at least held his own and did not suffer by comparison with the more “experienced” Nixon. The debates once again demonstrated the importance of image over substance in the television age. Many viewers found Kennedy’s glamour and vitality far more appealing than Nixon’s tired and pallid appearance. Kennedy squeezed through by the rather comfortable margin of 303 electoral votes to 219,* but with the breathtakingly close popular margin of only 118,574 votes out of over 68 million cast (see Map 37.3). He was the ﬁ rst Roman Catholic and the youngest person to date to be elected president. Like Franklin Roosevelt, Kennedy ran well in the large industrial centers, where he had strong support from workers, Catholics, and African Americans. (He had solicitously telephoned the pregnant Coretta King, whose husband, Martin Luther King, Jr., was then imprisoned in Georgia for a sit-in.) Although losing a few seats, the Democrats also swept both houses of Congress by wide margins.

 *Six Democratic electors in Alabama, all eight unpledged Democratic electors in Mississippi, and one Republican elector in Oklahoma voted for Senator Harry F. Byrd, who ran as an independent.



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


An Old General Fades Away
 President Eisenhower continued to enjoy extraordinary popularity to the ﬁ nal curtain. Despite Democratic jibes about “eight years of golﬁng and gooﬁng,” of “putting and puttering,” Eisenhower was universally admired and respected for his dignity, decency, sincerity, goodwill, and moderation. Pessimists had predicted that Eisenhower would be a seriously crippled “lame duck” during his second term, owing to the barrier against reelection erected by the Twenty-second Amendment, ratiﬁed in 1951. (See the Appendix.) In truth, he displayed more vigor, more political know-how, and more aggressive leadership during his last two years as president than ever before. For an unprecedented six years, from 1955 to 1961, Congress remained in Democratic hands, yet Eisenhower exerted unusual control over the legislative branch. He wielded the veto 169 times, and only twice was his nay overridden by the required twothirds vote. America was fabulously prosperous in the Eisenhower years, despite pockets of poverty and unemployment, recurrent recessions, and perennial farm problems. To the north the vast St. Lawrence waterway project, constructed jointly with Canada and completed in 1959, had turned the cities of the Great Lakes into bustling ocean seaports. “Old Glory” could now proudly display ﬁ fty stars. Alaska attained statehood in 1959, as did Hawaii. Alaska, though gigantic, was thinly populated and noncontiguous, but these objections were overcome in a Democratic Congress that expected Alaska to vote Democratic. Hawaii had ample population (largely of Asian descent), advanced democratic institutions, and more acreage than the mainland states of Rhode Island, Delaware, or Connecticut. As the ﬁ rst noncontiguous states to join the Union, Alaska and Hawaii helped turn America’s face toward the Paciﬁc and East Asia. Though a crusading general, Eisenhower as president mounted no moral crusade for civil rights. This was perhaps his greatest failing. Yet he was no bigot, and he had done far more than grin away problems and tread water. As a Republican president, he had further woven the reforms of the Democratic New Deal and Fair Deal into the fabric of national life. As a former general, he had exercised wise restraint in his use of military power and had soberly guided foreign policy away from countless threats to peace. The old soldier left ofﬁce crestfallen at his failure to end the

 After campaigning with promises to reduce the defense budget, President Dwight Eisenhower (1890–1969) presided over unprecedented increases in military spending. In his Farewell Address on January 17, 1961, he sagely but ironically warned against the menace his own policies had nurtured:

“


 This conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the American experience. . . . In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted inﬂuence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex.

”


 arms race with the Soviets. Yet he had ended one war and avoided all others. As the decades lengthened, appreciation of him grew.

The Life of the Mind
 in Postwar America America’s afﬂuence in the heady post–World War II decades was matched by a mother lode of literary gems. In ﬁction writing some of the prewar realists continued to ply their trade, notably Ernest Hemingway in The Old Man and the Sea (1952). A Nobel laureate in 1954, Hemingway was dead by his own duck gun in 1961. John Steinbeck, another prewar writer who persisted in graphic portrayals of American society, such as East of Eden (1952) and Travels with Charley (1962), received the Nobel Prize for literature in 1962, the seventh American to be so honored. Curiously, World War II did not inspire the same kind of literary outpouring that World War I had. Searing realism, the trademark style of war writers in the 1920s, characterized the earliest novels that portrayed soldierly life in World War II, such as Norman Mailer’s The Naked and the Dead (1948) and James Jones’s From Here to Eternity (1951). James Gould Cozzens delivered what is often considered the ﬁ nest American war novel in Guard of Honor (1948), the story of a colonel on a Florida army base struggling with how to balance the claims of black ofﬁcers for racial equality with his duty to keep the base operating smoothly in wartime. But as time passed, realistic writ-

The Shopping Mall as New Town Square, 1960
 n this photograph, Democratic presidential candidate John F. Kennedy is shown campaigning at the Bergen Mall in Paramus, New Jersey, in 1960. The Bergen Mall opened in 1957, at a time when similar shopping centers were popping up in suburbanizing metropolitan areas all over the United States. Real estate developers watched Americans ﬂee cities for suburbs, and they followed the money, locating shopping centers strategically at new highway intersections or along the busiest thoroughfares. As suburbanites increasingly found branches of their favorite department and chain stores closer to home during the 1950s and 1960s, they found it less and less necessary to go downtown. Shopping centers for their part went out of their way to sell themselves as modern-style downtowns worthy of being the public core of new suburban communities, even though legally they were privately owned space. They provided the full range of shops and ser vices once found in city centers, including restaurants, post

I


 ofﬁces, Laundromats, banks, and even chapels. They offered entertainment, from movie theaters and skating rinks to free open-air concerts, carnivals, and exhibitions. They made auditoriums available for community meetings. And they attracted public events like Kennedy on the stump. Just four years earlier, a regional shopping center would have been a rare campaign stop for a presidential candidate. Look closely at this photograph. What kind of audience greeted candidate Kennedy at the Bergen Mall? How different might the crowd have looked in a more socially diverse urban center like Manhattan or in nearby Newark, the largest city in New Jersey at the time? What did it mean for sites of consumption, such as privately owned shopping centers, to take on the roles and responsibilities previously associated with urban streets, squares, and parks? How might current struggles of downtown merchants against big-box chain stores like Wal-Mart be related to this history?





Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 Ernest Hemingway (1899–1961) Celebrated both for his writing and his colorful, swashbuckling lifestyle, Hemingway poses here with a dead leopard in 1953.

 ing fell from favor. Authors tended increasingly to write about the war in fantastic and even psychedelic prose. Joseph Heller’s Catch-22 (1961) dealt with the improbable antics and anguish of American airmen in the wartime Mediterranean. A savage satire, it made readers hurt when they laughed. The supercharged imagination of Kurt Vonnegut, Jr., poured forth works of puzzling complexity in sometimes impenetrably inventive prose, including the dark comedy war tale Slaughterhouse Five (1969). The dilemmas created by the new mobility and afﬂuence of American life were explored by Pennsylvania-born John Updike in books like Rabbit, Run (1960) and Couples (1968), and by Massachusetts-bred John Cheever in The Wapshot Chronicle (1957) and The Wapshot Scandal (1964). Louis Auchincloss wrote elegantly about upper-class New Yorkers. Gore Vidal penned a series of intriguing historical novels, as well as several impish and always iconoclastic works, in-

 cluding Myra Breckinridge (1968), about a reincarnated transsexual. Together these writers constituted the rear guard of an older, WASP (white Angle-Saxon Protestant) elite that had long dominated American writing. Poetry also ﬂowered in the postwar era, though poets were often highly critical, even deeply despairing, about the character of American life. Older poets were still active, including cantankerous Ezra Pound, jailed after the war in a U.S. Army detention center near Pisa, Italy, for alleged collaboration with the Fascists. Connecticut insurance executive Wallace Stevens and New Jersey pediatrician William Carlos Williams continued after 1945 to pursue second careers as proliﬁc poets of world-class stature. But younger poets were coming to the fore during the postwar period. Paciﬁc northwesterner Theodore Roethke wrote lyrically about the land until his death by drowning in Puget Sound in 1963. Robert Lowell, descended from a long line of patrician New Eng landers, sought to apply the wisdom of the Puritan past to the perplexing present in allegorical poems like For the Union Dead (1964). Troubled Sylvia Plath crafted the moving verses of Ariel (published posthumously in 1966) and a disturbing novel, The Bell Jar (1963), but her career was cut short when she took her own life in 1963. Anne Sexton produced brooding autobiographical poems until her death by apparent suicide in 1974. Another brilliant poet of the period, John Berryman, ended it all in 1972 by leaping from a Minneapolis bridge onto the frozen bank of the Mississippi River. Writing poetry seemed to be a dangerous pursuit in modern America. The life of the poet, it was said, began in sadness and ended in madness. Playwrights were also active. Tennessee Williams wrote a series of searing dramas about psychological misﬁts struggling to hold themselves together amid the disintegrating forces of modern life. Noteworthy were A Streetcar Named Desire (1947) and Cat on a Hot Tin Roof (1955). Arthur Miller brought to the stage searching probes of American values, notably Death of a Salesman (1949) and The Crucible (1953), which treated the Salem witch trials as a dark parable warning against the dangers of McCarthyism. Lorraine Hansberry offered an affecting portrait of African American life in A Raisin in the Sun (1959). In the 1960s Edward Albee exposed the rapacious underside of middleclass life in Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (1962). Books by black authors also made the best-seller lists, beginning with Richard Wright’s chilling portrait of a black Chicago killer in Native Son (1940). Ralph Ellison depicted the African American’s searing quest

Postwar American Literature


 Death of a Salesman First performed in 1949, Arthur Miller’s play probed the psychic costs of failure in a society that held out the promise of “success” to all. The play especially resonated with audiences in the booming 1950s and quickly took its place as an American classic. This scene from the original Broadway production shows Arthur Kennedy as Biff Loman (left) confronting his father, Willy, played by Lee J. Cobb (seated), while his brother, Happy, portrayed by Cameron Mitchell, looks on. Not shown here is Willy’s compassionate wife, Linda, brilliantly acted by Mildred Dunnock.

 for personal identity in Invisible Man (1952), a haunting novel narrated by a nameless black person who ﬁ nds that none of his supposed supporters—white philanthropists, black nationalists, and Communist party members—can see him as a real man. James Baldwin won plaudits as a novelist and essayist, particularly for his sensitive reﬂections on the racial question in The Fire Next Time (1963). Black nationalist LeRoi



 Jones, who changed his name to Imamu Amiri Baraka, crafted powerful plays like Dutchman (1964). The South boasted a literary renaissance, led by veteran Mississippi author William Faulkner, who was a Nobel recipient in 1950. Fellow Mississippians Walker Percy and Eudora Welty grasped the falling torch from the failing Faulkner, who died in 1962. Tennessean Robert Penn Warren immortalized Louisiana politico Huey Long in All the King’s Men (1946). Flannery O’Connor wrote perceptively of her native Georgia, and Virginian William Styron confronted the harsh history of his home state in a controversial ﬁctional representation of an 1831 slave rebellion, The Confessions of Nat Turner (1967). Especially bountiful was the harvest of books by Jewish novelists. Some critics quipped that a knowledge of Yiddish was becoming necessary to understand much of the dialogue presented in modern American novels. J. D. Salinger painted an unforgettable portrait of a sensitive, upper-class, Anglo-Saxon adolescent in The Catcher in the Rye (1951), but other Jewish writers found their favorite subject matter in the experience of lower- and middle-class Jewish immigrants. Bernard Malamud rendered a touching portrait of a family of New York Jewish storekeepers in The Assistant (1957). Malamud also explored the mythic qualities of the culture of baseball in The Natural (1952). Philip Roth wrote comically about young New Jersey suburbanites in Goodbye, Columbus (1959) and penned an uproarious account of a sexually obsessed middleaged New Yorker in Portnoy’s Complaint (1969). Chicagoan Saul Bellow contributed masterful sketches of Jewish urban and literary life in landmark books like The Adventures of Augie March (1953) and Herzog (1962). Bellow became the eighth American Nobel laureate for literature in 1977. Isaac Bashevis Singer immigrated to America from Poland in the 1930s and continued to write in Yiddish. He won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1978. E. L. Doctorow employed Old Testament themes in his ﬁctional account of atomic spies Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, The Book of Daniel (1971), and later he imaginatively recast other modern historical materials in books like Ragtime (1975), World’s Fair (1985), and Billy Bathgate (1989).



Chapter 37 The Eisenhower Era, 1952–1960


 CHRONOLOGY

 Eisenhower defeats Stevenson for presidency Ellison publishes Invisible Man



 CIA-engineered coup installs shah of Iran Joseph Stalin dies



 French defeated at Dien Bien Phu in Vietnam Army-McCarthy hearings Brown v. Board of Education Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) formed Nasser becomes prime minister of Egypt CIA-sponsored coup in Guatemala





 Montgomery bus boycott by blacks begins; emergence of Martin Luther King, Jr. Geneva summit meeting on Vietnam Soviet Union withdraws troops from Austria Warsaw Pact signed AF of L merges with CIO Tennessee Williams’s Cat on a Hot Tin Roof ﬁ rst performed



 Little Rock school desegregation crisis Civil Rights Act passed Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) formed Eisenhower Doctrine Soviet Union launches Sputnik satellites



 U.S. troops sent to Lebanon NDEA authorizes loans and grants for science and language education Galbraith publishes The Afﬂuent Society

1958–


 Berlin crisis



 Castro seizes power in Cuba Landrum-Grifﬁ n Act Alaska and Hawaii attain statehood



 Sit-in movement for civil rights begins U-2 incident sabotages Paris summit OPEC formed Kennedy defeats Nixon for presidency

 Soviets crush Hungarian revolt Suez crisis Eisenhower defeats Stevenson for presidency Mills publishes The Power Elite

KEY TERMS
The Feminine Mystique (945) rock ’n’ roll (947) Checkers Speech (948) McCarthyism (950) Army-McCarthy hearings (951) Jim Crow (951) Montgomery bus boycott (953) Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas (953) Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) (957) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Operation Wetback (957) Federal Highway Act of 1956 (958) policy of boldness (959) Hungarian uprising (959) Dien Bien Phu, Battle of (960) Suez crisis (960) Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) (961) Sputnik (962) kitchen debate (964) 
Dwight D. (“Ike)
Eisenhower
Richard M. Nixon
Betty Friedan
Elvis Presley
 Joseph McCarthy Rosa Parks Martin Luther King, Jr.

Earl Warren
John Foster Dulles
Nikita Khrushchev
Ho Chi Minh
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Fidel Castro
John F. Kennedy
Lyndon B. Johnson


To Learn More




To Learn More
Glenn Altschuler, All Shook Up: How Rock ’N’ Roll Changed
America (2003)
Stephen Ambrose, Eisenhower: The President (1984)
Lizabeth Cohen, A Consumers’ Republic: The Politics of
Mass Consumption in Postwar America (2003)
Mary Dudziak, Cold War Civil Rights (2000)
John Egerton, Speak Now Against the Day: The Generation
Before the Civil Rights Movement in the South (1994)
Tom Engelhardt, The End of Victory Culture (1995)
 Melvyn Lefﬂer, For the Soul of Mankind: The United States, the Soviet Union, and the Cold War (2007)

Elaine May, Homeward Bound: American Families in the
Cold War Era 1988)
Thomas Sugrue, Origins of the Urban Crisis: Race and
Inequality in Postwar Detroit (1992)
Theodore White, Making of the President, 1960 (1961)
 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Stormy Sixties





1960–1968
 Let the word go forth from this time and place, to friend and foe alike, that the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans. JOHN F. KENNEDY, INAUGURAL, 1961

C


 omplacent and comfortable as the 1950s closed, Americans elected in 1960 a young, vigorous president who pledged “to get the country moving again.” Neither the nation nor the new president had any inkling as the new decade opened just how actionpacked it would be, both at home and abroad. The 1960s would bring a sexual revolution, a civil rights revolution, the emergence of a “youth culture,” a devastating war in Vietnam, and the beginnings, at least, of a feminist revolution. By the end of the stormy sixties, many Americans would yearn nostalgically for the comparative calm of the ﬁ fties.

 Kennedy’s “New Frontier” Spirit Hatless and topcoatless in the twenty-two-degree chill, John F. Kennedy delivered a stirring inaugural address on January 20, 1961. Tall, elegantly handsome, speaking crisply and with staccato ﬁ nger jabs at the air, Kennedy personiﬁed the glamour and vitality of

 the new administration. The youngest president ever elected, he assembled one of the youngest cabinets, including his thirty-ﬁve-year-old brother, Robert F. Kennedy, as attorney general. “Bobby,” the president quipped, would ﬁ nd “some legal experience” useful when he began to practice law. The new attorney general set out, among other reforms, to recast the priorities of the FBI. The bureau deployed nearly a thousand agents on “internal security” work but targeted only a dozen against orga nized crime and gave virtually no attention to civil rights violations. Robert Kennedy’s efforts were stoutly resisted by J. Edgar Hoover, who had served as FBI director longer than the new attorney general had been alive. Business whiz Robert S. McNamara left the presidency of the Ford Motor Company to take over the Defense Department. Along with other youthful, talented advisers, these appointees made up an inner circle of “the best and the brightest” men around the president. From the outset Kennedy inspired high expectations, especially among the young. His challenge of a New Frontier quickened patriotic pulses. He brought

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Kennedy Takes Charge


 Richard Goodwin (b. 1931), a young Peace Corps staffer, eloquently summed up the buoyantly optimistic mood of the early 1960s:

“


 For a moment, it seemed as if the entire country, the whole spinning globe, rested, malleable and receptive, in our beneﬁcent hands.

”


 a warm heart to the Cold War when he proposed the Peace Corps, an army of idealistic and mostly youthful volunteers to bring American skills to underdeveloped countries. He summoned citizens to ser vice with his clarion call to “ask not what your country can do for you: ask what you can do for your country.” Himself Harvard-educated, Kennedy and his Ivy League lieutenants (heavily from Harvard) radiated conﬁdence in their abilities. The president’s personal grace and wit won him the deep affection of many of his fellow citizens. A journalist called Kennedy “the most seductive man I’ve ever met. He exuded a sense of vibrant life and humor that seemed naturally to bubble up out of him.” In an unprecedented gesture, he invited white-maned poet Robert Frost to speak at his inaugural ceremonies. The old Yankee versiﬁer



 shrewdly took stock of the situation. “You’re something of Irish and I suppose something of Harvard,” he told Kennedy—and advised him to be more Irish than Harvard.

The New Frontier at Home
 Kennedy came into ofﬁce with fragile Democratic majorities in Congress. Southern Democrats threatened to team up with Republicans and ax New Frontier proposals such as medical assistance for the aged and increased federal aid to education. Kennedy won a ﬁ rst round in his campaign for a more cooperative Congress when he forced an expansion of the all-important House Rules Committee, dominated by conser vatives who could have bottled up his entire legislative program. Despite this victory, the New Frontier did not expand swiftly. Key medical and education bills remained stalled in Congress. Another vexing problem was the economy. Kennedy had campaigned on the theme of revitalizing the economy after the recessions of the Eisenhower years. His administration helped negotiate a noninﬂationary wage agreement in the steel industry in early 1962. The assumption was that the companies, for their part, would keep the lid on prices. But almost immediately steel management announced signiﬁcant price

President John F. Kennedy and His Wife,
Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy
 Shown here leaving the White House to attend a series of inaugural balls in January 1961, the young and vibrant ﬁrst couple brought beauty, style, and grace to the presidency.



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 increases, thereby seemingly demonstrating bad faith. The president erupted in wrath. “My father always told me that all businessmen were sons of bitches,” he said, “ but I never believed him till now.” He called the “big steel” men onto the Oval Ofﬁce carpet and unleashed his Irish temper. Overawed, the steel operators backed down. The steel episode provoked ﬁery attacks by big business on the New Frontier, but Kennedy soon appealed to believers in free enterprise when he announced his support of a general tax-cut bill. He rejected the advice of those who wished greater government spending and instead chose to stimulate the economy by slashing taxes and putting more money directly into private hands. When he announced his policy before a big business group, one observer called it “the most Republican speech since McKinley.” Kennedy’s New Frontier vision also extended to the “ﬁ nal frontier.” Early in his term, the president promoted a multibillion-dollar project dedicated, as he put it, to “landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to earth.” When skeptics objected that the money could be better spent elsewhere, Kennedy

 On the Moon This moon’s-eye view of the earth greeted the ﬁrst men to land on the lunar surface. (right) Astronaut Edwin (“Buzz”) Aldrin descends from the spacecraft. As he stepped onto the moon’s surface, his companion, Neil Armstrong, said, “That’s one small step for man; one giant leap for mankind.”

 summoned stirring rhetoric of rising to challenges and expanding human possibilities. In reality, the moonshot was a calculated plan to restore America’s prestige in the space race, severely damaged by the Soviet Sputnik successes (see p. 962). Twenty-four billion dollars later, in July 1969, two NASA astronauts triumphantly planted their footprints—and the American ﬂag—on the moon’s dusty surface. As people around the globe huddled around televisions to watch the Apollo mission live, the world had never seemed so small and interconnected, nor the United States so dominant.

Rumblings in Europe
 A few months after settling into the White House, the new president met Soviet premier Khrushchev at Vienna in June 1961. The tough-talking Soviet leader adopted a belligerent attitude, threatening to make a treaty with East Germany and cut off Western access to Berlin. Though visibly shaken, the president refused to be bullied.

Troubles Abroad




 The Berlin Wall, 1961–1989 The wall separating East and West Berlin stood for nearly thirty years as a hated symbol of the division of Europe into democratic and communist camps. (left) East German soldiers stand guard as the concrete wall is constructed, November 20, 1961. (right) Demonstrators celebrating the impending reuniﬁcation of East and West Germany begin to tear down the wall in 1989.

 The Soviets backed off from their most bellicose threats but suddenly began to construct the Berlin Wall in August 1961. A barbed-wire and concrete barrier, it was designed to plug the heavy population drain from East Germany to West Germany through the Berlin funnel. But to the free world, the “Wall of Shame” looked like a gigantic enclosure around a concentration camp. The wall stood for almost three decades as an ugly scar symbolizing the post–World War II division of Europe into two hostile camps. Kennedy meanwhile turned his attention to Western Europe, now miraculously prospering after the tonic of Marshall Plan aid and the growth of the American-encouraged European Economic Community (EEC), the free-trade area that later evolved into the European Union. He ﬁ nally secured passage of the Trade Expansion Act in 1962, authorizing tariff cuts

 of up to 50 percent to promote trade with EEC countries. This act led to the so-called Kennedy Round of tariff negotiations, concluded in 1967, and to a significant expansion of European-American trade. These liberalized trade policies inaugurated a new era of such robustly invigorated international commerce that a new word was coined to describe it: globalization. But not all of Kennedy’s ambitious designs for Europe were realized. American policymakers were dedicated to an economically and militarily united “Atlantic Community,” with the United States the dominant partner. But they found their way blocked by towering, stiff-backed Charles de Gaulle, president of France. With a haughty “non,” de Gaulle vetoed the British application for Common Market membership in 1963, fearing that the British “special relationship” with the United States would make Britain a Trojan



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 horse for deepening American control over European affairs. De Gaulle deemed the Americans unreliable in a crisis, so he tried to preserve French freedom of action by developing his own small atomic force. Despite the perils of nuclear proliferation or Soviet domination, de Gaulle demanded an independent Europe, free of Yankee inﬂuence.

 Foreign Flare-ups and “Flexible Response” Special problems for U.S. foreign policy emerged from the worldwide decolonization of European overseas possessions after World War II. Sparsely populated Laos, freed of its French colonial overlords in 1954, was festering dangerously by the time Kennedy came into ofﬁce. The Eisenhower administration had drenched this jungle kingdom with dollars but failed to cleanse the country of an aggressive communist element. A red Laos, many observers feared, would be a river on which the inﬂuence of Communist China would ﬂood into all of Southeast Asia. As the Laotian civil war raged, Kennedy’s military advisers seriously considered sending in American troops. But the president found that he had insufﬁcient forces to put out the ﬁ re in Asia and still honor his commitments in Europe. Kennedy thus sought a diplomatic escape hatch in the fourteen-power Geneva conference, which imposed a shaky peace on Laos in 1962. These “brushﬁre wars” intensiﬁed the pressure for a shift away from Secretary Dulles’s dubious doctrine of “massive retaliation.” Kennedy felt hamstrung by the knowledge that in a crisis, he had the Devil’s choice between humiliation and nuclear incineration. With Defense Secretary McNamara, he pushed the strategy of “ﬂexible response”—that is, developing an array of military “options” that could be precisely matched to the gravity of the crisis at hand. To this end Kennedy increased spending on conventional military forces and bolstered the Special Forces (Green Berets). They were an elite antiguerrilla outﬁt trained to survive on snake meat and to kill with scientiﬁc ﬁ nesse.

 Stepping into the Vietnam Quagmire The doctrine of “ﬂexible response” seemed sane enough, but it contained lethal logic. It potentially lowered the level at which diplomacy would give way

 to shooting. It also provided a mechanism for a progressive, and possibly endless, stepping-up of the use of force. Vietnam soon presented grisly proof of these pitfalls. The corrupt, right-wing government of Ngo Dinh Diem in Saigon, despite a deluge of American dollars, had ruled shakily since the partition of Vietnam in 1954 (see p. 960). Anti-Diem agitators noisily threatened to topple the pro-American government from power. In a fateful decision late in 1961, Kennedy ordered a sharp increase in the number of “military advisers” (U.S. troops) in South Vietnam. American forces allegedly entered Vietnam to foster political stability—to help protect Diem from the communists long enough to allow him to enact basic social reforms favored by the Americans. But the Kennedy administration eventually despaired of the reactionary Diem and encouraged a successful coup against him in November 1963. Ironically, the United States thus contributed to a long process of political disintegration that its original policy had meant to prevent. Kennedy still told the South Vietnamese that it was “their war,” but he had made dangerously deep political commitments. By the time of his death, he had ordered more than ﬁ fteen thousand American men into the far-off Asian slaughter pen. A graceful pullout was becoming increasingly difﬁcult (see Map 38.1). “Modernization theory” provided the theoretical underpinnings for an activist U.S. foreign policy in the “underdeveloped” world. Its proponents believed that the traditional societies of Asia, Africa, and Latin

Map 38.1 Vietnam and Southeast Asia, 1954–1975
 Le Ly Hayslip (b. 1949) was born in a peasant village in South Vietnam, just south of Da Nang. In her memoir, When Heaven and Earth Changed Places, she describes the trauma endured by ordinary Vietnamese as a result of America’s ﬁght against the Viet Cong: “In 1963—the year the Viet Cong came to my village— American warplanes bombed Man Quang. It was at noon, just when the children were getting out of school. My aunt Thu and her pregnant daughter-in-law were making lunch for her husband and four grandchildren when the air-raid signal blared. They all jumped under the wooden table and sheltered the pregnant woman with their bodies—even the little kids. A bomb fell in Aunt Thu’s front yard. . . . Hot shrapnel tore through everyone except the pregnant woman. Aunt Thu and one of her grandchildren were killed. The passing fragment left only a weeping hole where her generous heart had been.”

Interactive Map






100 Km.


C


Ho Chi Minh Trail




Re
 d

Bla
 c

 Boat-people refugees after 1975

I


N


A


R


 k

Dienbienphu R.


 French surrender, May 7, 1954

 Harbor mined,

Hanoi


M Y A N M A R


Haiphong


 (BURMA)

H


100 Mi.


.


 Enemy supply routes Major battle of the Tet offensive, January 1968 Major U.S. base during the war

 U.S. bombing begins, 1964 Communist-Pathet Lao victory, 1975

NORTH V I ET N A M

P LAI N OF JARS

G u l f o f To n k i n


20°N


 Alleged attacks on American Naval vessels, August, 1964 (Gulf of Tonkin Incident)

R.


Ca
R.


M


 ek ong

L


A


Vinh


O


Keo Nua Pass


S


Vientiane


U.S.
Seventh Fleet  operations during the war

Mu Gia Pass


Udon Thani


Nakhon Phanom


Demilitarized Zone


 Sépone Khe Sanh Lang Vei

Khon Kaen


T


H


A


I


L


A


Quang Tri
Hue


N


Demarcation Line, 1954


A
Shau Valley


Da Nang


17°N


South China
Sea


D
Chu Lai
Kham
Duc


Ubon Ratchathani


Ta Khli


R.


Ratchasima


Mekong


Kontum
Pleiku An Khe


C E NTRAL H I G H LAN DS

 (KAMPUCHEA) U.S. bombing begins, 1969

U.S.


Nha Trang


 i n v a s i o n , 19 70

Gulf of Thailand


 Mayaguez incident,

 Vi etna mese in va

Phnom Penh


Dalat


100°E


 sion

,1




C A MAU
PE N I N SU L A

105°E


Cam Ranh Bay


SO UT H V I ET N A M

110°E


Bien Hoa
Long Binh


Saigon
Tan Son Nhut
Cholon
My Tho
Vung Tau
Vinh Long
Ben Tre
Can Tho


Chau Duc


Ca Mau


Tuy Hoa


Ban Me Thuot


Bu Dop
Communist-Khmer Rouge
 victory, 1975

Qui Nhon


Duc Co


C A M B O D I A


Sattahip


15°N


Dak To


Don Muang
Bangkok


My Lai
Quang Ngai


N
10°N


Mekong
Delta
Vietcong-North Vietnamese
 victory and U.S. withdrawal,





Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 to help the Good Neighbors close the gap between the callous rich and the wretched poor, and thus quiet communist agitation. But results were disappointing; there was little alliance and even less progress. American handouts had little positive impact on Latin America’s immense social problems. President Kennedy also struck below the border with the mailed ﬁst. He had inherited from the Eisenhower administration a CIA-backed scheme to topple Fidel Castro from power by invading Cuba with anticommunist exiles. On April 17, 1961, some twelve hundred exiles landed at Cuba’s Bay of Pigs. When the ill-starred Bay of Pigs invasion bogged down, Kennedy stood fast in his decision to keep hands off, and the bullet-riddled band of anti-Castroites surrendered. President Kennedy assumed full responsibility for the failure, remarking that “victory has a hundred fathers, and defeat is an orphan.” The Bay of Pigs blunder, along with continuing American covert efforts to assassinate Castro and overthrow his government, naturally pushed the Cuban leader even further into the Soviet embrace. Wily Chair-

Backbone


 The United States supports South Vietnam.

 America could develop into modern industrial and democratic nations by following the West’s own path. Noted economic historian Walt Whitman Rostow, one of the most inﬂuential modernization theorists, charted the route from traditional society to “the age of high mass-consumption” in his book The Stages of Economic Growth (1960). Though it would later come under attack for its Eurocentric bias, modernization theory offered a powerful intellectual framework for policymakers ensnared in the Cold War. Rostow himself served as an inﬂuential adviser to the Kennedy and Johnson administrations.

Cuban Confrontations
 Although the United States regarded Latin America as its backyard, its southern neighbors feared and resented the powerful Colossus of the North. In 1961 Kennedy extended the hand of friendship with the Alliance for Progress (Alianza para el Progreso), hailed as a Marshall Plan for Latin America. A primary goal was

Failed Bay of Pigs Invasion, 1961
 Cuban soldiers demonstrate a beach gun they used against a brigade of ex-Cubans who furtively invaded Cuba as agents of the United States. The debacle was one of several unsuccessful American attempts to overthrow Cuban leader Fidel Castro.

The Cuban Missile Crisis


 man Khrushchev lost little time in taking full advantage of his Cuban comrade’s position just ninety miles off Florida’s coast. In October 1962 the aerial photographs of American spy planes revealed that the Soviets were secretly and speedily installing nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba. The Soviets evidently intended to use these devastating weapons to shield Castro and to blackmail the United States into backing down in Berlin and other trouble spots. Kennedy and Khrushchev now began a nerveracking game of “nuclear chicken.” The president ﬂatly rejected air force proposals for a “surgical” bombing strike against the missile-launching sites. Instead, on October 22, 1962, he ordered a naval “quarantine” of Cuba and demanded immediate removal of the threatening weaponry. He also served notice on Khrushchev that any attack on the United States from Cuba would be regarded as coming from the Soviet Union and would trigger nuclear retaliation against the Russian heartland. For an anxious week, Americans waited while Soviet ships approached the patrol line established by the U.S. Navy off the island of Cuba. Seizing or sinking a Soviet vessel on the high seas would unquestionably be regarded by the Kremlin as an act of war. The world teetered breathlessly on the brink of global atomization. Only in 1991 did the full dimensions of this nuclear peril become known, when the Russians revealed that their ground forces in Cuba already had operational nuclear weapons at their disposal and were authorized to launch them if attacked. In this tense eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation, Khrushchev ﬁ nally ﬂ inched. On October 28 he agreed to a partially face-saving compromise, by which he would pull the missiles out of Cuba. The United States in return agreed to end the quarantine and not invade the island. The American government also quietly signaled that it would remove from Turkey some of its own missiles targeted at the Soviet Union. Fallout from the Cuban missile crisis was considerable. A disgraced Khrushchev was ultimately hounded out of the Kremlin and became an “unperson.” Hard-liners in Moscow, vowing never again to be humiliated in a nuclear face-off, launched an enormous program of military expansion. The Soviet buildup reached a crescendo in the next decade, stimulating, in turn, a vast American effort to “catch up with the Russians.” The Democrats did better than expected in the midterm elections of November 1962— allegedly because the Republicans were “Cubanized.” Kennedy, apparently sobered by the appalling risks



 he had just run, pushed harder for a nuclear test-ban treaty with the Soviet Union. After prolonged negotiations in Moscow, a pact prohibiting trial nuclear explosions in the at mosphere was signed in late 1963. Another barometer indicating a thaw in the Cold War was the installation (August 1963) of a MoscowWashington “hot line,” permitting immediate teletype communication in case of a crisis. Most signiﬁcant was Kennedy’s speech at American University in Washington, D.C., in June 1963. The president urged Americans to abandon a view of the Soviet Union as a Devil-ridden land ﬁ lled with fanatics and instead to deal with the world “as it is, not as it might have been had the history of the last eighteen years been different.” Kennedy thus tried to lay the foundation for a realistic policy of peaceful coexistence with the Soviet Union. Here were the modest origins of the policy that later came to be known as “détente” (French for “relaxation of tension”).

The Struggle for
Civil Rights
 Kennedy had campaigned with a strong appeal to black voters, but he proceeded gingerly to redeem his promises. Although he had pledged to eliminate racial discrimination in housing “with a stroke of the pen,” it took him nearly two years to ﬁ nd the right pen. Civil rights groups meanwhile sent thousands of pens to the White House in an “Ink for Jack” protest against the president’s slowness. Political concerns stayed the president’s hand on civil rights. Elected by a wafer-thin margin, and with shaky control over Congress, Kennedy needed the support of southern legislators to pass his economic and social legislation, especially his medical and educational bills. He believed, perhaps justiﬁably, that those mea sures would eventually beneﬁt black Americans at least as much as speciﬁc legislation on civil rights. Bold moves for racial justice would have to wait. But events soon scrambled these careful calculations. After the wave of sit-ins that surged across the South in 1960, groups of Freedom Riders fanned out to end segregation in facilities serving interstate bus passengers. A white mob torched a Freedom Ride bus near Anniston, Alabama, in May 1961, and Attor ney General Robert Kennedy’s personal representative was beaten unconscious in another anti–Freedom Ride riot in Montgomery. When southern ofﬁcials proved unwilling or unable to stem the violence, Washington



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


Freedom Ride, 1961
 Rampaging whites near Anniston, Alabama, burned this bus carrying an interracial group of Freedom Riders on May 14, 1961.

 dispatched federal marshals to protect the Freedom Riders. Reluctantly but fatefully, the Kennedy administration had now joined hands with the civil rights movement. Because of that partnership, the Kennedys proved ultrawary about the political associates of Martin Luther King, Jr. Fearful of embarrassing revelations that some of King’s advisers had communist afﬁ liations, Robert Kennedy ordered FBI director J. Edgar Hoover to wiretap King’s phone in late 1963. But for the most part, the relationship between King and the Kennedys was a fruitful one. Encouraged by Robert Kennedy, and with ﬁ nancial backing from Kennedyprodded private foundations, SNCC and other civil rights groups inaugurated the Voter Education Project to register the South’s historically disfranchised blacks. Because of his support for civil rights, President Kennedy told a group of black leaders in 1963, “I may lose the next election . . . I don’t care.” Integrating southern universities threatened to provoke wholesale slaughter. Some desegregated painlessly, but the University of Mississippi (“Ole Miss”) became a volcano. A twenty-nine-year-old air force veteran, James Meredith, encountered violent opposition when he attempted to register in October 1962. In the end President Kennedy was forced to send in four hundred federal marshals and three thousand troops to enroll Meredith in his ﬁ rst class—in colonial American history.

 In the spring of 1963, Martin Luther King, Jr., launched a campaign against discrimination in Birmingham, Alabama, the most segregated big city in America. Although blacks constituted nearly half of the city’s population, they made up fewer than 15 percent of the city’s voters. Previous attempts to crack the city’s rigid racial barriers had produced more than ﬁ fty cross burnings and eighteen bomb attacks since 1957. “Some of the people sitting here will not come back alive from this campaign,” King advised his organizers. Events soon conﬁ rmed this grim prediction of violence. Watching developments on television screens, a horriﬁed world saw peaceful civil rights marchers repeatedly repelled by police with attack dogs and electric cattle prods. Most fearsome of all were the high-pressure water hoses directed at the civil rights demonstrators. They delivered water with enough force to knock bricks loose from buildings or strip bark from trees at a distance of one hundred feet. Water from the hoses bowled little children down the street like tumbleweeds. Jolted by these vicious confrontations, President Kennedy delivered a memorable televised speech to the nation on June 11, 1963. In contrast to Eisenhower’s cool aloofness from the racial question, Kennedy called the situation a “moral issue” and committed his personal and presidential prestige to ﬁ nding a solution. Drawing on the same spiritual traditions as Martin Luther King, Jr., Kennedy declared that the

Marching to Washington




Hosing Down Civil Rights
Demonstrators, Birmingham,
Alabama, 1963


 principle at stake “is as old as the Scriptures and is as clear as the American Constitution.” He called for new civil rights legislation to protect black citizens. In August King led more than 200,000 black and white demonstrators on a peaceful March on Washington in support of the proposed legislation. In an electrifying speech from the Lincoln Memorial, King declared,

 “I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character.” Still the violence continued. On the very night of Kennedy’s stirring television address, a white gunman shot down Medgar Evers, a black Mississippi civil rights

Martin Luther King, Jr., Addresses
 the March on Washington, August 1963 This was the occasion of King’s famous “I Have a Dream” speech, in which he declared, “When the architects of our great republic wrote the magniﬁcent words of the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, they were signing a promissory note to which every American was to fall heir. This note was a promise that all men, yes, black men as well as white men, would be guaranteed the inalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.”



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 In his civil rights address of June 11, 1963, President John F. Kennedy (1917–1963) said,

“


 If an American, because his skin is dark, cannot eat lunch in a restaurant open to the public; if he cannot send his children to the best public school available; if he cannot vote for the public ofﬁcials who represent him; if, in short, he cannot enjoy the full and free life which all of us want, then who among us would be content to have the color of his skin changed and stand in his place?

”


 worker. In September 1963 an explosion blasted a Baptist church in Birmingham, kill ing four black girls who had just ﬁ nished their lesson called “The Love That Forgives.” By the time of Kennedy’s death, his civil rights bill was making little headway, and frustrated blacks were growing increasingly impatient.

The Killing of Kennedy
 Violence haunted America in the mid-1960s, and it stalked onto center stage on November 22, 1963. While riding in an open limousine in downtown Dallas, Texas, President Kennedy was shot in the brain by a concealed riﬂeman and died within seconds. As a stunned nation grieved, the tragedy grew still more unbelievable. The alleged assassin, a furtive ﬁgure named Lee Harvey Oswald, was himself shot to death in front of television cameras by a self-appointed avenger, Jack Ruby. So bizarre were the events surrounding the two murders that even an elaborate ofﬁcial investigation conducted by Chief Justice Warren could not quiet all doubts and theories about what had really happened. Vice President Johnson was promptly sworn in as president on a waiting airplane and ﬂown back to Washington with Kennedy’s body. Although he mistrusted “the Harvards,” Johnson retained most of the bright Kennedy team. The new president managed a digniﬁed and efﬁcient transition, pledging continuity with his slain predecessor’s policies. For several days the nation was steeped in sorrow. Not until then did many Americans realize how fully their young, vibrant president and his captivating wife had cast a spell over them. Chopped down in his prime

 after only slightly more than a thousand days in the White House, Kennedy was acclaimed more for the ideals he had enunciated and the spirit he had kindled than for the concrete goals he had achieved. He had laid one myth to rest forever—that a Catholic could not be trusted with the presidency of the United States. In later years revelations about Kennedy’s womanizing and allegations about his involvement with organized crime ﬁgures tarnished his reputation. But despite those accusations, his apparent vigor, charisma, and idealism made him an inspirational ﬁgure for the generation of Americans who came of age in the 1960s—including Bill Clinton, who as a boy had brieﬂy met President Kennedy and would himself be elected president in 1992.

The LBJ Brand on
 the Presidency The torch passed to craggy-faced Lyndon Baines Johnson, a Texan who towered six feet three inches. The new president hailed from the populist hill country west of Austin, Texas, whose people had ﬁ rst sent him to Washington as a twenty-nine-year-old congressman in 1937. Franklin D. Roosevelt was his political “Daddy,” Johnson claimed, and he had supported New Deal mea sures down the line. But when LBJ lost a Senate race in 1941, he learned the sobering lesson that liberal political beliefs did not necessarily win elections in Texas. He trimmed his sails to the right and squeezed himself into a Senate seat in 1948 with a questionable eighty-seven-vote margin—hence the ironic nickname “Landslide Lyndon.” Entrenched in the Senate, Johnson developed into a masterful wheeler-dealer. He became the Democratic majority leader in 1954, wielding power second only to that of Eisenhower in the White House. He could move mountains or checkmate opponents as the occasion demanded, using what came to be known as the “Johnson treatment”—a ﬂashing display of backslapping, ﬂesh-pressing, and arm-twisting that overbore friend and foe alike. His ego and vanity were legendary. On a visit to the Pope, Johnson was presented with a precious fourteenth-century painting from the Vatican art collection; in return, LBJ gave the Pope a bust—of LBJ! As president, Johnson quickly shed the conser vative coloration of his Senate years to reveal the latent liberal underneath. “No memorial oration or eulogy,” Johnson declared to Congress, “could more eloquently

Conflicting Press Accounts of the
March on Washington, 1963


 he day after the March on Washington of August 28, 1963 (see p. 981), newspapers all over the country carried reports of this historic assembly of more than 200,000 people to demand civil rights and equal job opportunities for African Americans. Although the basic outlines of the story were the same in most papers, ancillary articles, photographs, and editorials revealed deep-seated biases in coverage. Shown here are continuations from the front-page stories in the New York Times, a bastion of northeastern liberalism (below), and the Atlanta Constitution, a major southern newspaper (right). While the Times called the march “orderly” in its headline, the Constitution’s story in its right columns highlighted the potential for violence and the precautions taken by police. The article read: “There was such a force of uniformed ofﬁcers on hand to cope with any possible trouble that one senator was prompted to comment: ‘It almost looks like we had a military coup d’état during the night.’” In addition to stressing the march’s potential for disruption, the Constitution ran an advertisement right below the March on Washington story for a National Ku Klux Klan Rally two days hence, featuring promi nent speakers and a cross burning. This comparison of newspaper coverage of a controversial event serves as a reminder that press reporting

T


 (top) New York Times; (above) Atlanta Constitution

 must always be scrutinized for biases when it is used as historical evidence. What other differences in coverage separated these two newspapers? What factors contribute to press biases?





Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 had created in 1961) to enforce the law. When conser vatives tried to derail the legislation by adding a prohibition on sexual, as well as racial, discrimination, the tactic backﬁ red. The bill’s opponents cynically calculated that liberals would not be able to support a bill that threatened to wipe out laws that singled out women for special protection because of their sex. But the act’s Title VII passed with the sexual clause intact. It soon proved to be a powerful instrument of federally enforced gender equality, as well as racial equality. Johnson struck another blow for women and minorities in 1965 when he issued an executive order requiring all federal contractors to take afﬁrmative action against discrimination. Johnson also rammed Kennedy’s stalled tax bill through Congress and added proposals of his own for a billion-dollar “War on Poverty.” Johnson voiced special concern for Appalachia, where the sickness of the soft-coal industry had left tens of thousands of mountain folk on the human slag heap. Johnson dubbed his domestic program the Great Society—a sweeping set of New Dealish economic and welfare mea sures aimed at transforming the American way of life. Public support for LBJ’s antipoverty war was aroused by Michael Harrington’s The Other America (1962), which revealed that in afﬂuent America 20 percent of the population—and over 40 percent of the black population—suffered in poverty. President Lyndon Baines Johnson (1908–1973) Dedicated and hard-working, Johnson saw his presidency shattered by the trauma of Vietnam. By the end of his term, he was so unpopular that he could ﬁnd nonheckling audiences only on military bases or navy ships.

 honor President Kennedy’s memory than the earliest possible passage of the Civil Rights Bill for which he fought so long.” After a lengthy conser vative ﬁ libuster, Congress at last passed the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964. The act banned racial discrimination in most private facilities open to the public, including theaters, hospitals, and restaurants. It strengthened the federal government’s power to end segregation in schools and other public places. Title VII of the act barred employers from discriminating based on race or national origin in hiring and empowered the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC, a body Kennedy

Johnson Battles Goldwater
 in 1964 Johnson’s nomination by the Democrats in 1964 was a foregone conclusion; he was chosen by acclamation in Atlantic City as his birthday present. Thanks to the tall Texan, the Democrats stood foursquare on their most liberal platform since Truman’s Fair Deal days. The Republicans, convening in San Francisco’s Cow Palace, nominated box-jawed Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, a bronzed and bespectacled champion of rock-ribbed conservatism. The American stage was thus set for a historic clash of political principles. Goldwater’s forces had galloped out of the Southwest to ride roughshod over the moderate Republican “eastern establishment.” Insisting that the GOP offer “a choice not an echo,” Goldwater attacked the federal income tax, the Social Security system, the Tennessee Valley Authority, civil rights legislation, the nuclear test-ban treaty, and, most loudly, the Great

Johnson Reelected


 Negative Campaigning This infamous “attack ad” was televised only once as a paid political advertisement, but it signaled the emergence of a newly noxious style of political campaigning. The ad showed a child dreamily pulling petals from a ﬂower. Suddenly her voice gave way to that of a man reciting an ominous countdown, followed by an exploding nuclear bomb and a throaty voice warning “Vote for President Johnson on November 3. The stakes are too high for you to stay home.” The ad implied that a Goldwater presidency would risk nuclear Armageddon. Controversy forced the ad’s sponsors to take it off the air, but it was repeatedly reshown in news coverage of the controversy itself—raising serious questions about the very deﬁnition of “news.”



 Society. His ﬁercely dedicated followers proclaimed, “In Your Heart You Know He’s Right,” which prompted the Democratic response, “In Your Guts You Know He’s Nuts.” Goldwater warmed right-wing hearts when he proclaimed that “extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice. And . . . moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue.” Democrats gleefully exploited the image of Goldwater as a trigger-happy cowboy who would “Barry us” in the debris of World War III. Johnson cultivated the contrasting image of a resolute statesman by seizing upon the Tonkin Gulf episode early in August 1964. Unbeknownst to the American public or Congress, U.S. Navy ships had been cooperating with South Vietnamese gunboats in provocative raids along the coast of North Vietnam. Two of these American destroyers were allegedly ﬁ red upon by the North Vietnamese on August 2 and 4, although exactly what happened still remains unclear. Later investigations strongly suggested that the North Vietnamese ﬁ red in self-defense on August 2 and that the “attack” of August 4 never happened. Johnson later reportedly wisecracked, “For all I know, the Navy was shooting at whales out there.” Johnson nevertheless promptly called the attack “unprovoked” and moved swiftly to make political hay out of this episode. He ordered a “limited” retaliatory air raid against the North Vietnamese bases, loudly proclaiming that he sought “no wider war”— thus implying that the truculent Goldwater did. Johnson also used the incident to spur congressional passage of the all-purpose Tonkin Gulf Resolution. With only two dissenting votes in both houses, the lawmakers virtually abdicated their war-declaring powers and handed the president a blank check to use further force in Southeast Asia. The Tonkin Gulf Resolution, Johnson boasted, was “like grandma’s nightshirt—it covered every thing.” The towering Texan rode to a spectacular victory in November 1964. The voters were herded into Johnson’s column by fondness for the Kennedy legacy, faith in Great Society promises, and fear of Goldwater. A stampede of 43,129,566 Johnson votes trampled the Republican ticket with its 27,178,188 supporters. The tally in the Electoral College was 486 to 52 (see Map 38.2). Goldwater carried only his native Arizona and ﬁve other states—all of them, signiﬁcantly, in the traditionally Democratic but now racially restless South. Johnson’s record-breaking 61 percent of the popular vote swept lopsided Democratic majorities into both houses of Congress.



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 SD 4 NE 5

 NM 4

 CA

 WI

 IN

 OK 8 TX

 OH

 MD

 MT

OR ID

RI NV CA



KS OK

NM TX

 IL

 IN

 MO

 LA

OH KY

 MS

 AL

 WV

VA NC

 TN

 AR

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 14 RI PA NJ CT 4 17 8

 MI

 AK

FL AK

 IA

NE CO

 WI

D.C.


 SC

 GA

 UT

 MN

 SD

 DE

 VA 12

 AL

 ND

 WY

 AZ

 NC 13

 TN 11 MS

 WA

NJ WV

 KY 9

 LA

 ME

 PA

 MO

 AR

 NH

 MA 14 CT

IL KS 7

 AZ 5

UT WY NV 4 3 CO 6

 OR 6

 NY

 MI

 IA 9

ID MT 4 4

 ND 4

 WA 9

 MN 10

 VT

 GA

 SC

DE MD

 DC

 FL

 HI

 HI

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Johnson (Democrat)




90.3%


43,129,566


61.1%




9.7%


27,178,188


38.5%


Goldwater (Republican)


 Map 38.2 Presidential Election of 1964 In the map on the left the size of each state is distorted according to its weight in the Electoral College. In New Orleans, toward the end of the campaign, a gutsy Johnson displayed his commitment to civil rights when he told a story about an old senator who once said of his Deep South constituents, “I would like to go back down there and make them just one more Democratic speech. . . . The poor old State, they haven’t heard a Democratic speech in 30 years. All they hear at election time is Negro, Negro, Negro!” Johnson’s open voicing of sentiments like this contributed heavily to his losses in the traditionally Democratic “solid South.”

The Great Society Congress
 Johnson’s huge victory temporarily smashed the conservative congressional coalition of southern Democrats and northern Republicans. A wide-open legislative road stretched before the Great Society programs, as the president skillfully ringmastered his two-to-one Democratic majorities. Congress poured out a ﬂood of legislation, comparable only to the output of the New Dealers in the Hundred Days Congress of 1933. Johnson, conﬁdent that a growing economy gave him ample ﬁscal and political room for maneuver, delivered at last on long-deferred Democratic promises of social reform. Escalating the War on Poverty, Congress doubled the appropriation of the Ofﬁce of Economic Opportunity to $2 billion and granted more than $1 billion to redevelop the gutted hills and hollows of Appalachia. Johnson also prodded Congress into creating two new cabinet ofﬁces: the Department of Transportation and the Department of Housing and Urban Development

Interactive Map


 (HUD), to which he named the ﬁ rst black cabinet secretary in the nation’s history, respected economist Robert C. Weaver. Other noteworthy laws established the National Endowments for the Arts and the Humanities, designed to lift the level of American cultural life. Even more impressive were the Big Four legislative achievements that crowned LBJ’s Great Society program: aid to education, medical care for the elderly and indigent, immigration reform, and a new voting rights bill. Johnson neatly avoided the thorny question of separation of church and state by channeling educational aid to students, not schools, thus allowing funds to ﬂow to hard-pressed parochial institutions. (Catholic John F. Kennedy had not dared to touch this prickly issue.) With a keen eye for the dramatic, LBJ signed the education bill in the humble one-room Texas schoolhouse he had attended as a boy. Medicare for the elderly, accompanied by Medicaid for the poor, became a reality in 1965. Like the New Deal’s Social Security program, Medicare and Medicaid created “entitlements.” That is, they conferred

The Great Society




Giving Thanks for Medicare
 An elderly woman showed her gratitude to President Lyndon B. Johnson for his signing of the Medicare bill in April 1965, providing basic medical care for the aged. In tribute to former president Truman’s unsuccessful effort to pass a national medical insurance program twenty years earlier, Johnson ﬂew to Truman’s Missouri home to sign the bill that he claimed would deliver “care for the sick and serenity for the fearful.” No one acknowledged that Truman’s earlier plan had been much more comprehensive or that Johnson, then a young Texas congressman, had opposed it.

 rights on certain categories of Americans virtually in perpetuity, without the need for repeated congressional approval. These programs were part of a spreading “rights revolution” that materially improved the lives of millions of Americans—but also eventually undermined the federal government’s ﬁ nancial health. Immigration reform was the third of Johnson’s Big Four feats. The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 abolished at last the “national-origins” quota system that had been in place since 1921 (see p. 773). The act also doubled (to 290,000) the number of immigrants allowed to enter annually, while for the ﬁ rst time setting limits on immigrants from the Western Hemisphere (120,000). The new law further provided for the admission of close relatives of United States citizens, outside those numerical limits. To the surprise of many of the act’s architects, more than 100,000 persons per year took advantage of its “family uniﬁcation” provisions in the decades after 1965, and the immigrant stream swelled beyond expectations. Even more surprising to the act’s sponsors, the sources of immigration soon shifted heavily from Europe to Latin America and Asia, dramatically changing the racial and ethnic composition of the American population. Great Society programs came in for rancorous political attack in later years. Conservatives charged that the billions spent for “social engineering” had simply been ﬂushed down the waste pipe. Yet the poverty rate declined measurably in the ensuing decade (see Figure 38.1). Medicare made especially dramatic reductions in the incidence of poverty among America’s

Millions/ Percent
 Number in poverty

 Poverty rate (%)



















Figure 38.1 Poverty in the United States, 1960–2006
 In 2000 the poverty rate fell to 11.3 percent, its lowest level since 1979. In the new century, it increased by a percentage point. These ﬁgures refer to the number of people who live in families whose total income is lower than a set “poverty threshold,” which is tied to the consumer price index, so it varies with inﬂation. The “poverty rate” means the percentage of all Americans living below that threshold. (Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, http://www.census.gov/ hhes/www/poverty/histpov/hstpov2.html.)

 elderly. Other antipoverty programs, among them Project Head Start, sharply improved the educational perfor mance of underprivileged youth. Infant mortality rates also fell in minority communities as general health conditions improved. Lyndon Johnson was not



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 fully victorious in the war against poverty, but he did win several noteworthy battles.

Battling for Black Rights
 With the last of his Big Four reforms, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, Johnson made heartening headway against one of the most persistent American evils, racial discrimination. In Johnson’s native South, the walls of segregation were crumbling, but not fast enough for long-suffering African Americans. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 gave the federal government more muscle to enforce school-desegregation orders and to prohibit racial discrimination in all kinds of public accommodations and employment. But the problem of voting rights remained. In Mississippi, which had the largest black minority of any state, only about 5 percent of eligible blacks were registered to vote. The lopsided pattern was similar throughout the South. Ballotdenying devices like the poll tax, literacy tests, and barefaced intimidation still barred black people from the political process. Mississippi law required the names of prospective black registrants to be published for two weeks in local newspapers—a device that virtually guaranteed economic reprisals, or worse. Beginning in 1964, opening up the polling booths became the chief goal of the black movement in the South. The Twenty-fourth Amendment, ratiﬁed in January 1964, abolished the poll tax in federal elections. (See the Appendix.) Blacks joined hands with white civil rights workers—many of them student volunteers from the North—in a massive voter-registration drive in Mississippi during the Freedom Summer of 1964. Singing “We Shall Overcome,” they zealously set out to soothe generations of white anxieties and black fears. But events soon blighted bright hopes. In late June 1964, one black and two white civil rights workers disappeared in Mississippi. Their badly beaten bodies were later found buried beneath an earthen dam. FBI investigators eventually arrested twenty-one white Mississippians, including the local sheriff, in connection with the kill ings. But white juries refused to convict the whites for these murders. In August an integrated Mississippi Freedom Democratic party delegation was denied its seat at the national Democratic convention. Only a handful of black Mississippians had succeeded in registering to vote. Early in 1965 Martin Luther King, Jr., resumed the voter-registration campaign in Selma, Alabama, where blacks made up 50 percent of the population but only

 1 percent of the voters. State troopers with tear gas and whips assaulted King’s demonstrators as they marched peacefully to the state capital at Montgomery. A Boston Unitarian minister was killed, and a few days later a white Detroit woman was shotgunned to death by Klansmen on the highway near Selma. As the nation recoiled in horror before these violent scenes, President Johnson, speaking in soft southern accents, delivered a compelling address on television. What happened in Selma, he insisted, concerned all Americans, “who must overcome the crippling legacy

 Selma March, 1965 Alabama state troopers lie in wait for peaceful civil rights demonstrators marching from Selma to the state capital at Montgomery. This cover to the March 19, 1965, issue of Life magazine signaled that the civil rights movement had found a national audience. A few moments after the photo was taken, state troopers started beating marchers with billy clubs and shooting tear gas at them. Dozens of demonstrators were hospitalized. What Life called “the Savage Season” led Congress ﬁnally to pass the historic Voting Rights Act of 1965.

Black Power




 of bigotry and injustice.” Then, in a stirring adaptation of the anthem of the civil rights movement, the president concluded, “And we shall overcome.” Following words with deeds, Johnson speedily shepherded through Congress the landmark Voting Rights Act of 1965, signed into law on August 6. It outlawed literacy tests and sent federal voter registrars into several southern states. The passage of the Voting Rights Act, exactly one hundred years after the conclusion of the Civil War, climaxed a century of awful abuse and robust resurgence for African Americans in the South. “Give us the ballot,” said Martin Luther King, Jr., “and the South will never be the same again.” He was right. The act did not end discrimination and oppression overnight, but it placed an awesome lever for change in blacks’ hands. Black southerners now had power and began to wield it without fear of reprisals. White southerners began to court black votes and business as never before. In the following decade, for the ﬁrst time since emancipation, African Americans began to migrate into the South.

Black Power
 The Voting Rights Act of 1965 marked the end of an era in the history of the civil rights movement—the era of nonviolent demonstrations, focused on the South, led by peaceful moderates like Martin Luther King, Jr., and aimed at integrating blacks into American society. As if to symbolize the turn of events, just ﬁve days after President Johnson signed the landmark voting law, a bloody riot erupted in Watts, a black ghetto in Los Angeles. Blacks enraged by police brutality burned and looted their own neighborhoods for nearly a week. When the smoke ﬁ nally cleared over the Los Angeles basin, thirty-one blacks and three whites lay dead, more than a thousand people had been injured, and hundreds of buildings stood charred and gutted. The Watts explosion heralded a new phase of the black struggle—increasingly marked by militant confrontation, focusing on northern and western cities, led by radical and sometimes violent spokespersons, and often aiming not at interracial cooperation but at black separatism. The pious Christian moderation of Martin Luther King, Jr., came under heavy ﬁ re from this second wave of younger black leaders, who privately mocked the digniﬁed Dr. King as “de Lawd.” Deepening division among black leaders was highlighted by the career of Malcolm X. Born Malcolm Little, he was at ﬁ rst in-

 Malcolm X The charismatic black leader was a hypnotizing speaker who could rivet and arouse crowds with his call for black separatism. At the end of his life, Malcolm began to temper his separatist creed.

 spired by the militant black nationalists in the Nation of Islam. Like the Nation’s founder, Elijah Muhammed (born Elijah Poole), Malcolm changed his surname to advertise his lost African identity in white America. A brilliant and charismatic preacher, Malcolm X trumpeted black separatism and inveighed against the “blue-eyed white devils.” Eventually Malcolm distanced himself from Elijah Muhammed’s separatist preachings and moved toward mainstream Islam. (By the 1990s Islam was among America’s fastest-growing religions and counted some 2 million African American converts—or “reverts,” as Muslims described it— in its ranks.) In early 1965 he was cut down by rival Nation of Islam gunmen while speaking to a large crowd in New York City. The militant Black Panther party meanwhile brandished weapons in the streets of Oakland, Cal i fornia, even while it was establishing children’s breakfast



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 programs. Then in 1966 Trinidad-born Stokely Carmichael, a leader of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), began to preach the doctrine of Black Power, which, he said, “will smash every thing Western civilization has created.” Some advocates of Black Power insisted that they simply intended the slogan to describe a broad-front effort to exercise the political and economic rights gained by the civil rights movement and to speed the integration of American society. But other African Americans, recollecting previous black nationalist movements like that of Marcus

Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. (1929–1968) and
 Malcolm X (1925–1965) not only differed in the goals they held out to their fellow African Americans— King urging racial integration and Malcolm X black separatism—but also in the means they advocated to achieve them. In his famous “I Have a Dream” speech during the interracial March on Washington on August 28, 1963, King proclaimed to a quarter of a million people assembled at the Lincoln Memorial,

“


 In the process of gaining our rightful place we must not be guilty of wrongful deeds. Let us not seek to satisfy our thirst for freedom by drinking from the cup of bitterness and hatred. . . . We must not allow our creative protest to degenerate into physical violence. Again and again we must rise to the majestic heights of meeting physical force with soul force.

”


 About three months later, Malcolm X angrily rejected King’s “peaceful, turn-the-other-cheek revolution”:

“


 Revolution is bloody, revolution is hostile, revolution knows no compromise, revolution overturns and destroys everything that gets in its way. And you, sitting around here like a knot on the wall, saying, ‘I’m going to love these folks no matter how much they hate me,’ . . . Whoever heard of a revolution where they lock arms, . . . singing ‘We shall overcome?’ You don’t do that in a revolution. You don’t do any singing, you’re too busy swinging.

”


 Garvey earlier in the century (see p. 792), breathed a vibrant separatist meaning into the concept of Black Power. They emphasized African American distinctiveness, promoted “Afro” hairstyles and dress, shed their “white” names for new African identities, and demanded black studies programs in schools and universities. Ironically, just as the civil rights movement had achieved its greatest legal and political triumphs, more city-shaking riots erupted in the black ghettos of several American cities. A bloody outburst in Newark, New Jersey, in the summer of 1967 took twenty-ﬁve lives. Federal troops restored order in Detroit, Michigan, after forty-three people died in the streets. As in Los Angeles, black rioters torched their own neighborhoods, attacking police ofﬁcers and even ﬁ reﬁghters, who had to battle both ﬂames and mobs howling “Burn, baby, burn.” These riotous outbursts angered many white Americans, who threatened to retaliate with their own “backlash” against ghetto arsonists and killers. Innercity anarchy bafﬂed many northerners, who had considered racial problems a purely “southern” question. But black concerns had moved north—as had nearly half the nation’s black people. In the North the Black Power movement now focused less on civil rights and more on economic demands. Black unemployment, for example, was nearly double that for whites. These oppressive new problems seemed even less likely to be solved peaceably than the struggle for voting rights in the South. Despair deepened when the magnetic and moderate voice of Martin Luther King, Jr., was forever silenced by a sniper’s bullet in Memphis, Tennessee, on April 4, 1968. A martyr for justice, he had bled and died against the peculiarly American thorn of race. The kill ing of King cruelly robbed the American people of one of the most inspirational leaders in their history— at a time when they could least afford to lose him. This outrage triggered a nationwide orgy of ghetto-gutting and violence that cost over forty lives. Rioters noisily made news, but thousands of other blacks quietly made history. Their voter registration in the South shot upward, and by the late 1960s several hundred blacks held elected ofﬁce in the Old South. Cleveland, Ohio, and Gary, Indiana, elected black mayors. By 1972 nearly half of southern black children sat in integrated classrooms. Actually, more schools in the South were integrated than in the North. About a third of black families had risen economically into the ranks of the middle class—though an equal proportion

American Escalation in Vietnam


 remained below the “poverty line.” King left a shining legacy of racial progress, but he was cut down when the job was far from completed.

Combating Communism in
Two Hemispheres
 Violence at home eclipsed Johnson’s legislative triumphs, while foreign ﬂare-ups threatened his political life. Discontented Dominicans rose in revolt against their military government in April 1965. Johnson speedily announced that the Dominican Republic was the target of a Castro-like coup by “Communist conspirators,” and he dispatched American troops, ultimately some twenty-ﬁve thousand, to restore order. But the evidence of a communist takeover was fragmentary at best. Johnson was widely condemned, at home and in Latin America, for his temporary reversion to the ofﬁcially abandoned “gunboat diplomacy.” At about the same time, Johnson was sinking deeper into the monsoon mud of Vietnam. Guerillas loyal to the North Vietnamese communists, called Viet Cong, attacked an American air base at Pleiku, South Vietnam, in February 1965. The president immediately ordered retaliatory bombing raids against military installations in North Vietnam and for the ﬁ rst time or-



 dered attacking U.S. troops to land. By the middle of March 1965, the Americans had “Operation Rolling Thunder” in full swing—regular full-scale bombing attacks against North Vietnam. Before 1965 ended, some 184,000 American troops were involved, most of them slogging through the jungles and rice paddies of South Vietnam searching for guerrillas. Johnson had now taken the ﬁ rst fateful steps down a slippery path. He and his advisers believed that a ﬁ ne-tuned, step-by-step “escalation” of American force would drive the enemy to defeat with a minimum loss of life on both sides. But the enemy matched every increase in American ﬁ repower with more men and more wiliness in the art of guerrilla warfare. The South Vietnamese themselves were meanwhile becoming spectators in their own war, as the ﬁghting became increasingly Americanized. Corrupt and collapsible governments succeeded each other in Saigon with bewildering rapidity. Yet American ofﬁcials continued to talk of defending a faithful democratic ally. Washington spokespeople also defended America’s action as a test of Uncle Sam’s “commitment” and of the reliability of his numerous treaty pledges to resist communist encroachment. Persuaded by such panicky thinking, Johnson steadily raised the military stakes in Vietnam. By 1968 he had poured more than

The Mechanized War
 High technology and modern equipment, such as this helicopter, gave the Americans in Vietnam a huge military advantage. But unaccompanied by a clear political purpose and a national will to win, technological superiority was insufﬁcient to achieve ﬁnal victory.



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 half a million troops into Southeast Asia, and the annual bill for the war was exceeding $30 billion. Yet the end was nowhere in sight.

Vietnam Vexations
 America could not defeat the enemy in Vietnam, but it seemed to be defeating itself. World opinion grew increasingly hostile; the blasting of an underdeveloped country by a mighty superpower struck many critics as obscene. Several nations expelled American Peace Corps volunteers. The ever-censorious Charles de Gaulle withdrew France from NATO in 1966 and ordered all American troops out of the country, reportedly prompting Johnson to ask if that included the thousands buried in Normandy. Overcommitment in Southeast Asia also tied America’s hands elsewhere. Attacked by Soviet-backed Egypt, Jordan, and Syria, a beleaguered Israel stunned the world with a military triumph in June, 1967. When the smoke cleared after the Six-Day War, Israel expanded to control new territories in the Sinai Peninsula, the Golan Heights, the Gaza Strip, and the West Bank of the Jordan River, including Jerusalem (see Map 40.2 on p. 1038). The Israeli victory brought some 1 million resentful Palestinian Arabs under direct Israeli control, while another 350,000 Palestinian refugees ﬂed to neighboring Jordan. The Israelis eventually withdrew from the Sinai after signing a peace treaty with Egypt, but they refused to relinquish the other areas without a treaty and began moving Jewish settlers into the heavily Arab district of the West Bank. The Six-Day War markedly intensiﬁed the problems of the already volatile Middle East, leading to an intractable standoff between the Israelis and Palestinians, now led by Yasir Arafat (1929–2004), head of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). For decades a return to the “pre-1967 boundaries” would be a key negotiating aim for Palestinians. The Middle East became an ever more dangerously packed powder keg that the war-plagued United States proved powerless to defuse. Domestic discontent festered as the Vietnamese entanglement dragged on. Antiwar demonstrations had begun on a small scale with campus “teach-ins” in 1965, and gradually these protests mounted to tidalwave proportions. As the long arm of the military draft dragged more and more young men off to the Southeast Asian slaughter pen, resistance stiffened. Thousands of draft registrants ﬂed to Canada; others

 Vietnam Vets Protest the War, 1971 Public opinion gradually but inexorably turned against the war. In 1965 polls showed that only 15 percent of Americans favored withdrawal from Vietnam. But by 1969, 69 percent of those interviewed indicated that they considered the war a “mistake,” and by 1970 a majority supported withdrawal of U.S. troops. In this demonstration on April 23, 1971, eight hundred veterans threw away their Purple Hearts, Bronze Stars, Silver Stars, and other military honors in front of the U.S. Capitol in protest against a war they no longer could support.

 publicly burned their draft cards. Hundreds of thousands of marchers ﬁ lled the streets of New York, San Francisco, and other cities, chanting, “Hell no, we won’t go” and “Hey, hey, LBJ, how many kids did you kill today?” Many Americans felt pangs of conscience at the spectacle of their countrymen burning peasant huts and blistering civilians with ghastly napalm.

Johnson and Vietnam


 Opposition in Congress to the Vietnam involvement centered in the inﬂuential Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, headed by Senator William Fulbright of Arkansas. A constant thorn in the side of the president, he staged a series of widely viewed televised hearings in 1966 and 1967, during which prominent personages aired their views, largely antiwar. Gradually the public came to feel that it had been deceived about the causes and “winnability” of the war. A yawning “credibility gap” opened between the government and the people. New ﬂocks of antiwar “doves” were hatching daily. Even within the administration, doubts were deepening about the wisdom of the war in Vietnam. When Defense Secretary McNamara expressed increasing discomﬁture at the course of events, he was quietly eased out of the cabinet. (Years later McNamara wrote that “we were wrong, terribly wrong,” about Vietnam.) By early 1968 the brutal and futile struggle had become the longest and most unpopular foreign war in the nation’s history. The government had failed utterly to explain to the people what was supposed to be at stake in Vietnam. Many critics wondered if any objective could be worth the vast price, in blood and treasure, that America was paying. Casualties, killed and wounded, already exceeded 100,000. More bombs had been dropped on Vietnam than on all enemy territory in World War II.

 The Vietnam Quagmire This soldier, carrying a rocket launcher across a stream in the ironically named “demilitarized zone” (DMZ) that separated North and South Vietnam, was killed in action just days after this photo was taken.



 The war was also ripping apart the fabric of American society and even threatening to shred the Constitution. In 1967 President Johnson ordered the CIA, in clear violation of its charter as a foreign intelligence agency, to spy on domestic antiwar activists. He also encouraged the FBI to turn its counterintelligence program, code-named “Cointelpro,” against the peace movement. “Cointelpro” subverted leading “doves” with false accusations that they were communist sympathizers. These clandestine tactics made the FBI look like a totalitarian state’s secret police rather than a guardian of American democracy. As the war dragged on, evidence mounted that America had been entrapped in an Asian civil war, ﬁghting against highly motivated rebels who were striving to overthrow an oppressive regime. Yet Johnson clung to his basic strategy of ratcheting up the pressure bit by bit. He stubbornly assured doubting Americans that he could see “the light at the end of the tunnel.” But to growing numbers of Americans, it seemed that Johnson was bent on “saving” Vietnam by destroying it.

Vietnam Topples Johnson
 Hawkish illusions that the struggle was about to be won were shattered by a blistering communist offensive launched in late January 1968, during Tet, the Vietnamese New Year. At a time when the Viet Cong were supposedly licking their wounds, they suddenly and simultaneously mounted savage attacks on twentyseven key South Vietnamese cities, including the capital, Saigon. Although eventually beaten off with heavy losses, they demonstrated anew that victory could not be gained by Johnson’s strategy of gradual escalation. The Tet offensive ended in a military defeat but a political victory for the Viet Cong. With an increasingly insistent voice, American public opinion demanded a speedy end to the war. Opposition grew so vehement that President Johnson could feel the very foundations of government shaking under his feet. He was also suffering through hells of personal agony over American casualties. He wept as he signed letters of condolence and slipped off at night to pray with monks at a small Catholic church in Washington. American military leaders responded to the Tet attacks with a request for 200,000 more troops. The size of the request staggered many policymakers. Former secretary of state Dean Acheson reportedly advised the president that “the Joint Chiefs of Staff don’t know what they’re talking about.”



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


 ence by ﬁ rmly declaring that he would not be a candidate for the presidency in 1968. Johnson’s “abdication” had the effect of preserving the military status quo. He had held the “hawks” in check, while offering himself as a sacriﬁce to the militant “doves.” The United States could thus maintain the maximum acceptable level of military activity in Vietnam with one hand, while trying to negotiate a settlement with the other. North Vietnam shortly agreed to commence negotiations in Paris. But progress was glacially slow, as prolonged bickering developed over the very shape of the conference table.

The Presidential Sweepstakes
 of 1968

President Lyndon Johnson Haunted by Specters of
Vietnam, 1967


 The president meanwhile was being sharply challenged from within his own party. Eugene McCarthy, a little-known Democratic senator from Minnesota, had emerged as a contender for the 1968 Democratic presidential nomination. The soft-spoken McCarthy, a sometime poet and devout Catholic, gathered a small army of antiwar college students as campaign workers. Going “clean for Gene,” with shaven faces and shortened locks, they helped him gain an impressive 41.4 percent of the Democratic vote in the New Hampshire primary on March 12, 1968. Although still second to Johnson’s 49.6 percent, McCarthy’s showing was devastating for the president. Johnson’s star fell further four days later when Senator Robert F. Kennedy, now a senator from New York and an outspoken dove on the war, threw his hat into the ring. The charismatic and handsome Kennedy, heir to his murdered brother’s mantle of leadership, stirred a passionate response among workers, African Americans, Latinos, and young people. These startling events abroad and at home were not lost on LBJ. In a bombshell address on March 31, 1968, he announced on nationwide television that he would freeze American troop levels and scale back the bombing. Then, in a dramatic plea to unify a dangerously divided nation, Johnson startled his vast audi-

 The summer of 1968 was one of the hottest political seasons in the nation’s history. Johnson’s heir apparent for the Democratic nomination was his liberal vice president, Hubert H. Humphrey, a former pharmacist, college professor, mayor, and U.S. senator from Minnesota. Senators McCarthy and Kennedy meanwhile dueled in several state primaries, with Kennedy’s bandwagon gathering ever-increasing speed. But on June 5, 1968, the night of an exciting victory in the Cal i fornia primary, Kennedy was shot to death by a young Arab immigrant resentful of the candidate’s pro-Israel views. Angry antiwar zealots, deprived by an assassin’s bullet of their leading candidate, streamed menacingly into Chicago for the Democratic convention in August 1968. Mayor Richard Daley responded by arranging for barbed-wire barricades around the convention hall (“Fort Daley”), as well as thousands of police and National Guard reinforcements. Some militant demonstrators baited the ofﬁcers in blue by calling them “pigs,” chanting “Ho, Ho, Ho Chi Minh,” shouting obscenities, and hurling bags and cans of excrement at the police lines. As people the world over watched on television, the exasperated “peace ofﬁcers” broke into a “police riot,” clubbing and manhandling innocent and guilty alike. Acrid tear gas fumes hung heavy over the city even as Humphrey steamrollered to the nomination on the ﬁrst ballot. The Humphrey forces blocked the McCarthyites’ attempt to secure an antiwar platform plank and hammered into place their own declaration that armed force would be relentlessly applied until the enemy showed more willingness to negotiate.

The Election of 1968




The Siege of Chicago, 1968
 Antiwar protesters staged demonstrations in the streets of Chicago during the Democratic National Convention in August 1968. Some 2,500 members of the radical Youth International Party (known as the Yippies) planned a peaceful “festival of light” across the street from the convention hall, but instead found themselves drawn into a melee with the police and National Guardsmen. The confrontation in Chicago badly tarnished Democratic candidate Hubert Humphrey’s presidential campaign. His Republican opponent, Richard Nixon, won the presidency with calls for an “honorable peace” in Vietnam and “law and order” at home.

 Scenting victory over the badly divided Democrats, the Republicans convened in plush Miami Beach, Florida, where former vice president Richard M. Nixon arose from his political grave to win the nomination. As a “hawk” on Vietnam and a right-leaning middleof-the-roader on domestic policy, Nixon pleased the Goldwater conser vatives and was acceptable to party moderates. He appealed to white southern voters and to the “law-and-order” element when he tapped as his vice-presidential running mate Maryland’s Governor Spiro T. Agnew, noted for his tough stands against dissidents and black militants. The Republican platform called for victory in Vietnam and a strong anticrime policy. Adding color and confusion to the campaign was a “spoiler” third-party ticket—the American Independent party—headed by a scrappy ex-pugilist, George C. Wallace, former governor of Alabama. In 1963 he had stood in the doorway to prevent two black students from entering the University of Alabama. “Segregation now! Segregation tomorrow! Segregation forever!” he shouted. Wallace jabbed repeatedly at “pointy-headed bureaucrats,” and he taunted hecklers as “bums” in need of a bath. Speaking behind a bulletproof screen, he called for prodding the blacks into their place, with bayonets if necessary. He and his running mate,

 former air force general Curtis LeMay, also proposed smashing the North Vietnamese to smithereens by “bombing them back to the Stone Age.” Between the positions of the Republicans and the Democrats on Vietnam, there was little choice. Both candidates were committed to carrying on the war until the enemy settled for an “honorable peace,” which seemed to mean an American victory. The millions of “doves” had no place to roost, and many refused to vote at all. Humphrey, scorched by the LBJ brand, went down to defeat as a loyal prisoner of his chief’s policies. Nixon, who had lost a cliffhanger to Kennedy in 1960, won one in 1968. He garnered 301 electoral votes, with 43.4 percent of the popular tally (31,785,480), as compared with 191 electoral votes and 42.7 percent of the popular votes (31,275,166) for Humphrey (see Map 38.3). Unlike most new presidents, Nixon faced congressional majorities of the opposing party in both houses. He carried not a single major city, thus attesting to the continuing urban strength of the Democrats, who also won about 95 percent of the black vote. Nixon had received no clear mandate to do anything. He was a minority president who owed his election to divisions over the war and protest against the unfair draft, crime, and rioting.



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968
WA MT

 OR

 ID

NV CA

 ND

WY UT

 AZ

 MN

SD NE

 CO

 WI

IA KS OK

 NM

 IL

MI IN

 MO

 LA

 OH

 WV

KY TN

 AR

 TX

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 14 RI PA NJ CT 4 17 8

 MS

 AL

 GA

 VA

NC R-12/AI
-1 SC 
DE MD DC

 FL

AK HI

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Nixon (Republican)




56.1%


31,785,480


Humphrey (Democrat)




35.5%


31,275,166


42.7%




8.4%


9,906,473


13.5%


Wallace
(American Independent)


43.4%


 Map 38.3 Presidential Election of 1968 (with electoral vote by state) George Wallace won in ﬁve states, and he denied a clear majority to either of the two major-party candidates in twenty-ﬁve other states. A shift of some ﬁfty thousand votes might well have thrown the election into the House of Representatives, giving Wallace the strategic bargaining position he sought.

Interactive Map


 As for Wallace, he won an impressive 9,906,473 popular votes and 46 electoral votes, all from ﬁve states of the Deep South, four of which the Republican Goldwater had carried in 1964. Wallace remained a formidable force, for he had amassed the largest third-party popular vote in American history to that point and was the last third-party candidate to win any electoral votes. (In 1992 Ross Perot enjoyed a greater popularvote margin but won no states; see p. 1057.) Wallace had also resoundingly demonstrated the continuing power of “populist” politics, which appealed to voters’ fears and resentments rather than to the better angels of their nature. His candidacy foreshadowed a coarsening of American political life that would take deep root in the ensuing decades.

The Obituary of
Lyndon Johnson
 Talented but tragedy-struck Lyndon Johnson returned to his Texas ranch in January 1969 and died there four

 years later. His party was defeated, and his “me-too” Hubert Humphrey was repudiated. Yet Johnson’s legislative leadership for a time had been remarkable. No president since Lincoln had worked harder or done more for civil rights. None had shown more compassion for the poor, blacks, and the ill-educated. But by 1966 Johnson was already sinking into the Vietnam quicksands. Great Society programs began to wither on the vine, as soaring war costs sucked tax dollars into the military machine. His effort to provide both guns and butter prevented him from delivering either in sufﬁcient quantity. The War on Poverty met resistance that was as stubborn as the Viet Cong and eventually went down to defeat. Great want persisted alongside great wealth. Johnson had cruciﬁed himself on the cross of Vietnam. The Southeast Asian quagmire engulfed his noblest intentions. Committed to some degree by his two predecessors, he had chosen to defend the American foothold and enlarge the conﬂ ict rather than be run out. He was evidently persuaded by his brightest advisers, both civilian and military, that massive aerial bombing and limited troop commitments would make a “cheap” victory possible. His decision not to escalate the ﬁghting further offended the “hawks,” and his refusal to back off altogether antagonized the “doves.” Like the Calvinists of colonial days, luckless Lyndon Johnson was damned if he did and damned if he did not.

The Cultural Upheaval
 of the 1960s The struggles of the 1960s against racism, poverty, and the war in Vietnam had momentous cultural consequences. The decade came to be seen as a watershed dividing two distinct eras in terms of values, morals, and behavior. Everywhere in 1960s America, a newly negative attitude toward all kinds of authority took hold. Disillusioned by the discovery that American society was not free of racism, sexism, imperialism, and oppression, many young people lost their traditional moral rudders. Neither families nor churches nor schools seemed to be able to deﬁ ne values and shape behavior with the certainty of shared purpose that many people believed had once existed. The nation’s mainline Protestant denominations, which had dominated American religious life for centuries, lost their grip in the 1960s, as weekly churchgoing declined from 48 per-

 The Counterculture of the 1960s

 cent in the late 1950s to 41 percent in the early 1970s. The liberal Protestant churches suffered the most. They increasingly ceded religious authority to conservative evangelicals while surrendering cultural authority to secular professionals and academic social scientists. A new cultural divide began to take shape, as educated Americans became increasingly secular and the less educated became more religious. Religious upheaval even churned the tradition-bound Roman Catholic Church, among the world’s oldest and most conser vative institutions. Clerics abandoned their Roman collars and Latin lingo, folk songs replaced Gregorian chants, and meatless Fridays became ancient history. No matter what the topic, conventional wisdom and inherited ideas came under ﬁre. “Trust no one over thirty” was a popular sneer of rebellious youth. Skepticism about authority had deep historical roots in American culture, and it had even bloomed in the supposedly complacent and conformist 1950s. “Beat” poets like Allen Ginsberg and iconoclastic novelists like Jack Kerouac had voiced dark disillusion with the materialistic pursuits and “establishment” arrogance of the Eisenhower era. In movies like Rebel Without a Cause (1955), the attractive young actor James Dean expressed the restless frustration of many young people. The disaffection of the young reached crisis proportions in the tumultuous 1960s. One of the ﬁrst organized protests against established authority broke out at the University of Cal i fornia at Berkeley in 1964, in the aptly named Free Speech Movement. Students objected to an administrative ban on the use of campus space for political debate. During months of protest, they accused the Cold War “megaversity” of promoting corporate interests rather than humane values. But in only a few years, the clean-cut Berkeley activists and their sober-minded sit-ins would seem downright quaint. Fired by outrage against the war in Vietnam, some sons and daughters of the middle class became radical political rebels. Others turned to mind-bending drugs, tuned in to “acid rock,” and dropped out of “straight” society. Still others “did their own thing” in communes or “alternative” institutions. Patriotism became a dirty word. Beﬂowered women in trousers and long-haired men with earrings heralded the rise of a self-conscious “counterculture” stridently opposed to traditional American ways. Social upheaval in the 1960s was far from an American-only phenomenon. As people born in the wake of World War II came of age across the world, they questioned established authority every where. Waves of



The Free Speech Movement, Berkeley, California, 1964
 The Free Speech Movement on the campus of the University of California at Berkeley marked the ﬁrst of the large-scale student mobilizations that rocked campuses across the country throughout the rest of the 1960s. Here a student schooled in passive resistance is dragged by police to a waiting bus.

 protests and calls for individual rights and political freedom spread like wildﬁ re. The year 1968 was so stormy that it became synonymous with un rest in many languages. In May of that year, leftist French students organized city-crippling strikes against their country’s antiquated university system. Joined by millions of workers, they nearly toppled the government. The global spirit of protest—against the Vietnam War, racial injustice, and the strictures of bourgeois society—spread from Berkeley, Cal i fornia, to Columbia University in



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


Paris, 1968
 Protests ripped through the world in 1968. In Paris student battles with campus authorities and police triggered a massive nationwide labor strike and nearly brought down the French government.

 New York, to West Berlin, and even to Communist China. In Czechoslovakia, deep within the Soviet bloc, Western-inspired reformers launched the liberating program that became known as the “Prague Spring” in January 1968. For eight months political freedom blossomed, until ruthlessly mowed down by Soviet tanks. Despite backlashes—by university presidents, conservative politicians, and communist leaders—the genie of cultural and political protest was out of the bottle. The 1960s also witnessed a “sexual revolution,” though its novelty and scale are often exaggerated. Without doubt, the introduction of the birth-control pill in 1960 made unwanted pregnancies much easier to avoid and sexual appetites easier to satisfy. The Mattachine Society, founded in Los Angeles in 1951, was a pioneering advocate for gay rights, as gay men and lesbians increasingly demanded sexual tolerance. A brutal attack on gay men by off-duty police ofﬁcers at New York’s Stonewall Inn in 1969 proved a turning point, when the victims fought back in what became known as the Stonewall Rebellion. Widening worries in the 1980s about sexually transmitted diseases like genital herpes and AIDS (acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome) ﬁ nally slowed, but did not reverse, the sexual revolution. Launched in youthful idealism, many of the cultural “revolutions” of the 1960s sputtered out in vio-

 lence and cynicism. Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), once at the forefront of the antipoverty and antiwar campaigns, had by decade’s end spawned an underground terrorist group called the Weathermen. Peaceful civil rights demonstrations had given way to blockbusting urban riots. What started as apparently innocent experiments with drugs like marijuana and LSD had fried many youthful brains and spawned a loathsome underworld of drug lords and addicts. Straight-laced guardians of respectability denounced the self-indulgent romanticism of the “ﬂower children” as the beginning of the end of modern civilization. Sympathetic observers hailed the “greening” of America—the replacement of materialism and imperialism by a new consciousness of human values. The upheavals of the 1960s could be largely attributed to the three P’s: the youthful population bulge, protest against racism and the Vietnam War, and the apparent permanence of prosperity. As the decade ﬂowed into the 1970s, the ﬂower children grew older and had children of their own, the civil rights movement fell silent, the war ended, and economic stagnation blighted the bloom of prosperity. Young people in the 1970s seemed more concerned with ﬁ nding a job in the system than with tearing the system down. But if the “counterculture” had not managed fully to replace older values, it had weakened their grip, perhaps permanently.

Chronology




The First Gay Pride
Parade, New York City, 1970
 On the ﬁrst anniversary of homosexuals’ celebrated resistance to police harassment at the Stonewall Inn, on June 27, 1969, two hundred men and women marched from Greenwich Village to Central Park, initiating a tradition that now has spread to many other American cities and around the globe, attracting thousands of paraders, onlookers, and even prominent politicians.

 CHRONOLOGY

 European Economic Community (EEC, Common Market) created by Treaty of Rome



 Berlin Wall built Alliance for Progress Bay of Pigs invasion Kennedy sends “military advisers” to South Vietnam



 Pressure from Kennedy results in rollback of steel prices Trade Expansion Act Laos neutralized Cuban missile crisis



 France vetoes British membership in EEC Anti-Diem coup in South Vietnam Civil rights march in Washington, D.C. Kennedy assassinated; Johnson assumes presidency



 Twenty-fourth Amendment (abolishing poll tax in federal elections) ratiﬁed “Freedom Summer” voter registration in South Gulf of Tonkin Resolution

 Johnson defeats Goldwater for presidency War on Poverty begins Civil Rights Act

 Great Society legislation Voting Rights Act U.S. troops occupy Dominican Republic

 1965– Race riots in U.S. cities

 France withdraws from NATO



 Six-Day War between Israel and Egypt



 North Vietnamese army launches Tet offensive in South Vietnam Worldwide protests Martin Luther King, Jr., and Robert Kennedy assassinated Prague Spring crushed by Soviet army Nixon defeats Humphrey and Wallace for presidency



 Stonewall Inn riot in New York City Astronauts land on moon



Chapter 38 The Stormy Sixties, 1960–1968


KEY TERMS
New Frontier (972) Peace Corps (973) Apollo (974) Berlin Wall (975) European Economic Community (EEC) (975) Bay of Pigs invasion (978) Cuban missile crisis (979) Freedom Riders (979) Voter Education Project (980) March on Washington (981) Civil Rights Act of 1964 (984) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
afﬁrmative action (984) Great Society (984) Freedom Summer (988) Mississippi Freedom Democratic party (988) Voting Rights Act of 1965 (989) Black Panther party (989) Black Power (990) Six-Day War (992) Stonewall Rebellion (998) Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) (998) 
Robert F. Kennedy
 Robert S. McNamara Ngo Dinh Diem James Meredith

Lee Harvey Oswald
Malcolm X
 Eugene McCarthy George C. Wallace

The Sixties: Constructive or Destructive?


T


 he 1960s were convulsed by controversy, and they have remained controversial ever since. Conﬂ icts raged in that turbulent decade between social classes, races, sexes, and generations. More than three decades later, the shock waves from the 1960s still reverberate through American society. The “Contract with America” that swept conser vative Republicans to power in 1994 amounted to nothing less than a wholesale repudiation of the government activism that marked the sixties and a resounding reafﬁ rmation of the “traditional values” that sixties culture supposedly trashed. Liberal Democrats, on the other hand, continue to press afﬁ rmative action for women and minorities, protection for the environment, an expanded welfare state, and sexual tolerance—all legacies of the stormy sixties. Four issues dominate historical discussion of the 1960s: the struggle for civil rights, the Great Society’s “War on Poverty,” the Vietnam War and the antiwar movement, and the emergence of the “counterculture.”

 Although most scholars praise the civil rights achievements of the 1960s, they disagree over the civil rights movement’s turn away from nonviolence and its embrace of separatism and Black Power. The Freedom Riders and Martin Luther King, Jr., ﬁ nd much more approval in most history books than do Malcolm X and the Black Panther party. But some scholars, notably William L. Van Deburg in New Day in Babylon: The Black Power Movement and American Culture, 1965–1975 (1992), argue that the “ﬂank effect” of radical Black Power advocates like Stokely Carmichael actually enhanced the bargaining position of moderates like Dr. King. Deburg also suggests that the enthusiasm of Black Power advocates for African American cultural uniqueness reshaped both black self-consciousness and the broader culture, as it provided a model for the feminist and multiculturalist movements of the 1970s and later. Johnson’s War on Poverty has found its liberal defenders in scholars like Allen Matusow (The Unraveling of America, 1984) and John Schwarz (America’s

To Learn More


 Hidden Success, 1988). Schwarz demonstrates, for example, that Medicare and Social Security reforms virtually eliminated poverty among America’s elderly. But the Great Society has also provoked strong criticism from writers such as Charles Murray (Losing Ground, 1984) and Lawrence Meade (Beyond Entitlements, 1986). As those conser vative critics see the poverty issue, the Great Society was part of the problem, not part of the solution. In their view the War on Poverty did not simply fail to eradicate poverty among the so-called underclass; it actually deepened the dependency of the poor on the welfare state and even generated a multigenerational “cycle” of poverty. In this argument Johnson’s Great Society stands indicted of creating in effect a permanent welfare class. For many young people of the 1960s, the antiwar movement protesting America’s policy in Vietnam provided their initiation into politics and their introduction to “movement culture,” with its sense of community and shared purpose. But scholars disagree over the movement’s real effectiveness in checking the war. Writers like John Lewis Gaddis (Strategies of Containment, 1982) explain America’s eventual withdrawal from Vietnam essentially without reference to the protesters in the streets. Others, like Todd Gitlin (The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage, 1987), insist that mass protest was the force that ﬁ nally pressed the war to a conclusion. Debate over the counterculture not only pits liberals against conser vatives but also pits liberals against radicals. A liberal historian like William O’Neill (Coming Apart, 1971) might sympathize with what he considers some of the worthy values pushed



 by student activists, such as racial justice, nonviolence, and the antiwar movement, but he also claims that much of the sixties “youth culture” degenerated into hedonism, arrogance, and social polarization. In contrast, younger historians such as Michael Kazin and Maurice Isserman argue that cultural radicalism and political radicalism were two sides of the same coin. Many young people in the sixties made little distinction between the personal and the political. As Sara Evans demonstrates in Personal Politics (1980), “the personal was the political” for many women. She ﬁ nds the roots of modern feminism in the sexism women activists encountered in the civil rights and antiwar movements. Although scholars rightly see the 1960s as a liberal decade, some have also started to focus on the other side of the political spectrum. Historians like Lisa McGirr (Suburban Warriors, 2001) argue that even though Barry Goldwater lost in a landslide in 1964, the conser vative movement he kick-started laid the foundation for later successes by Ronald Reagan and both George Bushes. Rebecca Klatch shows in A Generation Divided (1999) how the New Right fed off the New Left, reshaping American politics in profound ways. Liberal policies toward minorities, women, and the poor fueled the ﬁ res of traditionalists who wanted a return to “the good old days.” And the hedonistic counterculture sparked a religious revival that led to politically powerful groups like the Moral Majority by the 1970s. While critics may argue over the “good” versus the “bad” sixties, there is no denying the degree to which that tumultuous time, for better or worse, shaped the world in which we now live.

To Learn More
Dan Carter, The Politics of Rage: George Wallace, the Origins
 of the New Conservatism, and the Transformation of American Politics (1995) Robert Dallek, An Unﬁnished Life: John F. Kennedy, 1917– 1963 (2003) Alex Haley, The Autobiography of Malcolm X (1966) Maurice Isserman and Michael Kazin, America Divided: The Civil War of the 1960s (2000) Robert F. Kennedy, Thirteen Days (1969) Lisa McGirr, Suburban Warriors: The Origins of the New American Right (2001) James Miller, “Democracy Is in the Streets”: From Port Huron to the Siege of Chicago ( 1987)

Ann Moody, Coming of Age in Mississippi (1968)
Bruce Schulman, Lyndon B. Johnson and American
Liberalism (1994)
Jeremi Suri, Power and Protest: Global Revolution and the
 Rise of Détente (2003)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Stalemated
Seventies





1968–1980
 In all my years of public life, I have never obstructed justice. People have got to know whether or not their President is a crook. Well, I’m not a crook; I earned every thing I’ve got. RICHARD NIXON, 1973

A


 s the 1960s lurched to a close, the fantastic quartercentury economic boom of the post–World War II era also showed signs of petering out. By increasing their productivity, American workers had doubled their average standard of living in the twenty-ﬁve years since the end of World War II. Now, fatefully, productivity gains slowed to the vanishing point. The entire decade of the 1970s did not witness a productivity advance equivalent to even one year’s progress in the preceding two decades. At the new rate, it would take ﬁve hundred more years to bring about another doubling of the average worker’s standard of living. The median income of the average American family stagnated in the two decades after 1970 and failed to decline only because of the addition of working wives’ wages to the family income (see Figure 39.1). The rising

 baby-boom generation now faced the depressing prospect of a living standard that would be lower than that of their parents. As the postwar wave of robust economic growth crested by the early 1970s, at home and abroad the “can-do” American spirit gave way to an unaccustomed sense of limits.

Sources of Stagnation
 What caused the sudden slump in productivity? Some observers cited the increasing presence in the work force of women and teenagers, who typically had fewer skills than adult male workers and were less likely to take the full-time, long-term jobs where skills might be developed. Other commentators blamed declining

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Economic Woes


Figure 39.1 Median Household Income, 1970–2005
 During the long post–World War II economic boom (from about 1950 to 1970), family incomes increased dramatically, but after 1970 “real,” or inﬂation-adjusted, incomes stagnated. Prosperity in the late 1990s led to a slight upward trend, though adjusted median family income began to decline in the early years of the twenty-ﬁrst century. (Sources: U.S. Census Bureau, Historical Income Tables—Households, 2007; U.S. Census Bureau, “Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2005”; Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2007.)



U.S.
Dollars (in thousands) 
Nominal








 Inflation - adjusted (1970 dollars)













 investment in new machinery, the heavy costs of compliance with government-imposed safety and health regulations, and the general shift of the American economy from manufacturing to ser vices, where productivity gains were allegedly more difﬁcult to achieve and mea sure. Yet in the last analysis, much mystery attends the productivity slowdown, and economists have wrestled inconclusively with the puzzle. The Vietnam War also precipitated painful economic distortions. The disastrous conﬂict in Southeast Asia drained tax dollars from needed improvements in education, deﬂected scientiﬁc skill and manufacturing capacity from the civilian sector, and touched off a sickening spiral of inﬂation. Sharply rising oil prices in the 1970s also fed inﬂation, but its deepest roots lay in deﬁcit spending in the 1960s—especially Lyndon Johnson’s insistence on simultaneously ﬁghting the war in Vietnam and funding Great Society programs at home, all without a tax increase to ﬁnance the added expenditures. Both military spending and welfare spending are inherently inﬂationary (in the absence of offsetting tax collections), because they put dollars into people’s hands without adding to the supply of goods that those dollars can buy. Whatever its cause, the effects of inﬂation were deeply felt. Prices increased astonishingly throughout the 1970s. The cost of living tripled in the dozen years after Richard Nixon’s inauguration, in the longest and steepest inﬂationary cycle in American history. Other weaknesses in the nation’s economy were also laid bare by the abrupt reversal of America’s ﬁnancial fortunes in the 1970s. The competitive advantage of many major American businesses had been so enormous after World War II that they had small in-

 The Nixon Wave During Richard Nixon’s presidency, Americans experienced the ﬁrst serious inﬂation since the immediate post–World War II years. The inﬂationary surge grew to tidal-wave proportions by the late 1970s, when the consumer price index rose at an annual rate of more than 10 percent.



Chapter 39 The Stalemated Seventies, 1968–1980


 centive to modernize plants and seek more efﬁcient methods of production. The defeated German and Japa nese people had meanwhile clawed their way out of the ruins of war and built wholly new factories with the most up-to-date technology and management techniques. By the 1970s their efforts paid handsome rewards, as they came to dominate industries like steel, automobiles, and consumer electronics—ﬁelds in which the United States had once been unchallengeable. The poor economic performance of the 1970s hung over the decade like a pall. It frustrated both policymakers and citizens who keenly remembered the growth and optimism of the quarter-century since World War II. The overachieving postwar generation had never met a problem it could not solve. But now a stalemated, unpopular war and a stagnant, unresponsive economy heralded the end of the self-conﬁdent postwar era. With it ended the liberal dream, vivid since New Deal days, that an afﬂuent society could spend its way to social justice.

 President Richard M. Nixon Reversing Kennedy’s inaugural plea to “bear any burden,” Nixon told Congress in February 1970, “America cannot—and will not—conceive all the plans, design all the programs, execute all the decisions and undertake all the defense of the free nations of the world.”

Nixon “Vietnamizes” the War
 Inaugurated on January 20, 1969, Richard Nixon urged the American people, torn with dissension over Vietnam and race relations, to “stop shouting at one another.” Yet the new president seemed an unlikely conciliator of the clashing forces that appeared to be ripping apart American society. Solitary and suspicious by nature, Nixon could be brittle and testy in the face of opposition. He also harbored bitter resentments against the “liberal establishment” that had cast him into the political darkness for much of the preceding decade. Yet Nixon brought one hugely valuable asset with him to the White House—his broad knowledge and thoughtful expertise in foreign affairs. With calculating shrewdness he applied himself to putting America’s foreign-policy house in order. The ﬁ rst burning need was to quiet the public uproar over Vietnam. President Nixon’s announced policy, called Vietnamization, was to withdraw the 540,000 U.S. troops in South Vietnam over an extended period. The South Vietnamese—with American money, weapons, training, and advice— could then gradually take over the burden of ﬁghting their own war. The so-called Nixon Doctrine thus evolved. It proclaimed that the United States would honor its exist ing defense commitments but that in the future, Asians and others would have to ﬁght their own wars without the support of large bodies of American ground troops.

 Nixon sought not to end the war, but to win it by other means, without the further spilling of American blood. But even this much involvement was distasteful to the American “doves,” many of whom demanded a withdrawal that was prompt, complete, unconditional, and irreversible. Antiwar protesters staged a massive national Vietnam moratorium in October 1969, as nearly 100,000 people jammed Boston Common and some 50,000 ﬁ led by the White House carrying lighted candles. Undaunted, Nixon launched a counteroffensive by appealing to the silent majority who presumably supported the war. Though ostensibly conciliatory, Nixon’s appeal was in fact deeply divisive. His intentions soon became clear when he unleashed tough-talking Vice President Agnew to attack the “nattering nabobs of negativism” who demanded a quick withdrawal from Vietnam. Nixon himself in 1970 sneered at the student antiwar demonstrators as “bums.” By January 1970 the Vietnam conﬂict had become the longest in American history and, with 40,000 killed and over 250,000 wounded, the third most costly foreign war in the nation’s experience. It had also become grotesquely unpopular, even among troops in the ﬁeld. Because draft policies largely exempted college students and men with critical civilian skills, the armed forces in Vietnam were largely composed of the least privileged young Americans. Especially in the

 Nixon's Vietnam Policies

A
Marine Corps ofﬁcer expressed the disillusion that beset many American troops in Vietnam: 
“


 For years we disposed of the enemy dead like so much garbage. We stuck cigarettes in the mouths of corpses, put Playboy magazines in their hands, cut off their ears to wear around our necks. We incinerated them with napalm, atomized them with B-52 strikes, shoved them out the doors of helicopters above the South China Sea. . . . All we did was count, count bodies. Count dead human beings. . . . That was our fundamental military strategy. Body count. And the count kept going up.

”


 war’s early stages, African Americans were disproportionately represented in the army and accounted for a disproportionately high share of combat fatalities. Black and white soldiers alike fought not only against the Vietnamese enemy but also against the coiled fear of ﬂoundering through booby-trapped swamps and steaming jungles, often unable to distinguish friend from foe among the Vietnamese peasants. Drug abuse, mutiny, and sabotage dulled the army’s ﬁghting edge. Morale appeared to have plummeted to rock bottom when rumors ﬁ ltered out of Vietnam that soldiers were “fragging” their own ofﬁcers—murdering them with fragmentation grenades. Domestic disgust with the war was further deepened in 1970 by revelations of the My Lai Massacre, in which American troops had murdered innocent women and children in the village of My Lai two years earlier. Increasingly desperate for a quick end to the demoralizing conﬂ ict, Nixon widened the war in 1970 by ordering an attack on Vietnam’s neighbor, Cambodia.

 Angry students nationwide responded to the Cambodian invasion with rock throwing, window smashing, and arson. At Kent State University in Ohio, jumpy members of the National Guard ﬁ red into a noisy crowd, killing four and wounding many more; at historically black Jackson State College in Mississippi, the highway patrol discharged volleys at a student dormitory, kill ing two students. The nation fell prey to turmoil as rioters and arsonists convulsed the land. Nixon withdrew the American troops from Cambodia on June 29, 1970, after only two months. But in America the Cambodian invasion deepened the bitterness between “hawks” and “doves,” as right-wing groups physically assaulted leftists. Disillusionment with “whitey’s war” increased ominously among African Americans in the armed forces. The Senate (though not the House) overwhelmingly repealed the Gulf of Tonkin blank check that Congress had given Johnson in 1964 and sought ways to restrain Nixon. The youth of America, still aroused, were only slightly molliﬁed when the government reduced draft calls and shortened the period of draftability, on a lottery basis, from eight years to one year. They were simi larly pleased, though not paciﬁed, when the Twenty-sixth Amend-

Cambodianizing the
Vietnam War
 For several years the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong had been using Cambodia, bordering South Vietnam on the west, as a springboard for troops, weapons, and supplies. Suddenly, on April 29, 1970, without consulting Congress, Nixon ordered American forces to join with the South Vietnamese in cleaning out the enemy sanctuaries in ofﬁcially neutral Cambodia.



Cold War? Not for Some




Chapter 39 The Stalemated Seventies, 1968–1980


 off one antagonist against the other and to enlist the aid of both in pressuring North Vietnam into peace. Nixon’s thinking was reinforced by his national security adviser, Dr. Henry A. Kissinger. Bespectacled and German-accented, Kissinger had reached America as a youth when his parents ﬂed Hitler’s anti-Jewish persecutions. In 1969 the former Harvard professor had begun meeting secretly on Nixon’s behalf with North Vietnamese ofﬁcials in Paris to negotiate an end to the war in Vietnam. He was meanwhile preparing the president’s path to Beijing and Moscow. Nixon, heretofore an uncompromising anticommunist, announced to a startled nation in July 1971 that he had accepted an invitation to visit Communist China the following year. He made his historic jour-

 The War at Home, Spring 1970 President Nixon’s order to invade Cambodia sparked angry protests on American campuses. At Kent State University in Ohio, the nation watched in horror as four student demonstrators were shot by jittery National Guardsmen.

 ment in 1971 lowered the voting age to eighteen (see the Appendix). New combustibles fueled the ﬁ res of antiwar discontent in June 1971, when a former Pentagon ofﬁcial leaked to the New York Times the Pentagon Papers, a top-secret Pentagon study that documented the blunders and deceptions of the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, especially the provoking of the 1964 North Vietnamese attack in the Gulf of Tonkin.

 Nixon’s Détente with Beijing (Peking) and Moscow As the antiwar ﬁ restorm ﬂared ever higher, Nixon concluded that the road out of Vietnam ran through Beijing and Moscow. The two great communist powers, the Soviet Union and China, were clashing bitterly over their rival interpretations of Marxism. In 1969 they had even fought several bloody skirmishes along the “inner border” that separated them in Asia. Nixon astutely perceived that the Chinese-Soviet tension afforded the United States an opportunity to play

 Some Chicken, Some Egg, 1975 This cartoon pokes fun at Henry Kissinger as a global statesman. Serving ﬁrst as President Nixon’s national security adviser and then as secretary of state in the Nixon and Ford administrations, the German-born Kissinger brought with him to Washington a sophisticated—some said cynical—view of the world honed during his nearly two decades as a political science professor at Harvard.

 High-Stakes Diplomacy with China and the Soviet Union

 ney in February 1972, enjoying glass-clinking toasts and walks on the fabled Great Wall of China. He capped his visit with the Shanghai Communiqué, in which the two nations agreed to “normalize” their relationship. An important part of the accord was America’s acceptance of a “one-China” policy, implying a lessened American commitment to the independence of Taiwan. Nixon next traveled to Moscow in May 1972 to play his “China card” in a game of high-stakes diplomacy in the Kremlin. The Soviets, hungry for Amer ican foodstuffs and alarmed over the possibility of intensiﬁed rivalry with an American-backed China, were ready to deal. Nixon’s visits ushered in an era of détente, or relaxed tension, with the two communist powers and produced several signiﬁcant agreements in 1972, including a three-year arrangement by which the foodrich United States agreed to sell the Soviets at least $750 million worth of wheat, corn, and other cereals.



 More important, the United States and the USSR agreed to an anti–ballistic missile (ABM) treaty, which limited each nation to two clusters of defensive missiles, and to a series of arms-reduction negotiations known as SALT (Strategic Arms Limitation Talks), aimed at freezing the numbers of long-range nuclear missiles for ﬁve years. The ABM and SALT accords constituted long-overdue ﬁ rst steps toward slowing the arms race. Yet even though the ABM treaty forbade elaborate defensive systems, the United States forged ahead with the development of “MIRVs” (multiple independently targeted reentry vehicles), designed to overcome any defense by “saturating” it with large numbers of warheads, several to a rocket. Predictably, the Soviets proceeded to “MIRV” their own missiles, and the arms race ratcheted up to a still more perilous plateau, with over sixteen thousand nuclear warheads deployed by both sides by the end of the 1980s. Nixon’s détente diplomacy did, to some extent, deice the Cold War. Yet Nixon remained staunchly anticommunist when the occasion seemed to demand it. He strongly opposed the election of the outspoken Marxist Salvador Allende to the presidency of Chile in 1970. His administration slapped an embargo on the Allende regime, and the Central Intelligence Agency worked covertly to undermine the legitimately elected leftist president. When Allende died during a Chilean army attack on his headquarters in 1973, many observers smelled a Yankee rat—an impression that deepened when Washington warmly embraced Al lende’s successor, military dictator General Augusto Pinochet. Even so, by checkmating and co-opting the two great communist powers, the president had cleverly set the stage for America’s exit from Vietnam, although the concluding act in that wrenching tragedy remained to be played.

A
New Team on the Supreme Bench


 Balancing Act Nixon treads delicately between the two communist superpowers in 1973, holding some of the wheat with which he enticed both into détente.

 Nixon had lashed out during the campaign at the “permissiveness” and “judicial activism” of the Supreme Court presided over by Chief Justice Earl Warren. Following his appointment in 1953, the jovial Warren had led the Court into a series of decisions that drastically affected sexual freedom, the rights of criminals, the practice of religion, civil rights, and the structure of political representation. The decisions of the Warren Court reﬂected its deep concern for the individual, no matter how lowly.



Chapter 39 The Stalemated Seventies, 1968–1980


The Embattled Warren Court The United States
 Supreme Court, presided over by Chief Justice Earl Warren, made historic, progressive decisions in areas ranging from civil rights to political representation. Its achievements were not appreciated everywhere, however, as evidenced by this billboard in New Mexico.

 In Griswold v. Connecticut (1965), the Court struck down a state law that prohibited the use of contraceptives, even among married couples. The Court proclaimed (critics said “invented”) a “right of privacy” that soon provided the basis for decisions protecting women’s abortion rights. In 1963 the Court held (Gideon v. Wainwright) that all criminal defendants were entitled to legal counsel, even if they were too poor to afford it. More controversial still were decisions in two cases—Escobedo (1964) and Miranda (1966)—that ensured the right of the accused to remain silent and enjoy other protections. The latter case gave rise to the Miranda warning that arresting police ofﬁcers must read to suspects. These several

 court rulings sought to prevent abusive police tactics, but they appeared to conser vatives to coddle criminals and subvert law and order. Conservatives also objected to the Court’s views on religion. In two stunning decisions, Engel v. Vitale (1962) and School District of Abington Township v. Schempp (1963), the justices argued that the First Amendment’s separation of church and state meant that public schools could not require prayer or Bible reading. Social conser vatives raised anew the battle cry “Impeach Earl Warren” (see p. 953). From 1954 on, the Court came under relentless criticism, the bitterest since New Deal days. But for better or worse, the black-robed justices were grappling with stubborn social problems spawned by midcentury tensions, even—or especially—if duly elected legislatures failed to do so. Fulﬁ lling campaign promises, President Nixon undertook to change the Court’s philosophical complexion. Taking advantage of several vacancies, he sought appointees who would strictly interpret the Constitution, cease “meddling” in social and political questions, and not coddle radicals or criminals. The Senate in 1969 speedily conﬁ rmed his nomination of white-maned Warren E. Burger of Minnesota to succeed the retiring Earl Warren as chief justice. Before the end of 1971, the Court counted four conser vative Nixon appointments out of nine members. Yet Nixon was to learn the ironic lesson that many presidents have learned about their Supreme Court appointees: once seated on the high bench, the justices are fully free to think and decide according to their own beliefs, not according to the president’s expectations. The Burger Court that Nixon shaped proved reluctant to dismantle the “liberal” rulings of the Warren Court; it even produced the most controversial judicial opinion of modern times, the momentous Roe v. Wade decision in 1973, which legalized abortion (see p. 1017).

Nixon on the Home Front
 Surprisingly, Nixon presided over signiﬁcant expansion of the welfare programs that conservative Republicans routinely denounced. He approved increased appropriations for entitlements like Food Stamps, Medicaid, and Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), while adding a generous new program, Supplemental Security Income (SSI), to assist the indigent aged, blind, and disabled. He signed legisla-

 Nixon's Domestic Policies

 tion in 1972 guaranteeing automatic Social Security cost-of-living increases to protect the elderly against the ravages of inﬂation when prices rose more than 3 percent in any year. Ironically, this “indexing” actually helped to fuel the inﬂationary ﬁ res that raged out of control later in the decade. Amid much controversy, Nixon in 1969 implemented his so-called Philadelphia Plan, requiring construction-trade unions to establish “goals and timetables” for the hiring of black apprentices. Nixon may have been motivated in part by a desire to weaken the forces of liberalism by driv ing a wedge between blacks and trade unions. But whatever his reasoning, the president’s new policy had far-reaching implications. Soon extended to all federal contracts, the Philadelphia Plan in effect required thousands of employers to meet hiring quotas or to establish “setasides” for minority subcontractors. Nixon’s Philadelphia Plan drastically altered the meaning of “afﬁ rmative action.” Lyndon Johnson had intended afﬁ rmative action to protect individuals against discrimination. Nixon now transformed and escalated afﬁ rmative action into a program that conferred privileges on certain groups. The Supreme Court went along with Nixon’s approach. In Griggs v. Duke Power Co. (1971), the black-robed justices prohibited intelligence tests or other devices that had the effect of excluding minorities or women from certain jobs. The Court’s ruling strongly suggested to employers that the only sure protection against charges of discrimination was to hire minority workers—or admit minority students—in proportion to their presence in the population. Together the actions of Nixon and the Court opened broad employment and educational opportunities for minorities and women. They also opened a Pandora’s box of protest from critics who assailed the new style of afﬁ rmative action as “reverse discrimination,” imposed by executive order and judicial decision, not by democratically elected representatives. Yet what other remedy was there, defenders asked, to offset centuries of prejudice and opportunity denied? Among Nixon’s legacies was the creation in 1970 of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which climaxed two decades of mounting concern for the environment. Scientist and author Rachel Carson gave the environmental movement a huge boost in 1962 when she published Silent Spring, an enormously effective piece of latter-day muckraking that exposed the poisonous effects of pesticides. On April 22, 1970, millions of environmentalists around the world cele-



 Author Rachel Carson (1907–1964) Some call her the mother of the modern conservation movement because of the impact of her 1962 book, Silent Spring.

 brated the ﬁ rst Earth Day to raise awareness and to encourage their leaders to act. In the wake of what became a yearly event, the U.S. Congress passed the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the Endangered Species Act of 1973. The EPA now stood on the frontline of the battle for ecological sanity and made notable progress in reducing automobile emissions and cleaning up befouled waterways and toxic waste sites. The federal government also expanded its regulatory reach on behalf of workers and consumers. Late in 1970 Nixon signed the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) into law, creating an agency dedicated to improving working conditions, preventing work-related accidents and deaths, and issuing safety standards. The Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) followed two years later, holding companies to account for selling dangerous products. Together these three mega-agencies gave the federal government far more direct control over business



Chapter 39 The Stalemated Seventies, 1968–1980


 operations than in years past, drawing the ire of many big companies, which chastised the overbearing “national nanny.” Worried about creeping inﬂation (then running at about 5 percent), Nixon overcame his distaste for economic controls and imposed a ninety-day wage and price freeze in 1971. To stimulate the nation’s sagging exports, he next stunned the world by taking the United States off the gold standard and devaluing the dollar. These moves effectively ended the “Bretton Woods” system of international currency stabilization that had functioned for more that a quarter of a century after World War II (see p. 923). Elected as a minority president, with only 43 percent of the vote in 1968, Nixon devised a clever but cynical plan—called the southern strategy—to achieve a solid majority in 1972. Appointing conser vative Supreme Court justices, soft-pedaling civil rights, and opposing school busing to achieve racial balance were all parts of the strategy.

The Nixon Landslide of 1972
 But as fate would have it, the southern strategy became superﬂuous as foreign policy dominated the presidential campaign of 1972. Vietnam continued to

 be the burning issue. Nearly four years had passed since Nixon had promised, as a presidential candidate, to end the war and “win” the peace. Yet in the spring of 1972, the ﬁghting escalated anew to alarming levels when the North Vietnamese, heavily equipped with foreign tanks, burst through the demilitarized zone (DMZ) separating the two Vietnams. Nixon reacted promptly by launching massive bombing attacks on strategic centers in North Vietnam, including Hanoi, the capital. Gambling heavily on foreign forbearance, he also ordered the dropping of contact mines to blockade the principal harbors of North Vietnam. Either Moscow or Beijing, or both, could have responded explosively, but neither did, thanks to Nixon’s shrewd diplomacy. The continuing Vietnam conﬂ ict spurred the rise of South Dakota senator George McGovern to the 1972 Democratic nomination. McGovern’s promise to pull the remaining American troops out of Vietnam in ninety days earned him the backing of the large antiwar element in the party. But his appeal to racial minorities, feminists, leftists, and youth alienated the traditional working-class backbone of his party. Moreover, the discovery shortly after the convention that McGovern’s running mate, Missouri senator Thomas Eagleton, had undergone psychiatric care—including electroshock therapy—forced Eagleton’s ouster from

European Attacks on the Vietnam
 War The prolonged American involvement in Vietnam became increasingly unpopular abroad, including among U.S. allies. This German cartoon from 1972 decried how much tiny Vietnam had suffered under an endless string of so-called liberators.

The Bombing of Cambodia


 the ticket and virtually doomed the Democrats’ hopes of recapturing the White House. Nixon’s campaign emphasized that he had wound down the “Democratic war” in Vietnam from some 540,000 troops to about 30,000. His candidacy received an added boost just twelve days before the election when the high-ﬂying Dr. Kissinger announced that “peace is at hand” in Vietnam and that an agreement would be reached in a few days. Nixon won the election in a landslide. His lopsided victory encompassed every state except Massachusetts and the nonstate District of Columbia (which was granted electoral votes by the Twentythird Amendment in 1961—see Appendix). He piled up 520 electoral votes to 17 for McGovern and a popular majority of 47,169,911 to 29,170,383 votes. McGovern had counted on a large number of young people’s votes, but less than half the 18–21 age group even bothered to register to vote. The dove of peace, “at hand” in Vietnam just before the balloting, took ﬂ ight after the election. Fighting on both sides escalated again, and Nixon launched a furious two-week bombing of North Vietnam in an ironhanded effort to force the North Vietnamese back to the conference table. This merciless pounding drove the North Vietnamese negotiators to agree to a cease-ﬁ re in the Treaty of Paris on January 23, 1973, nearly three months after peace was prematurely proclaimed. Nixon hailed the face-saving cease-ﬁ re as “peace with honor,” but the boast rang hollow. The United States was to withdraw its remaining 27,000 or so troops and could reclaim some 560 American prisoners of war. The North Vietnamese were allowed to keep some 145,000 troops in South Vietnam, where they still occupied about 30 percent of the country. The shaky “peace” was in reality little more than a thinly disguised American retreat.

The Secret Bombing
 of Cambodia and the War Powers Act The constitutionality of Nixon’s continued aerial battering of Cambodia had meanwhile been coming under increasing ﬁ re. In July 1973 America was shocked to learn that the U.S. Air Force had secretly conducted some thirty-ﬁve hundred bombing raids against North Vietnamese positions in Cambodia, beginning in March 1969 and continuing for some fourteen months prior to the open American incursion in May 1970. The most disturbing feature of these sky



 The Washington Post (July 19, 1973) carried this news item:

“


 American B-52 bombers dropped about 104,000 tons of explosives on Communist sanctuaries in neutralist Cambodia during a series of raids in 1969 and 1970. . . . The secret bombing was acknowledged by the Pentagon the Monday after a former Air Force major . . . described how he falsiﬁed reports on Cambodian air operations and destroyed records on the bombing missions actually ﬂown.

”


 forays was that while they were going on, American ofﬁcials, including the president, had sworn that Cambodian neutrality was being respected. Countless Americans began to wonder what kind of representative government they had if the United States had been ﬁghting a war they knew nothing about. Deﬁance followed secretiveness. After the Vietnam cease-ﬁ re in January 1973, Nixon brazenly continued large-scale bombing of communist forces in order to help the rightist Cambodian government, and he repeatedly vetoed congressional efforts to stop him. The years of bombing inﬂ icted grisly wounds on Cambodia, blasting its people, shredding its economy, and revolutionizing its politics. The long-suffering Cambodians soon groaned under the sadistic heel of Pol Pot, a murderous tyrant who dispatched as many as 2 million of his people to their graves. He was forced from power, ironically enough, only by a full-dress Vietnamese invasion in 1978, followed by a military occupation that dragged on for a decade. Congressional opposition to the expansion of presidential war-making powers by Johnson and Nixon led to the War Powers Act in November 1973. Passed over Nixon’s veto, it required the president to report to Congress within forty-eight hours after committing troops to a foreign conﬂict or “substantially” enlarging American combat units in a foreign country. Such a limited authorization would have to end within sixty days unless Congress extended it for thirty more days. The War Powers Act was but one manifestation of what came to be called the “New Isolationism,” a mood of caution and restraint in the conduct of the nation’s foreign affairs after the bloody and futile misadventure in Vietnam. Meanwhile, the draft ended in January 1973, although it was retained on a standby basis. Future



Chapter 39 The Stalemated Seventies, 1968–1980


 members of the armed forces were to be volunteers, greatly easing anxieties among draft-age youth.

The Arab Oil Embargo
 and the Energy Crisis The long-rumbling Middle East erupted anew in October 1973, when the rearmed Syrians and Egyptians unleashed surprise attacks on Israel in an attempt to regain the territory they had lost in the Six-Day War of 1967. With the Israelis in desperate retreat, Kissinger, who had become secretary of state in September, hastily ﬂew to Moscow in an effort to restrain the Soviets, who were arming the attackers. Believing that the Kremlin was poised to ﬂy combat troops to the Suez area, Nixon placed America’s nuclear forces on alert and ordered a gigantic airlift of nearly $2 billion in war materials to the Israelis. This assistance helped save the day, as the Israelis aggressively turned the tide and threatened Cairo itself before American diplomacy brought about an uneasy cease-ﬁ re to what became known as the Yom Kippur War. America’s policy of backing Israel against its oilrich neighbors exacted a heavy penalty. Late in October 1973, the OPEC nations announced an embargo on oil shipments to the United States and several European allies supporting Israel, especially the Netherlands. What was more, the oil-rich Arab states cut their oil production, further ratcheting up pressure on the entire West, whose citizens suffered a long winter

 Uncle Sam’s Bed of Nails The oil crises of the 1970s tortured the American economy.

 of lowered thermostats and speedometers. Lines at gas stations grew longer as tempers grew shorter. The shortage triggered a major economic recession not just in America but also in France and Britain. Although the latter two countries had not supported Israel and had thus been exempted from the embargo, in an increasingly globalized, interconnected world, all nations soon felt the crunch. The “energy crisis” suddenly energized a number of long-deferred projects. Congress approved a costly Alaska pipeline and a national speed limit of ﬁfty-ﬁve miles per hour to conserve fuel. Agitation mounted for heavier use of coal and nuclear power, despite the environmental threat they posed. The ﬁve months of the Arab “blackmail” embargo in 1974 clearly signaled the end of an era—the era of cheap and abundant energy. A twenty-year surplus of world oil supplies had masked the fact that since 1948 the United States had been a net importer of oil. Amer ican oil production peaked in 1970 and then began an irreversible decline. Blissfully unaware of their dependence on foreign suppliers, Americans, like revelers on a binge, had more than tripled their oil consumption since the end of World War II. The number of automobiles increased 250 percent between 1949 and 1972, and Detroit’s engineers gave nary a thought to build ing more fuel-efﬁcient engines. By 1974 America was oil-addicted and extremely vulnerable to any interruption in supplies. That stark fact would deeply color the diplomatic and economic history of the next three decades and beyond, as the

The Watergate Scandal


 Oil Shock When OPEC dramatically jacked up oil prices in the 1970s, many Americans—as represented by the Henry Kissinger ﬁgure in this cartoon—were slow to realize that an era of low energy prices had ended forever.

 Middle East loomed ever larger on the map of America’s strategic interests. OPEC approximately quadrupled its price for crude oil after lifting the embargo in 1974. Huge new oil bills wildly disrupted the U.S. balance of international trade and added further fuel to the already raging ﬁ res of inﬂation. The United States took the lead in forming the International Energy Agency in 1974 as a counterweight to OPEC, and various sectors of the economy, including Detroit’s carmakers, began their slow, grudging adjustment to the rudely dawning age of energy dependency. But full reconciliation to that uncomfortable reality was a long time coming.

Watergate and the
Unmaking of a President
 Nixon’s electoral triumph in 1972 was almost immediately sullied—and eventually undone—by the socalled Watergate scandal. On June 17, 1972, ﬁve men were arrested in the Watergate apartment-ofﬁce complex in Washington after a bungled effort to plant electronic “bugs” in the Democratic party’s headquarters. They were soon revealed to be working for the Republican Committee to Re-Elect the President— popularly known as CREEP. The Watergate break-in turned out to be just one in a series of Nixon administration “dirty tricks” that included forging documents



 to discredit Democrats, using the Internal Revenue Service to harass innocent citizens named on a White House “enemies list,” burglarizing the ofﬁce of the psychiatrist who had treated the leaker of the Pentagon Papers, and perverting the FBI and the CIA to cover the tricksters’ tracks. Meanwhile, the moral stench hanging over the White House worsened when Vice President Agnew was forced to resign in October 1973 for taking bribes from Maryland contractors while governor and also as vice president. In the ﬁ rst use of the Twenty-ﬁ fth Amendment (see the Appendix), Nixon nominated and Congress conﬁ rmed Agnew’s successor, a twelve-term congressman from Michigan, Gerald (“Jerry”) Ford. Amid a mood of growing national outrage, a select Senate committee conducted widely televised hearings about the Watergate affair in 1973–1974. Nixon indignantly denied any prior knowledge of the breakin and any involvement in the legal proceedings against the burglars. But John Dean III, a former White House lawyer with a remarkable memory, accused top White House ofﬁcials, including the president, of obstructing justice by trying to cover up the Watergate break-in and silence its perpetrators. Then another former White House aide revealed that a secret taping system had recorded most of Nixon’s Oval Ofﬁce conversations. Now Dean’s sensational testimony could be checked against the White House tapes, and the Senate committee could better determine who was telling the truth. But Nixon, stubbornly citing his “executive privilege,” refused to hand over the tapes. Then, on October 20, 1973, he ordered the “Saturday Night Massacre,” ﬁ ring his own special prosecutor appointed to investigate the Watergate scandal, as well as his attorney general and deputy attorney general because they had refused to go along with ﬁring the prosecutor. Responding at last to the House Judiciary Committee’s demand for the Watergate tapes, Nixon agreed in the spring of 1974 to the publication of “relevant” portions of the tapes, with many sections missing (including Nixon’s frequent obscenities, which were excised with the phrase “expletive deleted”). But on July 24, 1974, the president suffered a disastrous setback when the Supreme Court unanimously ruled that “executive privilege” gave him no right to withhold evidence relevant to possible criminal activity. Skating on thin ice over hot water, Nixon reluctantly complied. Seeking to soften the impact of inevitable disclosure, Nixon now made public three subpoenaed tapes of conversations with his chief aide on June 23, 1972.



Chapter 39 The Stalemated Seventies, 1968–1980


 Nixon, the “Law-and-Order-Man”

 Fatally for his own case, one of them—the notorious “smoking gun” tape (see p. 1015)—revealed the president giving orders, six days after the Watergate breakin, to use the CIA to hold back an inquiry by the FBI. Nixon’s own tape-recorded words convicted him of

Smoking Pistol Exhibit A
 The tape-recorded conversations between President Nixon and his top aide on June 23, 1972, proved mortally damaging to Nixon’s claim that he had played no role in the Watergate cover-up.

 having been an active party to the attempted cover-up. The House Judiciary Committee proceeded to draw up articles of impeachment, based on obstruction of justice, abuse of the powers of the presidential ofﬁce, and contempt of Congress. The public’s wrath proved to be overwhelming. Republican leaders in Congress concluded that the guilty and unpredictable Nixon was a loose cannon on the deck of the ship of state. They frankly informed the president that his impeachment by the full House and removal by the Senate were foregone conclusions and that he would do best to resign. Left with no better choice, Nixon choked back his tears and announced his resignation in a dramatic television appearance on August 8, 1974. Few presidents had ﬂown so high, and none had sunk so low. In his Farewell Address, Nixon admitted having made some “judgments” that “were wrong” but insisted that he had always acted “in what I believed at the time to be the best interests of the nation.” Unconvinced, countless Americans would change the song “Hail to the Chief” to “Jail to the Chief.” The nation had survived a wrenching constitutional crisis, which proved that the impeachment machinery forged by the Founding Fathers could work when public opinion overwhelmingly demanded that it be implemented. The principles that no person is above the law and that presidents must be held to strict accountability for their acts were strengthened. The United States of America, on the eve of its two-hundredth birthday as a republic, had eventually cleaned its own sullied house, giving an impressive demonstration of self-discipline and self-government to the rest of the world.

 The “Smoking Gun” Tape, June 23, 1972, 10:04–11:39 a.m. he technological capability to record Oval Ofﬁce conversations combined with Richard Nixon’s obsession with documenting his presidency to give the public—and the Senate committee investigating his role in the break-in of the Democratic National Committee headquarters in the Watergate Ofﬁce Tower—rare access to personal conversations between the president and his closest advisers. This tape, which undeniably exposed Nixon’s central role in constructing a “cover-up” of the Watergate break-in, was made on Nixon’s ﬁ rst day back in Washington after the botched burglary of June 17, 1972. In this conversation with White House Chief of Staff H. R. Haldeman, Nixon devised a plan to block a widening FBI investigation by instructing the director of the CIA to deﬂect any further FBI snooping on the grounds that it would endanger sensitive CIA operations. Nixon refused to turn over this and other tapes to Senate investigators until so ordered by the Supreme Court on July 24, 1974. Within four days of its release on August 5, Nixon was forced to resign. After eighteen months of protesting his innocence of the crime and his ignorance of any effort to obstruct justice, Nixon was ﬁ nally undone by the evidence in this incriminating “smoking gun” tape. While tapes documented two straight years of Nixon’s Oval Ofﬁce conversations, other presidents, such as Franklin Roosevelt, John F. Kennedy, and Lyndon Baines Johnson, recorded important meetings and crisis deliberations. Since Watergate, however, it is unlikely that any president has permitted extensive tape recording, depriving historians of a unique insight into the inner workings of the White House. Should taped White House discussions be part of the public record of a presidency, and if so, who should have access to them? What else might historians learn from a tape like this one, besides analyzing the Watergate cover-up?

T


 Haldeman: . . . yesterday, they concluded it was not the White House, but are now convinced it is a CIA thing, so the CIA turn off would . . . President: Well, not sure of their analysis, I’m not going to get that involved. I’m (unintelligible). Haldeman: No, sir. We don’t want you to. President: You call them in. President: Good. Good deal! Play it tough. That’s the way they play it and that’s the way we are going to play it. Haldeman: O.K. We’ll do it. President: Yeah, when I saw that news summary item, I of course knew it was a bunch of crap, but I thought ah, well it’s good to have them off on this wild hair thing because when they start bugging us, which they have, we’ll know our little boys will not know how to handle it. I hope they will though. You never know. Maybe, you think about it. Good! President: When you get in these people when you . . . get these people in, say: “Look, the problem is that this will open the whole, the whole Bay of Pigs thing, and the President just feels that” ah, without going into the details . . . don’t, don’t lie to them to the extent to say there is no involvement, but just say this is sort of a comedy of errors, bizarre, without getting into it, “the President believes that it is going to open the whole Bay of Pigs thing up again. And, ah because these people are plugging for, for keeps and that they should call the FBI in and say that we wish for the country, don’t go any further into this case,” period!





Chapter 39 The Stalemated Seventies, 1968–1980


The First Unelected President
 Gerald Rudolph Ford, the ﬁ rst man to be made president solely by a vote of Congress, entered the besmirched White House in August 1974 with serious handicaps. He was widely—and unfairly—suspected of being little more than a dim-witted former college football player. President Johnson had sneered that “Jerry” was so lacking in brainpower that he could not walk and chew gum at the same time. Worse, Ford had been selected, not elected, vice president, following Spiro Agnew’s resignation in disgrace. The sour odor of illegitimacy hung about this president without precedent. Then, out of a clear sky, Ford granted a complete pardon to Nixon for any crimes he may have committed as president, discovered or undiscovered. Democrats were outraged, and lingering suspicions about the circumstances of the pardon cast a dark shadow over Ford’s prospects of being elected president in his own right in 1976. Ford at ﬁ rst sought to enhance the so-called détente with the Soviet Union that Nixon had crafted. In July 1975 President Ford joined leaders from thirtyfour other nations in Helsinki, Finland, to sign several sets of historic accords. One group of agreements ofﬁcially wrote an end to World War II by ﬁ nally legitimizing the Soviet-dictated boundaries of Poland and other Eastern European countries. In return, the Soviets signed a “third basket” of agreements, guaranteeing more liberal exchanges of people and information between East and West and protecting certain basic

Passing the Buck
 A satirical view of where responsibility for the Vietnam debacle should be laid.

 “human rights.” The Helsinki accords kindled small dissident movements in Eastern Europe and even in the USSR itself, but the Soviets soon poured ice water on these sputtering ﬂames of freedom. Western Europeans, especially the West Germans, cheered the Helsinki conference as a milestone of détente. But in the United States, critics increasingly charged that détente was proving to be a one-way street. American grain and technology ﬂowed across the Atlantic to the USSR, and little of comparable importance ﬂowed back. Moscow also continued its human rights violations, including restrictions on Jewish emigration, which prompted Congress in 1974 to add punitive restrictions to a U.S.-Soviet trade bill. Despite these difﬁculties, Ford at ﬁ rst clung stubbornly to détente. But the American public’s fury over Moscow’s double-dealing so steadily mounted that by the end of his term, the president was refusing even to pronounce the word détente in public. The thaw in the Cold War was threatening to prove chillingly brief.

Defeat in Vietnam
 Early in 1975 the North Vietnamese gave full throttle to their long-expected drive southward. President Ford urged Congress to vote still more weapons for Vietnam, but his plea was in vain, and without the crutch of massive American aid, the South Vietnamese quickly and ingloriously collapsed. The dam burst so rapidly that the remaining Americans had to be frantically evacuated by helicopter, the last of them on April 29, 1975. Also rescued were

Feminist Victories


 about 140,000 South Vietnamese, most of them so dangerously identiﬁed with the Americans that they feared a bloodbath by the victorious communists. Ford compassionately admitted these people to the United States, where they added further seasoning to the melting pot. Eventually some 500,000 arrived (see “Makers of America: The Vietnamese,” pp. 1018–1019). America’s longest, most frustrating war thus ended not with a bang but a whimper. In a technical sense, the Americans had not lost the war; their client nation had. The United States had fought the North Vietnamese to a standstill and had then withdrawn its troops in 1973, leaving the South Vietnamese to ﬁght their own war, with generous shipments of costly American aircraft, tanks, and other munitions. The estimated cost to America was $118 billion in current outlays, together with some 56,000 dead and 300,000 wounded. The people of the United States had in fact provided just about every thing, except the will to win—and that could not be injected by outsiders. Technicalities aside, America had lost more than a war. It had lost face in the eyes of foreigners, lost its own self-esteem, lost conﬁdence in its military prowess, and lost much of the economic muscle that had made possible its global leadership since World War II. Americans reluctantly came to realize that their power as well as their pride had been deeply wounded in Vietnam and that recovery would be slow and painful.

Feminist Victories and Defeats
 As the army limped home from Vietnam, there was little rejoicing on the college campuses, where dem-



 onstrators had once braved tear gas and billy clubs to denounce the war. The antiwar movement, like many of the other protest movements that convulsed the country in the 1960s, had long since splintered and stalled. One major exception to this pattern stood out: American feminists, although they had their differences, showed vitality and momentum. They won legislative and judicial victories and provoked an intense rethinking of gender roles. (On the roots of this movement, see “Makers of America: The Feminists,” pp. 1022–1023.) Thousands of women marched in the Women’s Stride for Equality on the ﬁ ftieth anniversary of woman suffrage in 1970. In 1972 Congress passed Title IX of the Education Amendments, prohibiting sex discrimination in any federally assisted educational program or activity. Perhaps this act’s biggest impact was to create opportunities for girls’ and women’s athletics at schools and colleges, giving birth to a new “Title IX generation” that would reach maturity in the 1980s and 1990s and help professionalize women’s sports as well. The Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) to the Constitution won congressional approval in 1972. It declared, “Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.” Twenty-eight of the necessary thirty-eight states quickly ratiﬁed the amendment, ﬁrst proposed by suffragists in 1923. Hopes rose that the ERA might soon become the law of the land. Even the Supreme Court seemed to be on the movement’s side. In Reed v. Reed (1971) and Frontiero v. Richardson (1973), the Court challenged sex discrimination in legislation and employment. And in the landmark case of Roe v. Wade (1973), the Court struck down

 The Abortion Wars Pro-choice and prolife demonstrators brandish their beliefs. By the end of the twentieth century, the debate over abortion had become the most morally charged and divisive issue in American society since the struggle over slavery in the nineteenth century.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Vietnamese American Migration 
A


 t ﬁ rst glance the towns of Westminster and Fountain Valley, Cal i fornia, seem to resemble other Cal i fornia communities nearby. Tract homes line residential streets; shopping centers ﬂank the busy thoroughfares. But these are no ordinary American suburbs. Instead they make up “Little Saigons,” vibrant outposts of Vietnamese culture in the contemporary United States. Shops offer exotic Asian merchandise; restaurants serve such delicacies as lemongrass chicken. These neighborhoods, living reminders of America’s anguish in Vietnam, are a rarely acknowledged consequence of that sorrowful conﬂ ict. Before South Vietnam fell in 1975, few Vietnamese ventured across the Paciﬁc. Indeed, throughout most of American history until the mid-twentieth century, the bulk of U.S. immigrants had come from Europe, with the notable exception of the Chinese and, to a lesser extent, the Japa nese (see pp. 550–551 and pp. 878–879). This trend began to change in the 1960s, as people from South America and Asia began arriving in greater numbers. The war-weary Vietnamese were at the forefront of this new immigration, so much so that in 1966 the U.S. Immigration authorities designated “Vietnamese” as a separate category of newcomers. Most early immigrants were the wives and children of U.S. Servicemen. As the communists closed in on Saigon in the mid1970s, many Vietnamese, particularly those who had worked closely with American or South Vietnamese authorities, feared for their lives. Gathering together as many of their extended-family members as they could, thousands of Vietnamese prepared to ﬂee the country. In a few hectic days in 1975, some 140,000 Vietnamese escaped before the approaching communist gunﬁ re, a few dramatically clinging to the bottoms of departing U.S. helicopters. From Saigon they were conveyed to military bases in Guam and the Philippines. Another 60,000 less fortunate Vietnamese escaped at the same time over land and sea to Hong Kong and Thailand, where they waited ner vously for permission to move on. To accommodate the refugees, the U.S. government set up camps across the United States. Arrivals were crowded into army barracks affording little room



 and less privacy. These were boot camps not for military ser vice but for assimilation into American society. A rigorous program trained the Vietnamese in Eng lish, forbade children from speaking their native language in the classroom, and even immersed them in American slang. Many resented this attempt to mold them, to strip them of their culture. Their discontent boiled over when authorities prepared to release the refugees from camps and board them with families around the nation. The resettlement ofﬁcials had decided to ﬁ nd a sponsor for each Vietnamese family—an American family that would provide food, shelter, and assistance for the refugees until they could fend for themselves. But the Vietnamese people cherish their traditional extended families—grandparents, uncles, aunts, and cousins living communally with parents and children. Few American sponsors would accommodate a large extended family; fewer Vietnamese families would willingly separate.

 The Last Days of Saigon Violence often attended the frantic American evacuation from Vietnam in 1975.

Preserving the Past
A
Vietnamese American boy  learns classical calligraphy from his grandfather.

 The refugees were dispersed to Iowa, Illinois, Pennsylvania, New York, Washington, and Cal i fornia. But the settlement sites, many of them tucked away in rural districts, offered scant economic opportunities. The immigrants, who had held mainly skilled or whitecollar positions in Vietnam, bristled as they were herded into menial labor. As soon as they could, they relocated, hastening to established Vietnamese enclaves around San Francisco, Los Angeles, and Dallas. Soon a second throng of Vietnamese immigrants pushed into these Little Saigons. Fleeing from the ravages of poverty and from the oppressive communist government, these stragglers had crammed themselves and their few possessions into little boats, hoping to reach Hong Kong or get picked up by foreign ships. Eventually many of these “boat people” reached the United States. Usually less educated than the ﬁ rst arrivals and receiving far less resettlement aid from the U.S. government, they were, however, more willing to start at the bottom. Today these two groups total more than half a million people. Differing in experience and expectations, the Vietnamese share a new home in a strange land. Their uprooting is an immense, unreckoned consequence of America’s longest war.

Boat People


 Vietnamese refugees ﬂee to freedom.





Chapter 39 The Stalemated Seventies, 1968–1980


 laws prohibiting abortion, arguing that a woman’s decision to terminate a pregnancy was protected by the constitutional right of privacy. But the feminist movement soon faced a formidable backlash. In 1972 President Nixon vetoed a proposal to set up nationwide public day care, saying it would weaken the American family. Antifeminists blamed the women’s movement for the rising divorce rate, which tripled between 1960 and 1976. And the Catholic Church and the religious right orga nized a powerful grassroots movement to oppose the legalization of abortion. For many feminists the most bitter defeat was the death of the ERA. Antifeminists, led by conser vative

 Antifeminist Phyllis Schlaﬂy (b. 1924) Schlaﬂy traveled the country promoting her “STOP ERA” campaign. She argued that ratiﬁcation of the Equal Rights Amendment would undermine the American family by violating “the right of a wife to be supported by her husband,” requiring women to serve in combat, and legalizing homosexual marriage.

 activist Phyllis Schlaﬂy, argued that the ERA would remove traditional protections that women enjoyed by forcing the law to see them as men’s equals. They further believed that the amendment would threaten the basic family structure of American society. Schlaﬂy charged that the ERA’s advocates were just “bitter women seeking a constitutional cure for their personal problems.” In 1979 Congress extended the deadline for ratiﬁcation of the amendment, but opponents dug in their heels. The ERA died in 1982, three states short of success.

The Seventies in Black
 and White Although the civil rights movement had fractured, race remained an explosive issue in the 1970s. The Supreme Court in Milliken v. Bradley (1974) blindsided school integrationists when it ruled that desegregation plans could not require students to move across school-district lines. The decision effectively exempted suburban districts from shouldering any part of the burden of desegregating inner-city schools, thereby reinforcing “white ﬂ ight” from cities to suburbs. By the same token, the decision distilled all the problems of desegregation into the least prosperous districts, often pitting the poorest, most disadvantaged elements of the white and black communities against one another. Afﬁ rmative-action programs also remained highly controversial. White workers who were denied advancement and white students who were refused college admission continued to raise the cry of “reverse discrimination,” charging that their rights had been violated by employers and admissions ofﬁcers who put more weight on racial or ethnic background than on ability or achievement. One white Cal i fornian, Allan Bakke, made headlines in 1978 when the Supreme Court, by the narrowest of margins (ﬁve to four) upheld his claim that his application to medical school had been turned down because of an admissions program that favored minority applicants. In a tortured decision reﬂecting the troubling moral ambiguities and insoluble political complexities of this issue, the Court ordered the University of Cal i fornia at Davis medical school to admit Bakke and declared that preference in admissions could not be given to members of any group, minority or majority, on the basis of ethnic or racial identity alone. Yet at the same time, the Court said that racial

Race and Gender Controversies




A
Sad Day for Old Glory  In 1976, America’s bicentennial year, anti-busing demonstrators convulsed Boston, the historic “cradle of liberty.” White disillusionment with the racebased policies that were a legacy of Lyndon Johnson’s “Great Society” programs of the 1960s helped to feed the conservative, antigovernment movement that elected Ronald Reagan in 1980.

 factors might be taken into account in a school’s overall admissions policy for purposes of assembling a diverse student body. Among the dissenters on the sharply divided bench was the Court’s only black justice, Thurgood Marshall. He warned in an impassioned opinion that the denial of racial preferences might sweep away years of progress by the civil rights movement. But many conser vatives cheered the decision as afﬁ rming the principle that justice is colorblind. Inspired by the civil rights movement, Native Americans in the 1970s gained remarkable power through using the courts and well-planned acts of civil disobedience. But while blacks had fought against segregation, Indians used the tactics of the civil rights movement to assert their status as separate semisovereign peoples. Indian activists captured the nation’s attention by seizing the island of Alcatraz in 1970 and the village of Wounded Knee, South Dakota, in 1972. A series of victories in the courts consolidated the decade’s gains. In the case of United States v. Wheeler (1978), the Supreme Court declared that Indian tribes possessed a “unique and limited” sovereignty, subject to the will of Congress but not to individual states.

The Bicentennial Campaign
 America’s two-hundredth birthday, in 1976, fell during a presidential election year—a ﬁtting coincidence for a proud democracy. President Gerald Ford ener-

 getically sought the Republican nomination in his own right and defeated challenger Ronald Reagan, former actor and governor of Cal i fornia, who ran as a more conser vative candidate. The Democratic standard-bearer was ﬁfty-oneyear-old James Earl (“Jimmy”) Carter, Jr., a dark-horse candidate who galloped out of obscurity during the long primary-election season. A peanut farmer and former Georgia governor who insisted on the humble “Jimmy” as his ﬁ rst name, this born-again Baptist touched many people with his down-home sincerity. He ran against the memory of Nixon and Watergate as much as he ran against Ford. His most effective campaign pitch was his promise “I’ll never lie to you.” Untainted by ties with a corrupt and cynical Washington, he attracted voters as an outsider who would clean the disorderly house of “big government.” Carter squeezed out a narrow victory on election day, with 51 percent of the popular vote. The electoral count stood at 297 to 240. The winner swept every state except Virginia in his native South. Especially important were the votes of African Americans, 97 percent of whom cast their ballots for Carter. Carter enjoyed hefty Democratic majorities in both houses of Congress. Hopes ran high that the stalemate of the Nixon-Ford years between a Republican White House and a Democratic Capitol Hill would now be ended. At ﬁ rst Carter enjoyed notable success, as Congress granted his requests to create a new cabinet-level Department of Energy and to cut

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Feminists American Migration 
A


 well-to-do housewife and mother of seven, Elizabeth Cady Stanton (1815–1902) was an unlikely revolutionary. Yet this founding mother of American feminism devoted seven decades of her life to the ﬁght for women’s rights. Young Elizabeth Cady drew her inspiration from the ﬁght against slavery. In 1840 she married fellow abolitionist Henry Stanton. Honeymooning in London, they attended the World Anti-Slavery Convention, where women were forced to sit in a screened-off balcony above the convention ﬂoor. This insult awakened Stanton to the cause that would occupy her life. With Lucretia Mott and other female abolitionists, Stanton went on to organize the Seneca Falls Convention in 1848. There she presented her Declaration of Sentiments, modeled on the Declaration of Independence and proclaiming that “all men and women are created equal.” She demanded for women the right to own property, to enter the professions, and, most daring of all, to vote. As visionaries of a radically different future for women, early feminists encountered a mountain of hostility and tasted bitter disappointment. Stanton failed in her struggle to have women included in the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which granted African Americans equal citizenship. She died before seeing her dream of woman suffrage realized in the Nineteenth Amendment (1920). Yet by imagining women’s emancipation as an expansion of America’s founding principles of citizenship, Stanton charted a path that other feminists would follow a century later. Historians use the terms “ﬁ rst wave” and “second wave” to distinguish the women’s movement of the nineteenth century from that of the late twentieth century. The woman most often credited with launching the “second wave” is Betty Friedan (1921–2006). Growing up in Peoria, Illinois, she had seen her mother grow bitter over sacriﬁcing a journalism career to raise her family. Friedan, a suburban housewife, went on to write the 1963 best seller The Feminine Mystique, exposing the quiet desperation of millions of housewives trapped in the “comfortable concentration camp” of the suburban home. The book struck a resonant chord and catapulted its author onto the national stage. In 1966



Elizabeth Cady Stanton (1815–1902) and Two of Her
 Sons, 1848 In the same year this photo was taken, Stanton delivered her Declaration of Sentiments to the ﬁrst Woman’s Rights Convention in Seneca Falls, New York.

 Friedan cofounded the National Organization for Women (NOW), the chief political arm and more moderate wing of second-wave feminism. Just as ﬁ rst-wave feminism grew out of abolitionism, the second wave drew ideas, leaders, and tactics from the civil rights movement of the 1960s. Civil rights workers and feminists alike focused on equal rights. NOW campaigned vigorously for the Equal Rights Amendment, which fell just three states short of rati ﬁcation in 1982. But second-wave feminism knew

 Marching for Women’s Rights, 1977 A multiethnic and multiracial group of women, accompanied by noted “second-wave” feminists Bella Abzug (in hat) and Betty Friedan (far right), helped to carry a torch from Seneca Falls, New York, birthplace of the feminist movement, to Houston, Texas, site of the National Women’s Conference.

 no national boundaries. In the late 1960s, activists around the world resurrected the tradition of International Women’s Day, which ﬁ rst-wave feminists had marked through the 1920s. March 8 became an international day of celebration and awareness of the continued inequality and violence that many women faced around the globe. Second-wave feminism also had an avowedly radical wing, supported by younger women who were eager to challenge almost every traditional male and female gender role and to take the feminist cause to the streets. Among these women was Robin Morgan (b. 1941). As a college student in the 1960s, Morgan was active in civil rights orga ni zations that provided her with a model for crusading against social injustice. They also exposed her to the same sexism that plagued society at large. Women in the movement who protested against gender discrimination met ridicule, as in SNCC leader Stokely Carmichael’s famous retort, “The only position for women in SNCC is prone.” Morgan went on to found WITCH (Women’s International Terrorist Conspiracy from Hell), made famous by its protest at the 1968 Miss America pageant in Atlantic City, New Jersey. There demonstrators crowned a sheep Miss America and threw symbols of

 women’s oppression—bras, girdles, and dishcloths— into trash cans. (Contrary to news stories, they did not burn the bras.) As the contrast between WITCH and NOW suggests, second-wave feminism was a remarkably diverse movement. Feminists disagreed over many issues— from pornography and marriage to how much to expect from government, capitalism, and men. Some feminists placed a priority on gender equality—for example, full female service in the military. Others defended a feminism of gender difference—such as maternity leave and other special protections for women in the workplace. Still, beyond these differences feminists had much in common. Most advocated a woman’s right to choose in the battle over abortion rights. Most regarded the law as the key weapon against gender discrimination. By the early twenty-ﬁ rst century, radical and moderate feminists alike could take pride in a host of achievements that had changed the landscape of gender relations beyond what most people could have imagined at midcentury. Yet like Elizabeth Cady Stanton, second-wave feminists also shared the burden of understanding that the goals of genuine equality would take more than a lifetime to achieve.





Chapter 39 The Stalemated Seventies, 1968–1980


Celebrating the Camp David
Agreement, September 1978
 Anwar Sadat of Egypt (left) and Menachem Begin of Israel (right) join U.S. president Jimmy Carter in conﬁrming the historic accord that brought the hope of peace to the war-torn Middle East.

 taxes. The new president’s popularity remained exceptionally high during his ﬁrst few months in ofﬁce, even when he courted public disfavor by courageously keeping his campaign promise to pardon some ten thousand draft evaders of the Vietnam War era. But Carter’s honeymoon did not last long. An inexperienced outsider, he had campaigned against the Washington “establishment” and never quite made the transition to being an insider himself. He repeatedly rubbed congressional fur the wrong way, especially by failing to consult adequately with the leaders. Critics charged that he isolated himself in a shallow pool of fellow Georgians, whose ignorance of the ways of Washington compounded the problems of their greenhorn chief.

 Carter’s Humanitarian Diplomacy As a committed Christian, President Carter displayed from the outset an overriding concern for “human rights” as the guiding principle of his foreign policy. In the African nations of Rhodesia (later Zimbabwe) and South Africa, Carter and his eloquent U.N. am-

 bassador, Andrew Young, championed the oppressed black majority. The president’s most spectacular foreign-policy achievement came in September 1978 when he invited President Anwar Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel to a summit conference at Camp David, the woodsy presidential retreat in the Maryland highlands. Skillfully serving as go-between, Carter persuaded the two visitors to sign an accord (September 17, 1978) that held considerable promise of peace. Israel agreed in principle to withdraw from territory conquered in the 1967 war, and Egypt in return promised to respect Israel’s borders. Both parties pledged themselves to sign a formal peace treaty within three months. The president crowned this diplomatic success by resuming full diplomatic relations with China in early 1979 after a nearly thirty-year interruption. Carter also successfully pushed through two treaties to turn over the Panama Canal to the Panamanians. Although these treaties were decried by conser vatives such as Ronald Reagan—who stridently declared, “We bought it, we paid for it, we built it, and we intend to keep it!”—the United States gave up control of the canal on December 31, 1999.

 Carter's Foreign and Economic Policies

 Historical Double Take Many Americans who looked back reverently to Theodore Roosevelt’s “Rough Rider” diplomacy were outraged at the Panama “giveaway.” But the Carter administration, looking to the future, argued persuasively that relinquishing control of the canal would be healthy for U.S.–Latin American relations.

 Despite these dramatic accomplishments, trouble stalked Carter’s foreign policy. Overshadowing all international issues was the ominous reheating of the Cold War with the Soviet Union. Détente fell into disrepute as thousands of Cuban troops, assisted by Soviet advisers, appeared in Angola, Ethiopia, and elsewhere in Africa to support revolutionary factions. Arms-control negotiations with Moscow stalled in the face of this Soviet military meddling.

Economic and Energy Woes
 Adding to Carter’s mushrooming troubles was the failing health of the economy. A stinging recession during Ford’s presidency had brought the inﬂation rate down slightly to just under 6 percent, but from the moment Carter took over, prices resumed their dizzying ascent, driv ing the inﬂation rate well above 13 percent by 1980



 (see Figure 39.2). The soaring bill for imported oil plunged America’s balance of payments deeply into the red (an unprecedented $40 billion in 1978). The “oil shocks” of the 1970s taught Americans a painful but necessary lesson: that they could never again seriously consider a policy of economic isolation, as they had tried to do in the decades between the two world wars. For most of American history, foreign trade had accounted for no more than 10 percent of gross national product (GNP). But huge foreign-oil bills drove that ﬁgure steadily upward in the 1970s and thereafter. By century’s end, some 27 percent of GNP depended on foreign trade. Unable to dominate international trade and ﬁ nance as easily as they once had, Americans would have to master foreign languages and study foreign cultures if they wanted to prosper in the rapidly globalizing economy. Yawning deﬁcits in the federal budget, reaching nearly $60 billion in 1980, further aggravated the U.S. economy’s inﬂationary ailments. The elderly and other Americans living on ﬁ xed incomes suffered from the shrinking dollar. People with money to lend pushed interest rates ever higher, hoping to protect themselves from being repaid in badly depreciated dollars. The “prime rate” (the rate of interest that banks charge their very best customers) vaulted to an unheard-of 20 percent in early 1980. The high cost of borrowing money shoved small businesses to the wall and strangled the construction industry, which was heavily dependent on loans to ﬁ nance new housing and other projects. Carter diagnosed America’s economic disease as stemming primarily from the nation’s costly dependence on foreign oil. Unfortunately, his legislative proposals for energy conservation in 1977 ignited a blaze of indifference among the American people, who had already forgotten the long gasoline lines of 1973. Events in Iran jolted Americans out of their complacency about energy supplies in 1979. The imperious Mohammed Reza Pahlevi, installed as shah of Iran with help from America’s CIA in 1953, had long ruled his oil-rich land with a will of steel. His repressive regime was ﬁ nally overthrown in January 1979. Violent revolution was spearheaded in Iran by Muslim fundamentalists who ﬁercely resented the shah’s campaign to westernize and secularize his country. Denouncing the United States as the “Great Satan” that had abetted the shah’s efforts, these extremists engulfed Iran in chaos in the wake of his departure. The crippling upheavals soon spread to Iran’s oil ﬁelds. As Iranian oil stopped ﬂowing into the stream of world commerce,



Chapter 39 The Stalemated Seventies, 1968–1980
 Annual percentage change, all items (right scale)



 Average price of consumer goods (CPI )





Consumer Price Index (1982–1984=100)












1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007


Figure 39.2 The History of the Consumer Price Index, 1967–2005
 This graph shows both the annual percentage rate of inﬂation and the cumulative shrinkage of the dollar’s value since 1967. (By 2002 it took more than ﬁve dollars to buy what one dollar had purchased in 1967.) Although consumer price increases slowed between 2000 and 2002, the rising cost of oil in 2004 reversed that trend. (Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics and Statistical Abstract of the United States, relevant years.)

 shortages appeared, and OPEC again seized the opportunity to hike petroleum prices. Americans once more found themselves waiting impatiently in long lines at gas stations or buying gasoline only on speciﬁed days. As the oil crisis deepened, President Carter sensed the rising temperature of popular discontent. In July 1979 he retreated to the presidential mountain hideaway at Camp David, where he remained largely out of public view for ten days. Like a royal potentate of old, summoning the wise men of the realm for their counsel in a time of crisis, Carter called in over a hundred leaders from all walks of life to give him their views.

 Meanwhile, the nation waited anxiously for the results of these extraordinary deliberations. When Carter came down from the mountaintop on July 15, 1979, he stunned a perplexed nation with his malaise speech, chiding his fellow citizens for falling into a “moral and spiritual crisis” and for being too concerned with “material goods.” A few days later, in a bureaucratic massacre of almost unprecedented proportions, he ﬁ red four cabinet secretaries and circled the wagons of his Georgia advisers more tightly about the White House by reorganizing and expanding the power of his personal staff. Critics began to wonder aloud whether Carter, the professed man of

Hostage to Iran


 President Jimmy Carter (b. 1924) delivered what became known as his “malaise speech” (although he never used the word) on television in 1979:

“


 In a nation that was proud of hard work, strong families, close-knit communities, and our faith in God, too many of us now tend to worship self-indulgence and consumption. Human identity is no longer deﬁned by what one does, but by what one owns. But we’ve discovered that owning things and consuming things does not satisfy our longing for meaning. We’ve learned that piling up material goods cannot ﬁll the emptiness of lives which have no conﬁdence or purpose. . . . The symptoms of this crisis of the American spirit are all around us.

”


 In time cultural conservatives would take up Carter’s theme to support their call for a return to “traditional values.”

 the people, was losing touch with the popular mood of the country.



 iled shah, who had arrived in the United States two weeks earlier for medical treatment. World opinion hotly condemned the diplomatic felony in Iran, while Americans agonized over both the fate of the hostages and the stability of the entire Persian Gulf region, so dangerously close to the Soviet Union. The Soviet army then aroused the West’s worst fears on December 27, 1979, when it blitzed into the mountainous nation of Afghanistan, next door to Iran, and appeared to be poised for a thrust at the oil jugular of the gulf. President Carter reacted vigorously to these alarming events. He slapped an embargo on the export of grain and high-technology machinery to the USSR and called for a boycott of the upcoming Olympic Games in Moscow. He proposed the creation of a “Rapid Deployment Force” to respond to suddenly developing crises in faraway places and requested that young people (including women) be made to register for a possible military draft. The president proclaimed that the United States would “use any means necessary, including force,” to protect the Persian Gulf against Soviet incursions. He grimly conceded that he had misjudged the Soviets, and the SALT II treaty became a dead letter in the Senate. Meanwhile, the Soviet army met unexpectedly stiff resistance in Afghanistan and bogged down in a nasty, decade-long guerrilla war that came to be called “Russia’s Vietnam.”

Foreign Affairs and
 the Iranian Imbroglio Hopes for a less dangerous world rose slightly in June 1979, when President Carter met with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev in Vienna to sign the long-stalled SALT II agreements, limiting the levels of lethal strategic weapons in the Soviet and American arsenals. But conser vative critics of the president’s defense policies, still regarding the Soviet Union as the Wicked Witch of the East, unsheathed their long knives to carve up the SALT II treaty when it came to the Senate for debate in the summer of 1979. Political earthquakes in the petroleum-rich Persian Gulf region ﬁ nally buried all hopes of ratifying the SALT II treaty. On November 4, 1979, a mob of rabidly anti-American Muslim militants stormed the United States embassy in Tehran, Iran, and took all of its occupants hostage. The captors then demanded that the American authorities ship back to Iran the ex-

 Two-Way SALT Talks The grim specter of nuclear holocaust haunted the SALT II talks between President Carter and Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev in Vienna in June 1979.



Chapter 39 The Stalemated Seventies, 1968–1980


Iranians Denounce President Jimmy Carter, November 1979 Scenes
 like this one appeared almost nightly on American television during the 444 days of the Iranian hostage crisis, humiliating Carter and angering American citizens.

 The Iranian hostage crisis was Carter’s—and America’s—bed of nails. The captured Americans languished in cruel captivity, while the nightly television news broadcasts in the United States showed humiliating scenes of Iranian mobs burning the American ﬂag and spitting on efﬁgies of Uncle Sam. Carter at ﬁ rst tried to apply economic sanctions and the pressure of world public opinion against the Iranians, while waiting for the emergence of a stable government with which to negotiate. But the political turmoil in Iran rumbled on endlessly, and the president’s frustration grew. Carter at last ordered a daring rescue mission. A highly trained commando team penetrated deep into Iran’s sandy interior. Their plan re-

 quired ticktock-perfect timing to succeed, and when equipment failures prevented some members of the team from reaching their destination, the mission had to be scrapped. As the commandos withdrew in the dark desert night, two of their aircraft collided, kill ing eight of the would-be rescuers. This disastrous failure of the rescue raid proved anguishing for Americans. The episode seemed to underscore the nation’s helplessness and even incompetence in the face of a mortifying insult to the national honor. The stalemate with Iran dragged on throughout the rest of Carter’s term, providing an embarrassing backdrop to the embattled president’s struggle for reelection.

People to Know




 CHRONOLOGY

My Lai Massacre
 WITCH protests Miss America pageant in Atlantic City, New Jersey



 Nixon orders invasion of Cambodia Kent State and Jackson State incidents Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) created Clean Air Act



 Pentagon Papers published



 Twenty-sixth Amendment (lowering voting age to eighteen) passed Nixon visits China and Soviet Union Shanghai Communiqué begins “normalization” of U.S.-Chinese relations ABM and SALT I treaties ratiﬁed Nixon defeats McGovern for presidency Equal Rights Amendment passes Congress (not ratiﬁed by states) Title IX of Education Amendments passed



 Treaty of Paris enacts cease-ﬁ re in Vietnam and U.S. withdrawal Agnew resigns; Ford appointed vice president War Powers Act Yom Kippur War OPEC oil embargo Endangered Species Act

KEY TERMS
Vietnamization (1004) Nixon Doctrine (1004) silent majority (1004) My Lai Massacre (1005) Kent State University (1005) Pentagon Papers (1006) détente (1007) Miranda warning (1008) Philadelphia Plan (1009) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (1009) Earth Day (1009) 
 Chilean president Salvador Allende killed in CIA-backed coup Frontiero v. Richardson Roe v. Wade 1973–

 Watergate hearings and investigations



 Nixon resigns; Ford assumes presidency OPEC ends embargo, increases oil prices International Energy Agency formed Milliken v. Bradley



 Helsinki accords South Vietnam falls to communists



 Carter defeats Ford for presidency



 Camp David accords between Egypt and Israel United States v. Wheeler



 Iranian revolution and oil crisis SALT II agreements signed (never ratiﬁed by Senate) Soviet Union invades Afghanistan

1979–


 Iranian hostage crisis



 U.S. boycotts Summer Olympics in Moscow

PEOPLE TO KNOW
southern strategy (1010) War Powers Act (1011) Watergate (1013) “smoking gun” tape (1014) Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) (1017) Roe v. Wade (1017) malaise speech (1026) SALT II (1027) Iranian hostage crisis (1028) 
Henry A. Kissinger
Warren E. Burger
Rachel Carson
 George McGovern Gerald (“Jerry”) Ford

John Dean III
James Earl (“Jimmy”)
Carter, Jr.
Leonid Brezhnev




Chapter 39 The Stalemated Seventies, 1968–1980


To Learn More
Stephen Ambrose, Nixon: The Triumph of a Politician,
1962–1972 (1989)
 Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward, All the President’s Men (1974) James Bill, The Eagle and the Lion (1987) Robert Dallek, Nixon and Kissinger: Partners in Power (2007) Alice Echols, Daring to Be Bad: Radical Feminism in America, 1967–1975 (1989) David Greenberg, Nixon’s Shadow: The History of an Image (2003)

Linda Greenhouse, Becoming Justice Blackmun: Harry
 Blackmun’s Supreme Court Journey (2005) Walter LaFeber, Inevitable Revolutions: The United States in Central America 2nd ed., (1993) Bruce Schulman, The Seventies: The Great Shift in American Culture, Society, and Politics (2001) Bob Woodward and Scott Armstrong, The Brethren: Inside the Supreme Court (1979)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Resurgence
 of Conservatism




1980–1992
 It will be my intention to curb the size and inﬂuence of the federal establishment and to demand recognition of the distinction between the powers granted to the federal government and those reserved to the states or to the people.

I


 t’s morning in America” was the slogan of Republican candidate Ronald Reagan in his 1984 presidential campaign. Certainly the 1980s were a new day for America’s conser vative right. Census ﬁgures conﬁ rmed that the average American was older than in the stormy sixties and much more likely to live in the South or West, the traditional bastions of the “Old Right,” where many residents harbored suspicions of federal power. The conser vative cause drew added strength from the emergence of a “New Right” movement, partly in response to the countercultural protests of the 1960s. Spearheading the New Right were evangelical Christian groups such as the Moral Majority, dedicated believers who enjoyed startling success as political fund-raisers and organizers. Many New Right activists were far less agitated about economic questions than about cultural concerns—the so-called social issues. They denounced

 abortion, pornography, homosexuality, feminism, and afﬁ rmative action. They championed prayer in the schools and tougher penalties for criminals. Together the Old and New Right added up to a powerful political combination, devoted to changing the very character of American society.

The Election of
Ronald Reagan, 1980
 Ronald Reagan was well suited to lead the gathering conser vative crusade. Reared in a generation whose values were formed well before the upheavals of the 1960s, he naturally sided with the New Right on social issues. In economic and social matters alike, he denounced the activist government and failed “social engineering” of the 1960s. Just as his early political

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


 hero, Franklin Roosevelt, had championed the “forgotten man” against big business, Reagan championed the “common man” against big government. He condemned federal intervention in local affairs, favoritism for minorities, and the elitism of arrogant bureaucrats. He aimed especially to win over from the Democratic column working-class and lower-middle-class white voters by implying that the Democratic party had become the party of big government and the exclusive tool of its minority constituents. Though Reagan was no intellectual, he drew on the ideas of a small but inﬂuential group of thinkers known as “neoconser vatives.” Their ranks included Norman Podhoretz, editor of Commentary magazine, and Irving Kristol, editor of The Public Interest. Reacting against what they saw as the excesses of 1960s liberalism, the neoconser vatives championed free-market capitalism liberated from government restraints, and they took tough, harshly anti-Soviet positions in foreign policy. They also questioned liberal welfare programs and afﬁ rmative-action policies and called for the reassertion of traditional values of individualism and the centrality of the family. An actor-turned-politician, Reagan enjoyed enormous popularity with his crooked grin and aw-shucks manner. The son of a ne’er-do-well, impoverished Irish American father with a fondness for the bottle, he had grown up in a small Illinois town. Reagan got his start in life in the depressed 1930s as a sports announcer for an Iowa radio station. Good looks and a way with words landed him acting jobs in Hollywood, where he became a B-grade star in the 1940s. He dis-

 In a speech to the National Association of Evangelicals on March 8, 1983, President Ronald Reagan (1911–2004) deﬁned his stand on school prayer:

“


 The Declaration of Independence mentions the Supreme Being no less than four times. ‘In God We Trust’ is engraved on our coinage. The Supreme Court opens its proceedings with a religious invocation. And the Members of Congress open their sessions with a prayer. I just happen to believe the schoolchildren of the United States are entitled to the same privileges as Supreme Court Justices and Congressmen.

”


 President Ronald Reagan Older than any man previously elected to the presidency, Reagan displayed youthful vigor both on the campaign trail and in ofﬁce.

 played a ﬂair for politics as president of the Screen Actors Guild in the McCarthy era of the early 1950s, when he helped purge communists and other suspected “reds” from the ﬁ lm industry. In 1954 he became a spokesman for General Electric and began to abandon his New Dealish political views and increasingly to preach a conser vative, antigovernment line. Reagan’s growing skill at promoting the conservative cause inspired a group of wealthy Cal i fornia businessmen to help him launch his political career as governor of Cal i fornia from 1966 to 1974. By 1980 the Republican party was ready to challenge the Democrats’ hold on the White House. Bedeviled abroad and becalmed at home, Jimmy Carter’s administration struck many Americans as bungling



The Election of 1980


 and befuddled. Carter’s inability to control doubledigit inﬂation was especially damaging. Frustrated critics bellyached loudly about the Georgian’s alleged mismanagement of the nation’s affairs. Disaffection with Carter’s apparent ineptitude ran deep even in his own Democratic party, where an “ABC” (Anybody but Carter) movement gathered steam. The liberal wing of the party found its champion in Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts, the last survivor of the assassin-plagued Kennedy brothers. He and Carter slugged it out in a series of bruising primary elections, while delighted Republicans decorously proceeded to name Reagan their presidential nominee. In the end Kennedy’s candidacy fell victim to the country’s conser vative mood and to lingering suspicions about a 1969 automobile accident on Chappaquiddick Island, Massachusetts, in which a young woman assistant was drowned when Kennedy’s car plunged off a bridge. A badly battered Carter, his party divided and in disarray, was left to do battle with Reagan. The Republican candidate proved to be a formidable campaigner. Using his professional acting skills to great advantage, Reagan attacked the incumbent’s fumbling per for mance in foreign policy and blasted the “big-government” philosophy of the Democratic party (a philosophy that Carter did not fully embrace). Galloping inﬂation, sky-high interest rates, and a faltering economy also put the incumbent president on the defensive. Carter countered ineffectively with charges that Reagan was a trigger-happy cold warrior who might push the country into nuclear war. Carter’s spotty record in ofﬁce was no defense against Reagan’s popular appeal. On election day the Republican rang up a spectacular victory, bagging over 51 percent of the popular vote, while 41 percent went to Carter. Reﬂecting a small but vocal protest against both candidates, nearly 7 percent of the electorate voted for liberal Republican congressman John Anderson, who ran as an independent. The electoral count stood at 489 for Reagan and 49 for Carter, making him the ﬁ rst elected president to be unseated by voters since Herbert Hoover in 1932 (see Map 40.1). Equally startling, the Republicans gained control of the Senate for the ﬁ rst time in twenty-six years. Leading Democratic liberals, including George McGovern, had been targeted for defeat by well-heeled New Right groups. They went down like dead timber in the conservative windstorm that swept the country. Carter showed dignity in defeat, delivering a thoughtful Farewell Address that stressed his efforts

WA MT

 OR

 ID

NV CA

 ND

 WY

 SD

 CO

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 AZ

 MN

KS OK

NM TX

 IL

MI IN

 MO

 KY

 MS

 AL

PA WV

VA NC

 TN

AR LA

 OH

 GA

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 14 RI NJ CT 4 17 8 DE MD

 SC

 DC

 FL

 AK

 HI

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Reagan (Republican)




90.9%


43,899,248


50.8%




9.1%


35,481,435


41.0%


5,719,437


6.6%


Carter (Democrat)
Anderson (Independent)


Popular Vote


 Map 40.1 Presidential Election of 1980 (with electoral vote by state) This map graphically displays Reagan’s landslide victory over both Carter and Anderson. Interactive Map

 to scale down the deadly arms race, to promote human rights, and to protect the environment. In one of his last acts in ofﬁce, he signed a bill preserving some 100 million acres of Alaska land for national parks, forests, and wildlife refuges. An unusually intelligent, articulate, and well-meaning president, he had been hampered by his lack of managerial talent and had been badly buffeted by events beyond his control, such as the soaring price of oil, runaway inﬂation, and the galling insult of the hostages still held in Iran. Though unsuccessful in the White House, Carter earned much admiration in later years for his hu manitarian and human rights activities. He received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2002.

The Reagan Revolution
 Reagan’s arrival in Washington was triumphal. The Iranians contributed to the festive mood by releasing the hostages on Reagan’s Inauguration Day, January 20, 1981, after 444 days of captivity. The new president, a hale and hearty sixty-nineyear-old, was devoted to ﬁ scal ﬁtness and a leaner federal government. He sought nothing less than the dismantling of the welfare state and the reversal of



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


 Coming Home After more than a year in captivity in Iran, these hostages were released on the very day of Ronald Reagan’s presidential inauguration.

 the political evolution of the preceding half-century. Assembling a conser vative cabinet of “the best and the rightest,” he took dead aim at what he regarded as the bloated federal budget. “Government is not the solution to our problem,” he declared. “Government is the problem.” Years of New Deal–style tax-and-spend programs, Reagan jested, had created a federal government that reminded him of the deﬁ nition of a baby as a creature who was all appetite at one end, with no sense of responsibility at the other. On his conser vative crusade for smaller government, less bureaucracy, and freer markets, Reagan found common cause with the new leader of America’s oldest ally, Great Britain. Conservative Margaret Thatcher became Britain’s ﬁ rst female prime minister in 1979. With a mandate to improve her nation’s economy, which had suffered through the 1970s as the United States had, she embarked on a mission to reduce the power of labor unions and government involvement in business, two of Reagan’s chief goals. The philosophic kinship between “Ronnie and Maggie,” as the

 press dubbed the two heads of state, went beyond economics. Emboldened by each other, they strengthened the Anglo-American alliance through muscular foreign policy against a number of foes, especially the Soviet bloc. Their common refrain was that free markets made free peoples and that shrinking government meant keeping their nations safer from communism. By the early 1980s, this antigovernment message found a receptive audience in the United States. In the two decades since 1960, federal spending had risen from about 18 percent of gross national product to nearly 23 percent. At the same time, the composition of the federal budget had been shifting from defense to entitlement programs, including Social Security and Medicare (see the chart in the Appendix). In 1973 the budget of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare surpassed that of the Department of Defense. Citizens increasingly balked at paying the bills for further extension of government “beneﬁts.” After four decades of advancing New Deal and Great Society programs, a strong countercurrent took hold. Californians staged a “tax revolt” in 1978 (known by its ofﬁcial ballot title of Proposition 13) that slashed property taxes and forced painful cuts in government services. The Cal i fornia “tax quake” jolted other state capitals and even rocked the pillars of Congress in faraway Washington, D.C. Ronald Reagan had ridden this political shock wave to presidential victory in 1980 and now proceeded to rattle the “welfare state” to its very foundations.

 The Triumph of the Right, 1980 Republican conservatives scored a double victory in 1980, winning control of both the White House and the Senate. Aided by conservative Democratic “boll weevils,” they also dominated the House of Representatives, and a new era of conservatism dawned in the nation’s capital.

“Reaganomics” and “Star Wars”


 Reagan pursued his smaller-government policies with near-religious zeal and remarkable effectiveness. He proposed a new federal budget that necessitated cuts of some $35 billion, mostly in social programs like food stamps and federally funded job-training centers. Reagan worked naturally in harness with the Republican majority in the Senate, but to get his way in the Democratic House, he undertook some oldfashioned politicking. He enterprisingly wooed a group of mostly southern conser vative Democrats (dubbed boll weevils), who abandoned their own party’s leadership to follow the president. The new president seemed strong and motivated, all the more so after a failed assassination attempt in March 1981 brought an outpouring of sympathy and support.

The Battle of the Budget
 Swept along on a tide of presidential popularity, Congress swallowed Reagan’s budget proposals. The new president’s triumph amazed political observers, especially defeated Democrats. He had descended upon Washington like an avenging angel of conservatism, kicking up a blinding whirlwind of political change. His impressive per for mance demonstrated the power of the presidency with a skill not seen since Lyndon Johnson’s day. Out the window went the textbooks that had concluded, largely on the basis of the stalemated 1970s, that the Oval Ofﬁce had been eclipsed by a powerful, uncontrollable Congress. Reagan hardly rested to savor the sweetness of his victory. The second part of his economic program called for substantial reductions in marginal tax rates over a period of three years. Many Democrats, the president quipped, had “never met a tax they didn’t hike.” Thanks largely to Reagan’s skill as a television performer and the continued defection of the “boll weevils” from the Democratic camp, the president again had his way. In late 1981 Congress approved a set of far-reaching tax reforms that lowered individual tax rates, reduced federal estate taxes, and created new tax-free savings plans for small investors. Reagan’s supply-side economics advisers assured him that the combination of budgetary discipline and tax reduction would stimulate new investment, boost productivity, foster dramatic economic growth, and eventually even reduce the federal deﬁcit. But at ﬁ rst “supply-side” economics seemed to be a beautiful theory mugged by a gang of brutal facts,



 as the economy slid into its deepest recession since the 1930s. Unemployment reached nearly 11 percent in 1982, businesses folded, and several bank failures jolted the nation’s entire ﬁnancial system. The automobile industry, once the brightest jewel in America’s industrial crown, turned in its dimmest performance in history. Battling against Japanese imports, major automakers reported losses in the hundreds of millions of dollars. Fuming and frustrated Democrats angrily charged that the president’s budget cuts slashed especially cruelly at the poor and the handicapped and that his tax cuts favored the well-to-do. In reality, the anti-inﬂationary “tight money” policies that led to the so-called “Reagan recession” of 1981–1982 had been launched by the Federal Reserve Board in 1979, on Carter’s watch. Ignoring the yawping pack of Democratic critics, President Reagan and his economic advisers serenely waited for their supply-side economic policies (Reaganomics) to produce the promised results. The supply-siders seemed to be vindicated when a healthy economic recovery ﬁ nally got under way in 1983. Yet the economy of the 1980s was not uniformly sound. For the ﬁ rst time in the twentieth century, income gaps widened between the richest and the poorest Americans. The poor got poorer and the very rich grew fabulously richer, while middle-class incomes largely stagnated. Symbolic of the new income stratiﬁcation was the emergence of “yuppies,” or young, urban professionals. Sporting Rolex watches and BMW sports cars, they made a near-religion out of conspicuous consumption. Though something of a stereotype and numbering only about 1.5 million people, yuppies showcased the values of materialism and the pursuit of wealth that came to symbolize the high-rolling 1980s. Some economists located the sources of the economic upturn neither in the president’s budget cuts and tax reforms nor in the go-get-’em avarice of the yuppies. It was massive military expenditures, they argued, that constituted the real foundation of 1980s prosperity. Reagan cascaded nearly $2 trillion dollars onto the Pentagon in the 1980s, asserting the need to close a “window of vulnerability” in the armaments race with the Soviet Union. Ironically, this conser vative president thereby plunged the government into a red-ink bath of deﬁcit spending that made the New Deal look downright stingy. Federal budget deﬁcits topped $100 billion in 1982, and the government’s books were nearly $200 billion out of balance in every subsequent year of the 1980s. Massive government borrowing to cover those deﬁcits kept interest rates high, and high interest rates in turn elevated the value



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


 Wallﬂowers Reagan’s budget cuts fell almost exclusively on social programs, whereas military outlays increased substantially.

 of the dollar to record altitudes in the international money markets. The soaring dollar was good news for American tourists and buyers of foreign cars, but it dealt crippling blows to American exporters, as the American international trade deﬁcit reached a record $152 billion in 1987. The masters of international commerce and ﬁ nance for a generation after World War II, Americans suddenly became the world’s heaviest borrowers in the global economy of the 1980s.

 lin leaders would come to the bargaining table and sing Reagan’s tune. This strategy resembled a riverboat gambler’s ploy. It wagered the enormous sum of Reagan’s defense budgets on the hope that the other side would not call Washington’s bluff and initiate a new cycle of arms competition. Reagan played his trump card in this risky game in March 1983, when he announced his intention to pursue a high-technology missile-defense system called the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), popularly known as Star Wars. The plan called for orbiting battle stations in space that could ﬁ re laser beams or other forms of concentrated energy to vaporize intercontinental missiles on liftoff. Reagan described SDI as offering potential salvation from the nuclear nightmare by throwing an “astrodome” defense shield over American cities. Most scientists considered this an impossible goal. But the deeper logic of SDI lay in its ﬁt with Reagan’s overall Soviet strategy. By pitching the arms contest onto a stratospheric plane of high technology and astronomical expense, it would further force the Kremlin’s hand. Relations with the Soviets further nose-dived in late 1981, when the government of Poland, needled for over a year by a popular movement of workingpeople orga nized into a massive union called “Soli-

Reagan Renews the
Cold War
 Hard as nails toward the Soviet Union in his campaign speeches, Reagan saw no reason to soften up after he checked in at the White House. He claimed that the Soviets were “prepared to commit any crime, to lie, to cheat,” in pursuit of their goals of world conquest. He denounced the Soviet Union as the “focus of evil in the modern world.” Reagan believed in negotiating with the Soviets— but only from a position of overwhelming strength. Accordingly, his strategy for dealing with Moscow was simple: by enormously expanding U.S. military capabilities, he could threaten the Soviets with a fantastically expensive new round of the arms race. The American economy, theoretically, could better bear this new ﬁnancial burden than could the creaking Soviet system. Desperate to avoid economic ruin, Krem-

 Star Wars Fantasies President Reagan’s Strategic Defense Initiative (popularly known as Star Wars) evoked extravagant hopes for an impermeable defensive shield, but its daunting physical and engineering requirements also occasioned much ridicule in the scientiﬁc community.

 Reagan’s Foreign Policies

 darity,” clamped martial law on the troubled country. Reagan saw the heavy ﬁst of the Kremlin inside this Polish iron glove, and he imposed economic sanctions on Poland and the USSR alike. Dealing with the Soviet Union was additionally complicated by the inertia and ill health of the aging oligarchs in the Kremlin, three of whom died between late 1982 and early 1985. Relations grew even more tense when the Soviets, in September 1983, blasted from the skies a Korean passenger airliner that had inexplicably violated Soviet airspace. Hundreds of civilians, including many Americans, plummeted to their deaths in the frigid Sea of Okhotsk. By the end of 1983, all arms-control negotiations with the Soviets were broken off. The deepening chill of the Cold War was further felt in 1984, when USSR and Soviet-bloc athletes boycotted the Olympic Games in Los Angeles.

Troubles Abroad
 The volatile Middle Eastern pot continued to boil ominously. Israel badly strained its bonds of friendship with the United States by continuing to allow new settlements to be established in the occupied territory of the Jordan River’s West Bank (see Map 40.2). Israel further raised the stakes in the Middle East in June 1982 when it invaded neighboring Lebanon, seeking to suppress once and for all the guerrilla bases from which Palestinian ﬁghters harassed beleaguered Israel. The Palestinians were bloodily subdued, but Lebanon, already pulverized by years of episodic civil war, was plunged into armed chaos. President Reagan was obliged to send American troops to Lebanon in 1983 as part of an international peacekeeping force, but their presence did not bring peace. A suicide bomber crashed an explosives-laden truck into a United States Marine barracks on October 23, 1983, kill ing more than two hundred marines. President Reagan soon thereafter withdrew the remaining American troops, while miraculously suffering no political damage from this horrifying and humiliating attack. His mystiﬁed Democratic opponents began to call him the “Teﬂon president,” to whom nothing hurtful could stick. Central America, in the United States’ own backyard, also rumbled menacingly. A leftist revolution had deposed the long-time dictator of Nicaragua in 1979. President Carter had tried to ignore the hotly anti-American rhetoric of the revolutionaries, known as Sandinistas, and to establish good diplomatic relations with them. But cold warrior Reagan took their



 rhetoric at face value and hurled back at them some hot language of his own. He accused the Sandinistas of turning their country into a forward base for Soviet and Cuban military penetration of all of Central America. Brandishing photographs taken from high-ﬂying spy planes, administration spokespeople claimed that Nicaraguan leftists were shipping weapons to revolutionary forces in tiny El Salvador, torn by violence since a coup in 1979. Reagan sent military “advisers” to prop up the pro-American government of El Salvador. He also provided covert aid, including the CIA-engineered mining of harbors, to the rebel contras opposing the antiAmerican government of Nicaragua. Reagan ﬂexed his military muscles elsewhere in the turbulent Caribbean. In a dramatic display of American might, in October 1983 he dispatched a heavy-ﬁ repower invasion force to the island of Grenada, where a military coup had killed the prime minister and brought Marxists to power. Swiftly overrunning the tiny island and ousting the insurgents, American troops vividly demonstrated Reagan’s determination to assert the dominance of the United States in the Caribbean, just as Theodore Roosevelt had done (see Map 40.3).

Round Two for Reagan
 A conﬁdent Ronald Reagan, bolstered by a buoyant economy at home and by the popularity of his deﬁant posture abroad, met little opposition in his bid for a second White House term in 1984. His opponent was Democrat Walter Mondale, who made history by naming as his vice-presidential running mate Congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro of New York. She was the ﬁ rst woman ever to appear on a major-party presidential ticket. But even this dramatic gesture could not salvage Mondale’s candidacy, which was fatally tainted by his ser vice as vice president in the deeply discredited Carter administration. On election day Reagan walked away with 525 electoral votes to Mondale’s 13, winning every where except in Mondale’s home state of Minnesota and the District of Columbia. Reagan also overwhelmed Mondale in the popular vote— 52,609,797 to 36,450,613. Shrinking the federal government and reducing taxes had been the main objectives of Reagan’s ﬁrst term; foreign-policy issues dominated the news in his second term. The president soon found himself contending for the world’s attention with a charismatic new Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, installed as

T U R K EY


 n Se a

 ate

SY R I A

Tehran


Tel Aviv


Amman


Baghdad


I R AQ


 U.S. arms sales, 1980s, during Iran-Iraq War Iraq invades Kuwait, 1990 Second U.S.-Iraq War, 2003

 e R. Nil

Re


BAHRAIN
Riyadh 
 INDIA

 ian

Gu
 lf QATAR

Karachi


S


 tra Dubayy it of Hormuz Abu Dhabi Muscat

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

 Partner in U.S. efforts to eradicate al-Qaeda, 2001–

 a

30°E


 rs

Doha


SA U D I A R A B I A

Se


S U DA N


Pe
Manama


 d

Aswan
Dam


PA K I STA N
Quetta 
 U.S. and allies launch First U.S.-Iraq War, 1991

Kuwait


K U WA I T


Cancer


Kandahar


Basra


L I BYA


Tropic o
 f

Islamabad


Herat


30°N


J O R DA N
Cairo


EGY P T

 U.S. arms sales, 1955 –1978: $20.8 billion Shah overthrown, 1979 American hostages taken, 1979 –1981

 IRAN

Fallujah


ISRAEL 30°N

Tikrit


Damascus


L E BA N O N


A F G H A N I STA N


Kirkuk


 us R.

 nea

Mazar e
Sharif
Kabul


Ind


 rra

 CYPRUS

Sea


Crete


.


 ite

 sR

 ed

T U R K M E N I STA N


R.


 hr

 p

M


Tigris


Eu


 U.S. troops, 1958, 1983–1984

20°E


 ian

G R E EC E


 CHINA

 Soviet occupation, 1979–1989 U.S. aid to rebels, 1980s International and Northern Alliance forces defeat Taliban, 2001

 sp

ARMENIA AZERBAIJAN

Ankara


Athens


Ca


 GEORGIA

40°N


Mecca
 Jewish state after UN partition of Palestine, 1947

 Oil embargo, 1973 Source of 17% of U.S. oil imports in 1975 Largest buyer of U.S. arms, 1978

20°N


 OMAN

Arabian Sea


 Israel after War of 1948–1949 Area controlled by Israel after Six-Day War, 1967

40°E


 Israeli-occupied area after Yom Kippur War, 1973

Mediterranean
Sea


 YEMEN

70°E


50°E


Aden


SY R I A
Haifa 
Gulf


GOLAN HEIGHTS

Sea
 of Galilee Tel Aviv ISRAEL Jerusalem Gaza

WEST BANK

Port Said


60°E


Mukalla


Damascus


Jordan
R.


 By Egyptian-Israeli agreements of 1975 and 1979, Israel withdrew from the Sinai in 1982. In 1981 Israel annexed the Golan Heights. Through negotiations between Israel and the PLO, Jericho and the Gaza Strip were placed under Palestinian self-rule, and Israeli troops were withdrawn in 1994. In 1994 Israel and Jordan signed an agreement opening their borders and normalizing their relations.

Sana


L E BA N O N
Beirut


Amman


 de of A

 n

Socotra
(Yemen)


I N D I A N
O C E A N


10°N
32°E


 ETHIOPIA

Dead
Sea
J O R DA N


 U.S. troops assist in relief of famine, 1992–1993; U.S. troops withdrawn, 1994

Members of the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries
 (OPEC) Oil fields

SO M A L I A

Suez
Canal


EGY P T
Suez 
 fo fS ue z Sharm el-Sheikh

32°E


Mogadishu


Elath


Red Sea




500 Km.


500 Mi.


0° Equator
SA U D I ARABIA

N


28°E
36°E


 Map 40.2 The Middle East A combination of political instability and precious petroleum resources has made the region from Egypt to Afghanistan an “arc of crisis.”





 o f A qa b a

G ul


ARAB-ISRAELI CONFLICT

SINAI PENINSULA

G ul f


Nile R
.


Cairo


Interactive Map


Reagan and the Russians


 chairman of the Soviet Communist party in March 1985. Gorbachev was personable, energetic, imaginative, and committed to radical reforms in the Soviet Union. He announced two policies with remarkable, even revolutionary, implications. Glasnost, or “openness,” aimed to ventilate the secretive, repressive stuffiness of Soviet society by introducing free speech and a mea sure of political liberty. Perestroika, or “restructuring,” was intended to revive the moribund Soviet economy by adopting many of the free-market practices—such as the proﬁt motive and an end to subsidized prices—of the capitalist West. Both glasnost and perestroika required that the Soviet Union shrink the size of its enormous military machine and redirect its energies to the dismal civilian economy. That requirement, in turn, necessitated an end to the Cold War. Gorbachev accordingly made warm overtures to the West, including an announcement in April 1985 that the Soviet Union would cease to deploy intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) tar-

 geted at Western Europe, pending an agreement on their complete elimination. He pushed this goal when he met with Ronald Reagan at the ﬁ rst of four summit meetings, in Geneva in November 1985. A second summit meeting, in Reykjavik, Iceland, in October 1986, broke down when a furious Reagan stormed out, convinced that Gorbachev had come to end plans for the beloved SDI. But at a third summit, in Washington, D.C., in December 1987, the two leaders at last signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, banning all of these missiles from Europe. Reagan and Gorbachev capped their new friendship in May 1988 at a ﬁ nal summit in Moscow. There Reagan, who had entered ofﬁce condemning the “evil empire” of Soviet communism, warmly praised Gorbachev. Reagan, the consummate cold warrior, had been ﬂexible and savvy enough to seize a historic opportunity to join with the Soviet chief to bring the Cold War to a kind of conclusion. For this, history would give both leaders high marks.

 Map 40.3 Central America and the Caribbean This region, so important to the United States throughout its history, remained a hotbed of unrest through the last years of the Cold War and beyond. 100°W

UNITED STATES

90°W


80°W


 U.S. maintains prison for suspected terrorists despite international protests, 2003–.

 ida or

Fl


 of

H
A
M


S


A


 NAFTA links U.S., Canada, and Mexico Tropic of Cancer in free-trade zone, 1994. U.S. intervenes to save Mexican peso, 1995.

 its

CUBA
Guantánamo 
 Yucatán Peninsula Staging area for anti-Sandinista rebel army (Contras), organized and financed by U.S.

 BELIZE (1981)

 Radical leftist government overthrown by U.S. intervention, Oct. 1983.

VENEZUELA PANAMA

ST. VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
(1979) TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO (1962) 
 Flow of drugs to U.S. poses chronic problems.

 GUYANA (1966)

 Major economic expansion, 1980s, 1990s. Civilian rule restored, 1985. Reformer Luis da Silva elected president, 2002.

COLOMBIA
Panama Canal Treaties, 1978. U.S. invades Panama to capture Gen. Manuel Noriega, Dec. 1989. 
ST. LUCIA
(1979) BARBADOS (1966) 
 Populist Hugo Chávez elected president, 1988; survives coup, 2002; threatens oil boycott against U.S., 2007.

 U.S. territory achieved

(1974)


 U.S. finances guerrilla army fighting leftist Sandinista government, 1982–1988. Anti-Sandinista coalition wins 1990 election.

400 Mi.


 (1962) Year independence

 GRENADA

10°N


COSTA RICA

400 Km.


(1962)


Panama
Canal


PAC I F IC OC EAN

Guadeloupe (Fr.)
 DOMINICA (1978) Martinique (Fr.)

 JAMAICA

 Curaçao (Neth.)

EL SALVADOR



ST. KITTS AND NEVIS
(1983) ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA (1981) 
Caribbean Sea


 NICARAGUA



 HAITI

 HONDURAS

 Ongoing guerrilla activity and widespread poverty. Right-wing government and opposition leaders sign peace treaty, 1992.

Virgin Is.
Puerto Rico (Gr. Br.)
(U.S.)


DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Virgin Is. (U.S.)


 MEXICO

 GUATEMALA

N


 Military coup, 1991. U.S. invasion restores President Aristide, 1994. Aristide overthrown, 2004; U.S./U.N. peacekeeping forces intervene.

 BA

Stra


20°N


Interactive Map


AT L A N T I C O C E A N

Gulf of Mexico
 Migration of thousands of Cubans to U.S., 1980. Castro resignation foreshadows change, 2008.



70°W


BRAZIL 60°W



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


East Meets West
 President Reagan greets Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev at a summit meeting in Moscow in May 1988.

 Reagan made other decisive moves in foreign policy. His administration provided strong backing in February 1986 for Corazon Aquino’s ouster of dictator Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines. Reagan also ordered a lightning air raid against Libya in 1986, in retaliation for alleged Libyan sponsorship of terrorist attacks, including a bomb blast in a West Berlin discotheque that killed a U.S. ser viceman.

The Iran-Contra Imbroglio
 Two foreign-policy problems seemed insoluble to Reagan: the continuing captivity of a number of American hostages, seized by Muslim extremist groups in bleeding, battered Lebanon; and the continuing grip on power of the left-wing Sandinista government in Nicaragua. The president repeatedly requested that Congress provide military aid to the contra rebels ﬁghting against the Sandinista regime. Congress repeatedly refused, and the administration grew increasingly frustrated, even obsessed, in its search for a means to help the contras. Unknown to the American public, some Washington ofﬁcials saw a possible linkage between the two

 thorny problems of the Middle Eastern hostages and the Central American Sandinistas. In 1985 American diplomats secretly arranged arms sales to Iran, which was mired in a devastating territorial war with neighboring Iraq. In return, the Iranians helped obtain the release of at least one American hostage held by Middle Eastern terrorists. Meanwhile, the money Iran paid for the American weapons was diverted to the contras in Nicaragua. These actions brazenly violated a congressional ban on military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels—not to mention Reagan’s repeated vow that he would never negotiate with terrorists. Washington also continued to support Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein, to whom it sold weapons used against Iran. News of these secret dealings broke in November 1986 and ignited a ﬁ restorm of controversy. President Reagan claimed he was innocent of wrongdoing and ignorant of his subordinates’ activities. Reviving a refrain from the Watergate era, the public clamored to know “what the president knew and when he knew it.” Although Reagan was never found to have lied outright, a congressional committee condemned the “secrecy, deception, and disdain for the law” displayed by administration ofﬁcials and concluded that “if the president did not know what his national security advisers were doing, he should have.”

The Iran-Contra Scandal




Contra Rebel Troops Head for Battle
 These rebels were long-seasoned and battle-scarred veterans of Nicaragua’s civil war by the time this photograph was taken in 1987.

 The Iran-Contra affair cast a dark shadow over the Reagan record on foreign policy, tending to obscure the president’s outstanding achievement in establishing a new relationship with the Soviets. Out of the several Iran-Contra investigations, a picture emerged of Reagan as a lazy, perhaps even senile, president who napped through meetings and paid little or no attention to the details of policy. Reagan’s critics pounced on this portrait as proof that the movie-starturned-politician was a mental lightweight who had merely acted his way through the role of the presidency without really understanding the script. But despite these damaging revelations, Reagan remained among the most popular and beloved presidents in modern American history.

On March 4, 1987, President Ronald Reagan
 somewhat confusingly tried to explain his role (or lack of role) in the arms-for-hostages deal with Iran:

“


 A few months ago I told the American people I did not trade arms for hostages. My heart and my best intentions still tell me that is true, but the facts and the evidence tell me it is not.

”


 Reagan’s Economic Legacy Ronald Reagan had taken ofﬁce vowing to invigorate the American economy by rolling back government regulations, lowering taxes, and balancing the budget. He did ease many regulatory rules, and he pushed major tax reform bills through Congress in 1981 and 1986. But a balanced budget remained grotesquely out of reach. Supply-side economic theory had promised that lower taxes would actually increase government revenue because they would stimulate the economy as a whole. But, in fact, the combination of tax reduction and huge increases in military spending opened a vast “revenue hole” of $200 billion annual deﬁcits. In his eight years in ofﬁce, President Reagan added nearly $2 trillion to the national debt—more than all of his predecessors combined, including those who had fought protracted global wars (see Figure 40.1). The staggering deﬁcits of the Reagan years assuredly constituted a great economic failure. And because so much of the Reagan-era debt was ﬁnanced by foreign lenders, especially the Japa nese, the deﬁcits virtually guaranteed that future generations of Americans would either have to work harder than their parents, lower their standard of living, or both to pay their foreign creditors when the bills came due.



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992
 Billions of dollars 9,000 8,500 8,000 7,500 7,000 6,500 6,000 5,500 5,000

G. W. BUSH ELECTED 2001, SEPTEMBER 11TH ATTACK

4,000






CLINTON ELECTED

1,000


REAGAN ELECTED

1,500


VIETNAM WAR

2,000


 DEPRESSION

2,500


KOREAN WAR BREAKS

WORLD WAR II BREAKS

3,000


JAPAN SURRENDERS

3,500


INVASION OF IRAQ

4,500






























 Figure 40.1 The National Debt, 1930–2006 World War II provided the ﬁrst major boost to the national debt. But it was the policies of the Reagan and George H. W. Bush administrations, 1981–1993, that explosively expanded the debt to the $4 trillion level. By the 1990s, 14 percent of federal revenues went to interest payments on the debt. The budget surpluses created by the booming economy of the second Clinton administration (1997–2001) raised the prospect that the debt might be paid off. But the combination of the George W. Bush tax cuts and increased military spending sent the debt soaring again after 2001. (Sources: Historical Statistics of the United States and Statistical Abstract of the United States, relevant years; Ofﬁce of Management and Budget, “Mid-Session Review: Budget of the U.S. Government, Fiscal Year 2008.”)

 But if the deﬁcits represented an economic failure, they also constituted, strangely enough, a kind of political triumph. Among the paramount goals of Reagan’s political life was his ambition to slow the growth of government, and especially to block or even repeal the social programs launched in the era of Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society. By appearing to make new social spending both practically and politically impossible for the foreseeable future, the deﬁcits served exactly that purpose. They achieved, in short, Reagan’s highest political objective: the containment of the welfare state. Ronald Reagan thus ensured the long-term perpetuation of his dearest political values to a degree

 that few presidents have managed to achieve. For better or worse, the consequences of “Reaganomics” would be large and durable. Yet another legacy of the 1980s was a sharp reversal of a long-term trend toward a more equitable distribution of income and an increasing squeeze on the middle class. In the early 1990s, median household income (in 1993 dollars) actually declined, from about $33,500 in 1989 to about $31,000 in 1993 (see Figure 40.2). Whether that disturbing trend should be attributed to Reagan’s policies or to more deeply running economic currents remained controversial.

Religion and Politics


51.7


49.5


47.6


46.7


46.2
46.6


48.7


49.8


50.4


21.0


22.1


22.2








Highest 5%


44.1


18.5
16.5
4.2


3.8


1980 1990


3.7


3.6


3.4








 Lowest 20 percent

1980 1990








 Middle 60 percent

The Religious Right
 Religion pervaded American politics in the 1980s. Especially conspicuous was a coalition of conser vative, evangelical Christians known as the religious right. In 1979 the Reverend Jerry Falwell, an evangelical minister from Lynchburg, Virginia, founded a political orga ni zation called the Moral Majority. Falwell preached with great success against sexual permissiveness, abortion, feminism, and the spread of gay rights. In its ﬁ rst two years, the Moral Majority registered between 2 million and 3 million voters. Using radio, direct-mail marketing, and cable TV, “televangelists” reached huge audiences in the 1980s, collected millions of dollars, and became aggressive political advocates of conser vative causes. Members of the religious right were sometimes called “movement conser vatives,” a term that recalls the left-wing protest movements of the 1960s. In many ways the religious right of the 1980s was a reﬂection of, or answer to, sixties radicalism. Feminists in the 1960s declared that “the personal was political.” The religious right did the same. What had in the past been personal matters—gender roles, homosexuality, and prayer—became the organizing ground for a powerful political movement. Like advocates of multiculturalism and afﬁ rmative action, the religious right practiced a form of “identity politics.” But rather than deﬁ ning themselves as Latino voters or gay voters, they declared themselves Christian or pro-life voters.

1980 1990


 Highest 20 percent



Figure 40.2
Share of Income
Received by Families,
 by Quintile, 1980–2005 Since 1980 the incomes of the lowest 20 percent and the middle 60 percent have been shrinking, while the incomes of the highest 20 percent, and particularly the top 5 percent, have climbed steadily. (Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2008.)

 The New Right also mimicked the New Left in some of its tactics. If the left had consciousness-raising sessions, the right had prayer meetings. Adherents articulated their positions in a language of rights and entitlements, as in the “right-to-life” (or anti-abortion) movement. They even mirrored the tactics of civil

 The Moral Majority, 1981 Television evangelist and religious leader the Reverend Jerry Falwell mobilized his national Moral Majority organization in support of Ronald Reagan’s presidential campaign in 1980 and a conservative social agenda.



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


 disobedience. Protesters in the 1960s blocked entrances to draft ofﬁces; protesters in the 1980s blocked entrances to abortion clinics. Several leaders of the religious right fell from grace in the latter part of the decade. One tearfully admitted to repeated trysts with prostitutes. Another went to prison following revelations of his own ﬁ nancial and sexual misconduct. But such scandals would not shake the faith of America’s conser vative Christians or diminish the new political clout of activist, evangelical religionists.

Conservatism in the Courts
 If the budget was Reagan’s chief weapon in the war against the welfare state, the courts became his principal instrument in the “cultural wars” demanded by the religious right. By the time he left ofﬁce, Reagan had appointed a near-majority of all sitting judges. Equally important, he had named three conser vativeminded justices to the U.S. Supreme Court. They included Sandra Day O’Connor, a brilliant, public-spirited Arizona judge. When she was sworn in on September 25, 1981, she became the ﬁ rst woman to ascend to the high bench in the Court’s nearly two-hundred-year history. Reaganism repudiated two great icons of the liberal political culture: afﬁ rmative action and abortion. The Court showed its newly conser vative colors in 1984, when it decreed, in a case involving Memphis ﬁ reﬁghters, that union rules about job seniority could outweigh afﬁ rmative-action concerns in guiding promotion policies in the city’s ﬁ re department. In two cases in 1989 (Ward’s Cove Packing v. Antonia and Martin v. Wilks), the Court made it more difﬁcult to prove that an employer practiced racial discrimination in hiring and made it easier for white males to argue that they were the victims of reverse discrimination by employers who followed afﬁ rmative-action practices. Congress passed legislation in 1991 that partially reversed the effects of those decisions. The contentious issue of abortion also reached the Court in 1989. In the case of Roe v. Wade in 1973, the Supreme Court had prohibited states from making laws that interfered with a woman’s right to an abortion during the early months of pregnancy. For nearly two decades, that decision had been the bedrock principle on which “pro-choice” advocates built their case for abortion rights. It had also provoked bitter criticism from Roman Catholics and various “right-to-life”

 The Justice Is a Lady, 1981 Herblock hails Sandra Day O’Connor’s appointment to the Supreme Court.

 groups, who wanted a virtually absolute ban on all abortions. In Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, the Court in July 1989 did not entirely overturn Roe, but it seriously compromised Roe’s protection of abortion rights. By approving a Missouri law that imposed certain restrictions on abortion, the Court signaled that it was inviting the states to legislate in an area in which Roe had previously forbidden them to legislate. The Court renewed that invitation in Planned Parenthood v. Casey in 1992, when it ruled that states could restrict access to abortion as long as they did not place an “undue burden” on the woman. Using this standard, the Court held that Pennsylvania could not compel a wife to notify her husband about an abortion but could require a minor child to notify parents, as well as other restrictions. Right-to-life advocates were at ﬁ rst delighted by the Webster decision. But the Court’s ruling also galva-

 Reagan's Legacy

Speaking to the National Association of
 Evangelicals, President Ronald Reagan said the following about abortion:

“


 More than a decade ago, a Supreme Court decision [Roe v. Wade, 1973] literally wiped off the books of ﬁfty states statutes protecting the rights of unborn children. Abortion on demand now takes the lives of up to 1½ million unborn children a year. Human life legislation ending this tragedy will some day pass the Congress, and you and I must never rest until it does. Unless and until it can be proven that the unborn child is not a living entity, then its right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness must be protected.

”


 nized pro-choice orga ni zations into a new militancy. Bruising, divisive battles loomed as state legislatures across the land confronted abortion. This painful cultural conﬂ ict over the unborn was also part of the Reagan era’s bequest to the future.

Referendum on
Reaganism in 1988
 Republicans lost control of the Senate in the off-year elections of November 1986. Hopes rose among Democrats that the “Reagan Revolution” might be showing signs of political vulnerability at last. The newly Democratic majority in the Senate ﬂexed its political muscles in 1987 when it rejected an ultraconservative nominee for the Supreme Court. Democrats also relished the prospect of making political hay out of both the Iran-Contra affair and disquieting signs of economic trouble. The “double mountain” of deﬁcits—the federal budget deﬁcit and the international trade deﬁcit—continued to grow ominously. Falling oil prices blighted the economy of the Southwest, slashing real estate values and undermining hundreds of savings and loan (S&L) institutions. The damage to the S&Ls was so massive that a federal rescue operation was eventually estimated to carry a price tag of well over $500 billion. Meanwhile, many American banks found themselves holding nearworthless loans they had unwisely foisted upon Third



 World countries, especially in Latin America. In 1984 it took federal assistance to save Continental Illinois Bank from a catastrophic failure. More banks and savings institutions were folding than at any time since the Great Depression of the 1930s. A wave of mergers, acquisitions, and leveraged buyouts washed over Wall Street, leaving many brokers and traders megarich and many companies saddled with megadebt. A cold spasm of fear struck the money markets on Black Monday, October 19, 1987, when the leading stock-market index plunged 508 points—the largest one-day decline in history to that point. This crash, said Newsweek magazine, heralded “the ﬁ nal collapse of the money culture . . . , the death knell of the 1980s.” But as Mark Twain famously commented about his own obituary, this announcement proved premature. Hoping to cash in on these ethical and economic anxieties, a pack of Democrats—dubbed the “Seven Dwarfs” by derisive Republicans—chased after their party’s 1988 presidential nomination. The handsome and charismatic Democratic front-runner, former Colorado senator Gary Hart, was forced to drop out of the race in May 1987 after charges of sexual misconduct. African American candidate Jesse Jackson, a rousing speechmaker who hoped to forge a “rainbow coalition” of minorities and the disadvantaged, campaigned energetically. But the Democratic nomination in the end went to the coolly cerebral governor of Massachusetts, Michael Dukakis. Republicans nominated Reagan’s vice president, George H. W. Bush, who ran largely on the Reagan record of tax cuts, strong defense policies, toughness on crime, opposition to abortion, and a long-running if hardly robust economic expansion. Dukakis made little headway exploiting the ethical and economic sore spots and came across to television

 Hollywood director Oliver Stone’s (b. 1946) ﬁlm Wall Street both romanticized and viliﬁed the business culture of the 1980s. The character of Gordon Gekko, inspired by real-life corporate raider Ivan Boesky, captured the spirit of the times:

“


 Ladies and gentlemen, greed is good. Greed works, greed is right. . . . Greed for life, money, love, knowledge, has marked the upward surge of mankind—and greed, mark my words, will save the malfunctioning corporation called the U.S.A.

”




Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


 viewers as almost supernaturally devoid of emotion. On election day the voters gave him just 41,016,429 votes to 47,946,422 for Bush. The Electoral College count was 111 to 426.

George H. W. Bush and
 the End of the Cold War George Herbert Walker Bush was born with a silver ladle in his mouth. His father had served as a U.S. senator from Connecticut, and young George had enjoyed a ﬁ rst-rate education at Yale. After ser vice in World War II, he had amassed a modest fortune of his own in the oil business in Texas. His deepest commitment, however, was to public ser vice; he left the business world to serve brieﬂy as a congressman and then held various posts in several Republican administrations, including emissary to China, ambassador to the United Nations, director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and vice president. He capped this long political career when he was inaugurated president in January 1989, promising to work for “a kinder, gentler America.” In the ﬁ rst months of the Bush administration, the communist world commanded the planet’s fascinated attention. Everywhere in the communist bloc, it seemed, the season of democracy had arrived. In China hundreds of thousands of prodemocracy demonstrators thronged through Beijing’s Tiananmen Square in the spring of 1989. They proudly ﬂourished a thirty-foot-high “Goddess of Democracy,”

Tiananmen Square,
Beijing, China, June 1989
 The Chinese communist state mobilized all its forces against students demonstrating for a more democratic China.

George Herbert Walker Bush (b. 1924) Campaigning,
 October 1988 Bush soundly defeated Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis in the November 1988 election.

 modeled on the Statue of Liberty, as a symbol of their aspirations. But in June of that year, China’s aging and autocratic rulers brutally crushed the prodemocracy movement. Tanks rolled over the crowds, and machinegunners killed hundreds of protesters. World opinion

 The USSR Dissolves



Fallen Idol
 Romanians toppled this statue of Vladimir Lenin in 1990, symbolically marking the collapse of the Marxian dream that had agitated the world for more than a century.

 roundly condemned the bloody suppression of the prodemocracy demonstrators. President Bush joined in the criticism. Yet despite angry demands in Congress for punitive restrictions on trade with China, the president insisted on maintaining normal relations with Beijing. Stunning changes also shook Eastern Europe. Long oppressed by puppet regimes propped up by Soviet guns, the region was revolutionized in just a few startling months in 1989. The Solidarity movement in Poland led the way when it toppled Poland’s communist government in August. With dizzying speed, communist regimes collapsed in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and even hyperrepressive Romania. In December 1989, jubilant Germans danced atop the hated Berlin Wall, symbol of the division of Germany and all of Europe into two armed and hostile camps. The wall itself soon came down, heralding the imminent end of the forty-ﬁve-year-long Cold War. Chunks of the wall’s concrete became instant collectors’ items—gray souvenirs of a grim episode in Europe’s history. With the approval of the victorious Allied powers of World War II, the two Germanys, divided since 1945, were at last reunited in October 1990. Most startling of all were the changes that rolled over the heartland of world communism, the Soviet Union itself. Mikhail Gorbachev’s policies of glasnost and perestroika had set in motion a groundswell that

 surged out of his control. Old-guard hard-liners, in a last-gasp effort to preserve the tottering communist system, attempted to dislodge Gorbachev with a military coup in August 1991. With the support of Boris Yeltsin, president of the Russian Republic (one of the several republics that composed the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, or USSR), Gorbachev foiled the plotters. But his days were numbered. In December 1991 Gorbachev resigned as Soviet president. He had become a leader without a country as the Soviet Union dissolved into its component parts, some ﬁ fteen republics loosely confederated in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), with Russia the most powerful state and Yeltsin the dominant leader. To varying degrees, all the new governments in the CIS repudiated communism and embraced democratic reforms and a free-market economy (see Map 40.4). These developments astonished the “experts,” who had long preached that the steely vise-grip of communist rule never could be peacefully broken. Yet suddenly and almost miraculously, the totalitarian tonnage of communist oppression had been rendered politically weightless. Most spectacularly, the demise of the Soviet Union wrote a deﬁ nitive ﬁ nish to the Cold War era. More than four decades of nail-biting tension between two nuclear superpowers, the Soviet Union and the United States, evaporated when the USSR dismantled itself. With the Soviet Union swept into the



20°W


0°


°N


20°E


40°E


 Communist regimes overthrown since 1989

Arctic


Circle


 SWEDEN

 Soviet Union, dissolved in 1991

 NORWAY

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

 IRELAND

 DENMARK

UNITED KINGDOM

NETH. LUX.



UG RT PO

CZECH REP.

 ITALY

 SPAIN

 BELARUS

AUSTRIA SLOVAKIA HUNGARY

U K R AI NE


 ALBANIA

 BULGARIA

Black


Se


 a

 TUNISIA

 GEORGIA

GR EEC E

 CHECHNYA

U ZB EK I ST AN


CHINA T U R K MENI ST AN

 AZERBAIJAN

SLOVENIA CROATIA

SYR I A

Ad
 ri

 at ic

 SERBIA

Se


 NATO airwar against Serbia to protect Kosovo, 1994

 a

 MONTENEGRO

 AFGHANISTAN

I R AN


SAU D I AR AB I A

 EGYPT





 KUWAIT

500 Km.


 ia

 rs

Sea


F.Y.R.
 MACEDONIA

 JORDAN

Pe


 KOSOVO

 IRAQ

 ISRAEL

Red


 U.S. troops join NATO peacekeeping forces, Dec. 1995

 PAKISTAN

N


CYPRUS LEBANON

 BOSNIAHERZEGOVINA

 KYRGYZSTAN

 TAJIKISTAN

 ARMENIA

 TURKEY

Sea


 MALTA

 a

 ian

Se


 sp

 n

Aral
Sea


Ca


 nea

 KAZAKHSTAN

 Chechnya declares independence 1991; Russia attacks, 1994

 ROMANIA

 ALGERIA

 Gorbachev in power, 1985 –1991 Moscow coup fails; Boris Yeltsin declared president of Russia, 1990

 Czechoslovakia broke into Czech Republic and Slovakia in 1993 MOLDOVA

Mediterra


 RUSSIA

Moscow


Berlin


80°E


 Largest and most influential of the former Soviet republics after 1991

LATVIA LITHUANIA

 POLAND

 SWITZ.

 FRANCE

 AL

°N


 RUSSIA

 GERMANY

 BELG.

60°E


 ESTONIA

Elections, 1989


 Berlin Wall opened, Nov. 1989 German reunification, 1990

 Yugoslavia, dissolved in civil war, 1991–1992

F I NL AND


North
Sea


 n

500 Mi.


Map 40.4 The End of the Cold War Changed the Map of Europe


 dustbin of history and communism all but extinct, Bush spoke hopefully of a “new world order,” where democracy would reign and diplomacy would supersede weaponry. Some observers even saw in these developments “the end of history,” in the sense that democracy, victorious in its two-century-long struggle against foes on the left and right, had no ideological battles left to ﬁght. Exultant Americans joked that the USSR had become the “USS were.” But the disintegration of the Soviet Union was no laughing matter. Rankling questions remained. For example, who would honor armscontrol agreements with the United States? Which of the successor states of the former Soviet Union would take command of the formidable Soviet nuclear arsenal? (A partial answer was provided in early 1993, when President Bush, in one of his last ofﬁcial acts, signed the START II accord with Russian president Boris Yeltsin, committing both powers to reduce their long-range nuclear arsenals by two-thirds within ten years.)

Gu


 lf

Interactive Map


 In his state of the union address on January 31, 1990, President George H. W. Bush (b. 1924) declared,

“


 The events of the year just ended, the revolution of ’89, have been a chain reaction, changes so striking that it marks the beginning of a new era in the world’s affairs.

”


 Just six months later, speaking at Stanford University, Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev (b. 1931) said,

“


 The Cold War is now behind us. Let us not wrangle over who won it. It is in the common interest of our two countries and nations not to ﬁght this trend toward cooperation, but rather to promote it.

”


The End of the Cold War




The Agony of Yugoslavia, 1992
 These Bosnian refugees from the town of Jajce illustrate the plight of millions of Yugoslavians as their country slid into vicious interethnic battles in the wake of the Cold War’s conclusion.

 Throughout the former Soviet empire, waves of nationalistic fervor and long-suppressed ethnic and racial hatreds rolled across the vast land as communism’s roots were wrenched out. A particularly nasty conﬂ ict erupted in the Russian Caucasus in 1991, when the Chechnyan minority tried to declare their independence from Russia, prompting President Yeltsin to send in Russian troops. Ethnic warfare ﬂared in other disintegrating communist countries as well, notably in misery-drenched Yugoslavia, racked by vicious “ethnic cleansing” campaigns against various minorities. The end of the Cold War also proved a mixed blessing for the United States. For nearly half a century, the containment of Soviet communism had been the paramount goal of U.S. foreign policy. Indeed the Cold War era had been the only lengthy period in American history when the United States had consistently pursued an internationalist foreign policy. With the Soviet threat now canceled, would the United States revert to its traditional isolationism? What principles would guide American diplomacy now that “anticommunism” had lost its relevance? The Soviet-American rivalry, with its demands for high levels of military preparedness, had also deeply shaped and even invigorated the U.S. economy. Huge economic sectors such as aerospace were heavily sustained by military contracts. The economic cost of beating swords into plowshares became painfully apparent

 in 1991 when the Pentagon announced the closing of thirty-four military bases and canceled a $52 billion order for a navy attack plane. More closings and cancellations followed. Communities that had been drenched with Pentagon dollars now nearly dried up, especially in hard-hit southern California, where scores of defense plants shut their doors and unemployment soared. The problems of weaning the U.S. economy from its decades of dependence on defense spending tempered the euphoria of Americans as they welcomed the Cold War’s long-awaited ﬁ nale. Elsewhere in the world, democracy marched triumphantly forward. The white regime in South Africa took a giant step toward liberating that troubled land from its racist past when in 1990 it freed African leader Nelson Mandela, who had served twenty-seven years in prison for conspiring to overthrow the government. Four years later Mandela was elected South Africa’s president. Free elections in Nicaragua in February 1990 removed the leftist Sandinistas from power. Two years later peace came at last to war-ravaged El Salvador.

The Persian Gulf Crisis
 Sadly, the end of the Cold War did not mean the end of all wars. President Bush ﬂexed the United States’



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


 still-intimidating military muscles in tiny Panama in December 1989, when he sent airborne troops to capture dictator and drug lord Manuel Noriega. Still more ominous events in the summer of 1990 severely tested Bush’s dream of a democratic and peaceful new world order. On August 2 Saddam Hussein, the brutal and ambitious ruler of Iraq, sent his armies to overrun Kuwait, a tiny, oil-rich desert sheikdom on Iraq’s southern frontier. Oil fueled Saddam’s aggression. Financially exhausted by its eight-year war with Iran, which had ended in a stalemate in 1988, Iraq needed Kuwait’s oil to pay its huge war bills. Saddam’s larger design was ironﬁsted control over the entire Persian Gulf region. With his hand thus ﬁ rmly clutching the world’s economic jugular vein, he dreamed of dictating the terms of oil supplies to the industrial nations, and perhaps of totally extinguishing the Arabs’ enemy, Israel. Ironically, the United States and its allies had helped supply Saddam with the tools of aggression. He was widely known to be a thug and assassin who intimidated his underlings by showing them the bodies of his executed adversaries hanging on meat hooks. But in the 1980s, American enmity for Islamicfundamentalist Iran was intense, and Saddam was at war with Iran. Assuming that “the enemy of my enemy is my friend,” American policymakers helped build Saddam’s military machine into a formidable force. On August 2, 1990, Saddam’s army roared into Kuwait. The speed and audacity of the invasion was stunning, but the world responded just as swiftly. The United Nations Security Council unanimously condemned the invasion on August 3 and demanded the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Iraq’s troops. When an economic embargo failed to squeeze the Iraqis into compliance by November, the Security Council delivered an ultimatum to Saddam to leave Kuwait by January 15, 1991, or U.N. forces would “use all necessary means” to expel his troops. For perhaps the ﬁ rst time in the post–World War II era, the U.N. seemed to be fulﬁ lling its founders’ dreams that it could preserve international order by putting guns where its mouth was. It also put them where the world’s critical oil supply was. In a logistical operation of astonishing complexity, the United States spearheaded a massive international military deployment on the sandy Arabian Peninsula. As the January 15 deadline approached, some 539,000 U.S. soldiers, sailors, and pilots—many of them women and all of them members of the new, post-Vietnam, all-volunteer American military—

 swarmed into the Persian Gulf region. They were joined by nearly 270,000 troops, pilots, and sailors from twenty-eight other countries in the coalition opposed to Iraq. When all diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis failed, the U.S. Congress voted regretfully on January 12 to approve the use of force. On January 16 the time bomb of war ticked off its last beats. The United States and its U.N. allies unleashed a hellish air attack against Iraq. For thirty-seven days, warplanes pummeled targets in occupied Kuwait and in Iraq itself, in an awesome display of high-technology, precision-targeting modern warfare. Iraq responded to this pounding by launching several dozen “Scud” short-range ballistic missiles against military and civilian targets in Saudi Arabia and Israel. These missile attacks claimed several lives but did no signiﬁcant military damage. Yet if Iraq made but a feeble military response to the air campaign, the allied commander, the beefy and blunt American general Norman (“Stormin’ Norman”) Schwarzkopf, took nothing for granted. Saddam, who had threatened to wage “the mother of all battles,” had the capacity to inﬂict awful damage. Iraq had stockpiled tons of chemical and biological weapons, including poison gas and the means to spread epidemics of anthrax. Saddam’s tactics also included ecological warfare as he released a gigantic oil slick into the Persian Gulf to forestall amphibious assault and ignited hundreds of oil-well ﬁ res, whose smoky plumes shrouded the ground from aerial view. Faced with these horrifying tactics, Schwarzkopf’s strategy was starkly simple: soften the Iraqis with relentless bombing, then suffocate them on the ground with a tidal-wave rush of troops and armor. On February 23 the dreaded and long-awaited land war began. Dubbed Operation Desert Storm, it lasted only four days—the “hundred-hour war” (see Map 40.5). With lightning speed the U.N. forces penetrated deep into Iraq, outﬂanking the occupying forces in Kuwait and blocking the enemy’s ability either to retreat or to reinforce. Allied casualties were amazingly light, whereas much of Iraq’s remaining ﬁghting force was quickly destroyed or captured. On February 27 Saddam accepted a cease-ﬁ re, and Kuwait was liberated. Most Americans cheered the war’s rapid and enormously successful conclusion. Many people echoed President Bush’s sentiments when he declared, “By God, we’ve kicked the Vietnam Syndrome once and for all!” But when the smoke cleared, Saddam Hussein had survived to menace the world another day. America and its allies had agreed to the liberation of Ku-

Operation Desert Storm




The Highway of Death
 The allied coalition wreaked gruesome destruction on Iraqi forces ﬂeeing back to Iraq after their defeat in Kuwait in 1991.

 wait, but Bush, fearing that a full assault on Baghdad would cost many lives and much public support, stopped well short of overthrowing the tyrant Saddam. The perpetually troubled Middle East knew scarcely

 less trouble after Desert Storm had ceased to thunder, and the United States, for better or worse, found itself even more deeply ensnared in the region’s web of mortal hatreds and intractable conﬂ icts.

Map 40.5 Operation Desert Storm: The Ground War, February 23–27, 1991
30˚E


40˚E


50˚E


SOVIET U N I O N
Baku 
Yerevan


TU R KEY
Tigris 
I R AN
I R AQ
Basra


Nile


KU WA I T



Kuwait City


Tabuk


Hafar al Batin


Pe


Jubail
Dhahran


Se


 a

Riyadh


 rs



 ian

Gul


 f

BAH R AI N Q ATAR
Abu Doha Dhabi 
300 Km.


300 Mi.


 o f Ho

 uz

 d

Allied Central
Command


Medina


Khafji


King Khalid
Military City




 rm

Re


SA U D I A R A B IA

60˚E


N


Baghdad


Aqaba


SI N AI

EGY P T EGY P T

 Primary Scud missile target

 t

Damascus


Suez IS R AEL
Canal
JOR DAN

R.


Cairo


 Allied naval forces Tehran

L E BANON
Beirut 
Haifa
Tel Aviv
WEST BAN K
Amman GA Z A STR I P Jerusalem 30˚N 
 Main allied air base

 ate

 ai

 ean Sea

 Allied advances in ground war, Feb. 24–28, 1991

Str


 iterran

R.


SYR IA

C Y P R US


Mosul


 Major oil field

.


Med


Nicosia


 Kurdish refugees flee Iraq toward Turkey and Iran.

 sR

N. CYPRUS

Euphr


 Kurdish region

 ea pian S

Ankara


Incirlih


 Allied troop build-up, Aug. 1990–Feb. 1991

Cas


40˚N


Interactive Map


Gul


U N IT ED
AR AB EM I R AT ES

 f of Oman Muscat



Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


Bush on the Home Front
 George H. W. Bush partly redeemed his pledge to work for a “kinder, gentler America” when he signed the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990, a landmark law prohibiting discrimination against the 43 million U.S. citizens with physical or mental disabilities. The president also signed a major water projects bill in 1992 that fundamentally reformed the distribution of subsidized federal water in the West. The bill put the interests of the environment ahead of agriculture, especially in Cal i fornia’s heavily irrigated Central Valley, and made much more water available to the West’s thirsty cities. The new president continued to aggravate the explosive “social issues” that had so divided Americans throughout the 1980s, especially the nettlesome questions of afﬁ rmative action and abortion. In 1990 Bush’s Department of Education challenged the legality of college scholarships targeted for racial minorities. Bush repeatedly threatened to veto civil rights legislation that would make it easier for employees to prove discrimination in hiring and promotion practices. (He grudgingly accepted a watered-down civil rights bill in 1991.) Most provocatively, in 1991 Bush nominated for the Supreme Court the conser vative African American jurist Clarence Thomas, a stern critic of afﬁ rmative action. Thomas’s nomination was loudly opposed by

Read My Nose
 When President Bush reneged on his 1988 campaign promise of “no new taxes,” he inﬂicted mortal political damage on his reelection campaign in 1992.

 liberal groups, including orga nized labor, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), and the National Organization for Women (NOW). Reﬂecting irreconcilable divisions over afﬁ rmative action and abortion, the Senate Judiciary Committee concluded its hearings on the nomination with a divided 7–7 vote and forwarded the matter to the full Senate without a recommendation. Then, just days before the Senate was scheduled to vote in early October 1991, a press leak revealed that Anita Hill, a law professor at the University of Oklahoma, had accused Thomas of sexual harassment. The Senate Judiciary Committee was forced to reopen its hearings. For days a prurient American public sat glued to their television sets as Hill graphically detailed her charges of sexual improprieties and Thomas angrily responded. In the end, by a 52–48 vote, the Senate conﬁ rmed Thomas as the second African American ever to sit on the supreme bench (Thurgood Marshall was the ﬁ rst). While many Americans hailed Hill as a heroine for focusing the nation’s at tention on issues of sexual harassment, Thomas maintained that Hill’s widely publicized, unproved allegations amounted to “a high-tech lynching for uppity blacks who in any way deign to think for themselves, to do for themselves.” The furor over Thomas’s conﬁ rmation suggested that the social issues that had helped produce three Republican presidential victories in the 1980s were losing some of their electoral appeal. Many women, en-

Economic Troubles


 raged by the all-male judiciary committee’s behavior in the Thomas hearings, grew increasingly critical of the president’s uncompromising stand on abortion. A “gender gap” opened between the two political parties, as pro-choice women grew increasingly cool toward the strong anti-abortion stand of the Republicans. Still more damaging to President Bush’s political health was the economy, which sputtered and stalled almost from the outset of his administration. By 1992 the unemployment rate exceeded 7 percent. It approached 10 percent in the key state of Cal i fornia, rav-

 aged by defense cutbacks. The federal budget deﬁcit continued to mushroom cancerously, topping $250 billion in each of Bush’s years as president. In a desperate attempt to stop the hemorrhage of red ink, Bush agreed in 1990 to a budget increase that included $133 billion in new taxes. Bush’s 1990 tax and budget package added up to a political catastrophe. In his 1988 presidential campaign, Bush had belligerently declared, “Read my lips— no new taxes.” Now he had ﬂagrantly broken that campaign promise.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Reagan defeats Carter for presidency





 Iran releases American hostages “Reaganomics” spending and tax cuts passed Solidarity movement in Poland O’Connor appointed to Supreme Court (ﬁ rst woman justice)

 Fourth Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting in Moscow Bush defeats Dukakis for presidency



 Chinese government suppresses prodemocracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square Webster v. Reproductive Health Services Eastern European countries oust communist governments Berlin Wall torn down

1981–


 United States aids anti-leftist forces in Central America



 Recession hits U.S. economy Israel invades Lebanon



 Reagan announces SDI plan (Star Wars) U.S. marines killed in Beirut, Lebanon U.S. invasion of Grenada

 Iraq invades Kuwait East and West Germany unite Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)



Persian Gulf War
 Thomas appointed to Supreme Court Gorbachev survives coup attempt, resigns as Soviet president Soviet Union dissolves; republics form Commonwealth of Independent States



 Twenty-seventh Amendment (prohibiting congressional pay raises from taking effect until an election seats a new session of Congress) ratiﬁed Planned Parenthood v. Casey





 Reagan defeats Mondale for presidency Soviet Union boycotts Summer Olympics in Los Angeles



 Gorbachev comes to power in Soviet Union, announces glasnost and perestroika First Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting in Geneva



 Reagan administration backs Aquino in Philippines Iran-Contra affair revealed Second Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting in Reykjavik, Iceland



 Senate rejects Supreme Court nomination of Robert Bork U.S. naval escorts begin in Persian Gulf Stock market plunges 508 points Third Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting in Washington, D.C.; INF treaty signed





Chapter 40 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 1980–1992


KEY TERMS
Proposition 13 (1034) boll weevils (1035) supply-side economics (1035) Reaganomics (1035) Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) (1036) Sandinistas (1037) contras (1037) glasnost (1039) perestroika (1039) Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty (1039) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Iran-Contra affair (1041) Moral Majority (1043) Black Monday (1045) Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) (1047) Operation Desert Storm (1050) Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) (1052) 
Ronald Reagan
Margaret Thatcher
Mikhail Gorbachev
Saddam Hussein
Jerry Falwell
Sandra Day O’Connor
George H. W. Bush


Boris Yeltsin
Nelson Mandela
Manuel Noriega
Norman (“Stormin’
Norman”)
Schwarzkopf
Clarence Thomas


Where Did Modern Conservatism Come From?


R


 onald Reagan’s election surprised many historians. Reﬂecting a liberal political outlook that is common among academic scholars, they were long accustomed to understanding American history as an inexorable, almost evolutionary, unfolding of liberal principles, including the quests for economic equality, social justice, and active government. That point of view animated the enormously popular writings of the so-called progressive historians, such as Charles and Mary Beard, earlier in the century (see “Varying Viewpoints: The Populists: Radicals or Reactionaries?” on p. 744). For the Beards, “conser vatives” were the rich, privileged elites bent on preserving their wealth and power and determined to keep government impotent, but doomed in the end to give way to the forces of liberal democracy. Even the “New Left” revisionists of the 1960s, while critical of the celebratory tone of their progressive forebears, were convinced that the deepest currents of American history ﬂowed leftward. But whether they were liberal or revisionist, most scholars writing in the ﬁ rst three post–World War II decades dismissed conservatism as an obsolete political creed. The revisionists were much more interested in decrying liberalism’s deﬁciencies than in analyzing conservatism’s strengths. Liberals and revision-

 ists alike abandoned the Beards’ image of powerful conser vative elites and offered instead a contemptuous portrait of conser vatives as fringe wackos— paranoid McCarthyites or racist demagogues who, in the words of the liberal critic Lionel Trilling, trafﬁcked only in “irritable mental gestures which seem to resemble ideas.” Such an outlook is conspicuous in books such as Daniel Bell’s The Radical Right (1963) and Richard Hofstadter’s The Paranoid Style in American Politics (1965). Yet what ﬂowed out of the turbulent decade of the 1960s was not a strengthened liberalism, but a revived conservatism. Ronald Reagan’s huge political success compelled a thorough reexamination of the tradition of American conservatism and the sources of its modern resurgence. Historians such as Leo Ribuffo and Alan Brinkley have argued that characters once dismissed as irrational crackpots or colorful irrelevancies—including religious fundamentalists and depression-era ﬁgures like Huey Long and Father Charles Coughlin— articulated values deeply rooted and widely shared in American culture. Those conser vative spokespersons, whatever their peculiarities, offered a vision of free individuals, minimal government, and autonomous local communities that harked back to many

To Learn More


 of the themes of “civic republicanism” in the era of young nationhood. But modern conservatism, however deep its roots, is also a product of the recent historical past. As scholars like Thomas Sugrue and Thomas Edsall have shown, the economic stagnation that set in af ter 1970 made many Americans insecure about their futures and receptive to new political doctrines. At the same time, as the commentator Kevin Phillips has stressed, “social issues,” with little or no apparent economic content, became increasingly prom inent, as movements for sexual liberation, legal abortion, and women’s rights sharply challenged traditional beliefs. Perhaps most important, the success of the civil rights movement thrust the perpet ually agonizing question of race relations to the very center of American political life. Finally, the failure of government policies in Vietnam, runaway inﬂation in the 1970s, and the disillusioning Watergate episode cast doubt on the legitimacy, the efﬁcacy, and even the morality of “big government.” Many modern conser vatives, including the pun-



 dit George Will, stress the deep historical roots of American conservatism. In their view, as Will once put it, it took sixteen years to count the ballots from the 1964 (Goldwater versus Johnson) election, and Goldwater won after all. But that argument is surely overstated. Goldwater ran against the legacy of the New Deal and was overwhelmingly defeated. Reagan ran against the consequences of the Great Society and won decisively. Many conser vatives, in short, apparently acknowledge the legitimacy of the New Deal and the stake that many middle-class Americans feel they have in its programs of Social Security, home mortgage subsidies, farm price supports, and similar policies. But they reject the philosophy of the Great Society, with its more focused attack on urban poverty and its vigorous support of afﬁ rmative action. Modern conservatism springs less from a repudiation of government per se and more from a disapproval of the particular priorities and strategies of the Great Society. The different historical fates of the New Deal and the Great Society suggest the key to the rise of modern conservatism.

To Learn More
Robert Collins, Transforming America: Politics and Culture
During the Reagan Years (2007)
Barbara Ehrenreich, The Worst Years of Our Lives: Irreverent
 Notes from a Decade of Greed (1990) Irving Kristol, Reﬂections of a Neoconservative (1983) Walter LaFeber, Inevitable Revolutions (2nd ed., 1993) William Martin, With God on Our Side: The Rise of the Religious Right in America (1996) Richard L. Pacelle, Jr., The Transformation of the Supreme Court’s Agenda: From the New Deal to the Reagan Administration (1991) Kevin Phillips, The Politics of Rich and Poor: Wealth and the American Electorate in the Reagan Aftermath (1990)

Paul C. Roberts, The Supply-Side Revolution (1984)
John W. Sloan, The Reagan Effect: Economics and
Presidential Leadership (1999)
David A. Stockman, The Triumph of Politics: Why the Reagan Revolution Failed (1986)


 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

America Confronts the
Post–Cold War Era





1992–2009
 There is nothing wrong with America that cannot be cured with what is right in America.

T


 he collapse of the Soviet Union and the democratization of its client regimes in Eastern Europe ended the four-decade-old Cold War and left the United States the world’s sole remaining superpower. Americans welcomed these changes but seemed unsure how to exercise their unprecedented economic and military might in this new international framework. The culture wars that had started in the 1960s fed ferociously partisan political squabbles that distracted the nation from the urgent task of clearly deﬁ ning its role in the dawning age of globalization. In 2000 George W. Bush won a bitterly contested presidential election that left the nation more rancorously divided than ever, until the spectacular terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, called forth, at least temporarily, a resurgent sense of national unity. Bush responded to the 9/11 attacks by invading the terrorist haven of Afghanistan. Amidst roiling controversy over his claims that Iraq

 possessed weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and had ties to terrorists, Bush proceeded to invade Iraq as well. After the failure to ﬁ nd WMD and over four thousand American battle deaths in the prolonged Iraq War, a war-weary country, nostalgic for the prosperity and peace of the 1990s, made history by electing Barack Obama.

Bill Clinton: The First
Baby-Boomer President
 As the last decade of the twentieth century opened, the slumbering economy, the widening gender gap, and the rising anti-incumbent spirit spelled opportunity for Democrats, frozen out of the White House for all but four years since 1968. In a bruising round of primary elections, Governor William Jefferson (“Bill”) Clinton

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Clinton Elected


 of Arkansas weathered blistering accusations of womanizing and draft evasion to emerge as his party’s standard-bearer. Breaking with the tradition of a “balanced ticket,” he selected a fellow forty-something southern white male Protestant moderate, Senator Albert Gore of Tennessee, as his vice-presidential running mate. Clinton claimed to be a “new” Democrat, chastened by the party’s long exile in the political wilderness. With other centrist Democrats, he had formed the Democratic Leadership Council to point the party away from its traditional antibusiness, dovish, champion-ofthe-underdog orientation and toward progrowth, strong defense, and anticrime policies. Clinton campaigned especially vigorously on promises to stimulate the economy, reform the welfare system, and overhaul the nation’s health-care apparatus, which had grown into a scandalously expensive contraption that failed to provide medical coverage to nearly 40 million Americans. Trying to wring one more win out of the social issues that had underwritten two Reagan and one Bush presidential victories, the Republican convention in Houston in August 1992 emphasized “family values” and, as expected, nominated George Bush and Vice President J. Danforth Quayle for a second term. But Bush’s listless campaign and his penchant for spaghetti sentences set him sharply apart from his youthful rival, the super-energetic and phenomenally articulate Clinton. Bush claimed credit for ending the Cold War and trumpeted his leadership role in the Persian Gulf War. But pocketbook problems as the economy dipped into recession swayed more voters than pride in past foreign policy. The purchasing power of the average worker’s paycheck had actually declined during Bush’s presidency. At Clinton’s campaign headquarters, a simple sign reminded staffers of his principal campaign theme: “It’s the economy, stupid.” Reﬂecting pervasive economic unease and the virulence of the throw-thebums-out national mood, nearly 20 percent of voters cast their ballots for independent presidential candidate H. Ross Perot, a bantamweight, jug-eared Texas billionaire who harped incessantly on the problem of the federal deﬁcit and made a boast of the fact that he had never held any public ofﬁce. Perot’s colorful presence probably accounted for the record turnout on election day, when some 100 million voters—55 percent of those eligible—went to the polls. The ﬁ nal tally gave Clinton 44,909,889 popular votes and 370 votes in the Electoral College. He was the ﬁ rst baby boomer to ascend to the White



Presidential Campaign Debate, 1992 George Bush,
 Ross Perot, and Bill Clinton squared off at the University of Richmond (Virginia) on October 16, 1992. The telegenic Clinton handily dominated the televised debates, especially in the “talk-show” format used on this occasion.

 House, a distinction reﬂecting the electoral proﬁ le of the population, 70 percent of whom had been born after World War II. Bush polled some 39,104,545 popular votes and 168 electoral votes. Perot won no electoral votes but did gather 19,742,267 popular votes—the strongest showing for an independent or third-party candidate since Theodore Roosevelt ran on the Bull Moose ticket in 1912 (see Map 41.1). Democrats also racked up clear majorities in both houses of Congress, which seated near-record numbers of new members, including thirty-nine African Americans, nineteen Hispanic Americans, seven Asian Americans, one Native American, and forty-eight women. Carol MoseleyBraun of Illinois became the ﬁ rst African American woman elected to the U.S. Senate, where she joined ﬁve other women in the largest female contingent in the upper chamber to that point. Clinton also seized the



Chapter 41 America Confronts the Post–Cold War Era, 1992–2009
WA MT

 OR

 ID

NV CA

 ND

 WY

 SD

 CO

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 AZ

 MN

KS OK

 NM

 IL

 LA

 TX

MI IN

 MO

OH KY

 MS

 AL

 WV

VA NC

 TN

 AR

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 12 RI PA NJ CT 4 15 8

 GA

 SC

DE MD DC

 FL

AK HI

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Clinton (Democrat)




68.8%


44,908,233


43.0%


Bush (Republican)




31.2%


39,102,282


37.4%




0.0%


19,741,048


18.9%


Perot (Independent)


 Map 41.1 Presidential Election of 1992 (with electoral vote by state)

Interactive Map


 opportunity in 1993 to nominate Ruth Bader Ginsburg to the Supreme Court, where she joined Sandra Day O’Connor to make a pair of women justices.

A
False Start for Reform  Badly overestimating his electoral mandate for liberal reform, the young president made a series of costly blunders upon entering the White House. In one of his ﬁ rst initiatives on taking ofﬁce, he stirred a hornet’s nest of controversy by advocating an end to the ban on gays and lesbians in the armed ser vices. Confronted with ﬁerce opposition, the president ﬁ nally had to settle for a “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy that quietly accepted gay and lesbian soldiers and sailors without ofﬁcially acknowledging their presence in the military. Even more damaging to Clinton’s political standing, and to his hopes for lasting liberal achievement, was the ﬁasco of his attempt to reform the nation’s health-care system. In a dramatic but personally and politically risky move, the president appointed his wife, nationally prominent lawyer and children’s advocate Hillary Rodham Clinton, as the director of a task force charged with redesigning the medical-ser vice in-

 dustry. Their stupefyingly complicated plan was dead on arrival when it was presented to Congress in October 1993. The First Lady was doused with a torrent of abuse, although she eventually rehabilitated herself sufﬁciently to win election as a U.S. senator from New York in 2000—the ﬁ rst First Lady ever to hold elective ofﬁce. Her bid to win the Democratic nomination for president in 2008 proved equally as historic, if less successful. Clinton had better luck with a deﬁcitreduction bill in 1993, which combined with an increasingly buoyant economy by 1996 to shrink the federal deﬁcit to its lowest level in more than a decade. By 1998 Clinton’s policies seemed to have caged the ravenous deﬁcit monster, as Congress argued over the unfamiliar question of how to manage federal budget surpluses. The new president also induced Congress in 1993 to pass a gun-control law, the “Brady Bill,” named for presidential aide James Brady, who had been wounded and disabled by gunﬁ re in the assassination attempt on President Ronald Reagan in 1981. In July 1994 Clinton made further progress against the national plague of ﬁ rearms when he persuaded Congress to pass a $30 billion anticrime bill, which contained a ban on several types of assault weapons that continued until the law expired in 2004. With these mea sures the government struggled to hold the line against an epidemic of violence that rocked American society in the 1990s. A huge explosion destroyed a federal ofﬁce building in Oklahoma City in 1995, taking 168 lives, in retribution for a 1993 standoff in Waco, Texas, between federal agents and a fundamentalist sect known as the Branch Davidians. That showdown had ended in the destruction of the sect’s compound and the deaths of many Branch Davidians, including women and children. Events like the Oklahoma City bombing brought to light a lurid and secretive underground of paramilitary private “militias” composed of alienated citizens armed to the teeth and ultrasuspicious of all government. Even many law-abiding citizens shared to some degree in the antigovernment attitudes that drove the militia members to murderous extremes. Thanks largely to the disillusioning agony of the Vietnam War and the naked cynicism of Richard Nixon in the Watergate scandal, the conﬁdence in government that had come naturally to the generation that had licked the Great Depression and won the Second World War was in short supply by century’s end. Reﬂecting that pervasive disenchantment with politics and politicians,

Violence in America




 Bombing of Federal Building in Oklahoma City, 1995 A truck bomb killed 168 people in this federal ofﬁce building in the worst act of terrorism in the United States until September 11, 2001. Convicted on eleven counts for the attack, antigovernment militant Timothy McVeigh became the ﬁrst person executed by the federal government in nearly forty years in 2001.

 several states passed term-limit laws for elected ofﬁcials, although the Supreme Court ruled in 1995 that the restrictions did not apply to federal ofﬁceholders. Before the decade was out, the logic of Clinton’s emphasis on gun control was tragically conﬁ rmed. On an April morning in 1999, two students at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado, killed twelve fellow students and a teacher. Debate ﬂared over the origins of school violence. Some observers targeted the violence portrayed in movies, TV shows, and video games; others pointed to the failings of parents. But the culprit that attracted the most sustained political attention was guns—their abundance and accessibility, especially in suburban and rural communities. Clinton engaged in a pugnacious debate with the progun National Riﬂe Association over the need to toughen gun laws, and ﬁ lmmaker Michael Moore agi-

 tated for gun control in his popular 2002 documentary, Bowling for Columbine. The “Million Mom March” in Washington, D.C., in May 2002 and the tragic killing of thirty-two people by a disturbed student at Virginia Tech in 2007 further drove calls for new antigun mea sures, but reform was slow in coming.

The Politics of Distrust
 Clinton’s failed initiatives and widespread antigovernment sentiment afforded Republicans a golden opportunity in 1994, and they seized it aggressively. Led by outspoken Georgia representative Newt Gingrich, Republicans offered voters a Contract with America that promised an all-out assault on budget deﬁcits and radical reductions in welfare programs. Their campaign



Chapter 41 America Confronts the Post–Cold War Era, 1992–2009


 succeeded fabulously, as a right-wing tornado roared across the land in the 1994 congressional elections. Every incumbent Republican gubernatorial, senatorial, and congressional candidate was reelected. Republicans also picked up eleven new governorships, eight seats in the Senate, and ﬁ fty-three seats in the House (where Gingrich became speaker), giving them control of both chambers of the federal Congress for the ﬁ rst time in forty years. But if President Clinton had overplayed his mandate for liberal reform in 1993, the congressional Republicans now proceeded to overplay their mandate for conser vative retrenchment. In 1996 the new Congress achieved a major conser vative victory when it compelled a reluctant Clinton to sign the Welfare Reform Bill, which made deep cuts in welfare grants and required able-bodied welfare recipients to ﬁ nd employment. The new welfare law also tightly restricted welfare beneﬁts for legal and illegal immigrants alike, reﬂecting a rising tide of anti-immigrant sentiment as the numbers of newcomers climbed toward an alltime high. Old-line liberal Democrats howled with pain at the president’s alleged betrayal of his party’s heritage, and some prominent administration members resigned in protest against his decision to sign the welfare bill. But Clinton’s acceptance of the welfare reform package was part of his shrewd political strategy of accommodating the electorate’s conser vative mood by moving to his right. President Clinton was at ﬁ rst stunned by the magnitude of the Republican congressional victory in 1994. But many Americans gradually came to feel that the Gingrich Republicans were bending their conser vative bow too far, especially when the new Speaker advocated provocative ideas like sending the children of welfare families to orphanages. In a tense confrontation between the Democratic president and the Republican Congress, the federal government actually had to shut down for several days at the end of 1995 until a budget package was agreed upon. These outlandishly partisan antics bred a backlash that helped President Clinton rebound from his political neardeath experience. As the 1996 election approached, the Republicans chose Kansas senator Robert Dole as their presidential candidate. A decorated World War II veteran, Dole ran a listless campaign. Clinton, buoyed by a healthy economy and by his artful trimming to the conser vative wind, breezed to an easy victory, with 47,401,898 popular votes to Dole’s 39,198,482 (see Map 41.2). The Reform party’s egomaniacal leader, Ross Perot, ran a sorry third, picking up less than half the votes he had

WA MT

 OR

 ID

NV CA

 ND

 WY

 SD

 CO

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 AZ

 MN

KS OK

 NM

 IL

 LA

 TX

MI IN

 MO

OH KY

 MS

 AL

 WV

VA NC

 TN

 AR

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 12 RI PA NJ CT 4 15 8

 GA

 SC

DE MD DC

 FL

AK HI

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Clinton (Democrat)




70.4%


47,401,054


49.2%


Dole (Republican)




29.6%


39,197,350


40.7%




0 .0%


8,085,285


8.4%


Perot (Independent)


Popular Vote


 Map 41.2 Presidential Election of 1996 (with electoral vote by state) The “solid South,” once a safe Democratic stronghold, had by century’s end largely become Republican territory.

Interactive Map


 garnered in 1992. Clinton won 379 electoral votes, Dole only 159. But Republicans remained in control of Congress.

Clinton Again
 As Clinton began his second term—the ﬁ rst Democratic president since Franklin Delano Roosevelt to be reelected—the heady promises of far-reaching reform with which he had entered the White House four years earlier were no longer heard. Still facing Republican majorities in both houses of Congress, he proposed only modest legislative goals, even though soaring tax revenues generated by the prosperous economy produced in 1998 a balanced federal budget for the ﬁrst time in three decades. Clinton cleverly managed to put Republicans on the defensive by claiming the political middle ground. He now warmly embraced the landmark Welfare Reform Bill of 1996 that he had initially been slow to endorse. Juggling the political hot potato of afﬁ rmative action, Clinton pledged to “mend it, not end it.” When voters in Cal i fornia in 1996 approved Proposition 209, prohibiting afﬁ rmative-action preferences in government and higher education, the number of minority

Post-Cold War Foreign Policies




 Protesting NAFTA, 1993 These members of the Teamsters Union feared that the adoption of the North American Free Trade Agreement would mean the replacement of high-paying American jobs with low-wage, nonunion Mexican labor. More than a decade later, the treaty still rankled. Policymakers disagreed about whether NAFTA had been damaging to American workers. In the 2008 election, the Republicans endorsed it, while the Democrats attacked it.

 students in the state’s public universities temporarily plummeted. A federal appeals court decision, Hopwood v. Texas, had a similar effect in Texas. Clinton criticized these broad assaults on afﬁ rmative action but stopped short of trying to reverse them, aware that public support for afﬁrmative action, especially among white Americans, had diminished since the 1970s. Clinton’s major political advantage continued to be the roaring economy, which by 2000 had sustained the longest period of growth in American history, driven by new Internet (“dot-com”) businesses and other high-tech and media companies. While unemployment crept down to 4 percent and businesses scrambled madly for workers, inﬂationary pressure remained remarkably low. Prosperity did not make Clinton immune to controversy over trade policy. During his ﬁrst term, he had displayed political courage by supporting the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), creating in 1993 a free-trade zone encompassing Mexico, Canada, and the United States. In doing so, he reversed his own stand in the 1992 election campaign and bucked the opposition of protectionists in his own party, especially labor leaders fearful of losing jobs to lowwage Mexican workers. Clinton took another step in 1994 toward a global free-trade system when he vigorously promoted the creation of the World Trade Organization (WTO), the successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and a cherished goal of free-trade advocates since the end of the Second World War. Simmering discontent over trade policy boiled over in 1999 when Clinton hosted the meeting of the WTO in Seattle. The city’s streets ﬁ lled with protesters

 railing against what they viewed as the human and environmental costs of economic “globalization.” Trade talks ﬁ zzled in Seattle, with Clinton taking a hefty share of the blame. Money spurred controversy of another sort in the late 1990s. Campaign ﬁ nance reform, long smoldering as a potential issue, suddenly ﬂared up after the 1996 presidential contest. Congressional investigators revealed that the Clinton campaign had received funds from many improper sources, including contributors who paid to stay overnight in the White House and foreigners who were legally prohibited from giving to American candidates. But Republicans and Democrats alike had reason to avoid reform. Both parties had grown dependent on vast sums to ﬁ nance television ads for their candidates. Clinton did little more than pay lip ser vice to the cause of campaign ﬁ nance reform. But within the ranks of both parties, a few mavericks proposed to eliminate the corrupting inﬂuence of big donors. Senator John McCain from Arizona made campaign ﬁ nance reform a centerpiece of his failed 2000 campaign for the Republican presidential nomination and ultimately succeeded in passing the McCain-Feingold Act of 2002 that more strictly regulated how money ﬂowed to candidates.

Problems Abroad
 The end of the Cold War dismantled the framework within which the United States had conducted foreign policy for nearly half a century. Clinton groped for a diplomatic formula to replace anticommunism as the basic premise of American diplomacy.



Chapter 41 America Confronts the Post–Cold War Era, 1992–2009


 Absorbed by domestic issues, President Clinton at ﬁ rst seemed uncertain and even amateurish in his conduct of foreign policy. He followed his predecessor’s lead in dispatching American troops as part of a peacekeeping mission to Somalia and reinforced the U.S. contingent after Somali rebels killed more than a dozen Americans in late 1993. But in March 1994, the president quietly withdrew the American units, without having accomplished any clearly deﬁ ned goal. Burned in Somalia, Washington stood on the sidelines in 1994 when catastrophic ethnic violence in the central African country of Rwanda resulted in the deaths of half a million people. Clinton also struggled to deﬁ ne a policy with respect to China, which was rapidly emerging as an economic and political powerhouse. Candidate Clinton had denounced George Bush in 1992 for not imposing economic sanctions on China as punishment for Beijing’s wretched record of human rights abuses. But

 President Clinton learned what Bush had long known: China’s economic importance to the United States did not permit Washington the luxury of taking the high road on human rights. Clinton soon soft-pedaled his criticism of the Beijing regime and instead began seeking improved trade relations with that robustly industrializing country and potential market bonanza. By 2000 Clinton was crusading for a controversial China trade bill. Congress passed it in May 2000, making the Asian giant a full-ﬂedged trading partner of the United States. Clinton’s approach to the tormented Balkans in southeastern Europe showed a similar initial hesitation, followed eventually by ﬁrm leadership. In the former Yugoslavia, as vicious ethnic conﬂ ict raged through Bosnia, the Washington government dithered until ﬁ nally deciding to commit American troops to a NATO peacekeeping contingent in late 1995. Deadlines for removing the troops were postponed and then ﬁ-

 Intifada Against Israeli Control, 1994 Beginning in 1987, Palestinians living in the Israeli-controlled territories of the West Bank and Gaza rose up in protest. As the stalemate dragged on, the likelihood of Middle East peace receded, despite repeated international diplomatic efforts to reach a settlement. These young Palestinians in East Jerusalem wave Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) ﬂags outlawed by Israel.

The Impeachment of Clinton


 nally abandoned altogether as it became clear that they were the only force capable of preventing new hostilities. NATO’s expansion to include the new member states of Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic in 1997, and its continuing presence in Bosnia, failed to pacify the Balkans completely. When Serbian president Slobodan Milosević in 1999 unleashed a new round of “ethnic cleansing” in the region, this time against ethnic Albanians in the province of Kosovo, U.S.-led NATO forces launched an air war against Serbia. The bombing campaign initially failed to stop ethnic terror, as refugees ﬂooded into neighboring countries, but it eventually forced Milosević to accept a NATO peacekeeping force on the ground in Kosovo. Milosević was arrested in 2001 and put on trial before the International Criminal Court in The Hague, where he died in 2006 before the trial was completed. The Middle East remained a major focus of American diplomacy right up to the end of Clinton’s tenure. In 1993 Clinton presided over a historic meeting at the White House between Israeli premier Yitzhak Rabin and Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) leader Yasir Arafat. They agreed in principle on selfrule for the Palestinians within Israel. But hopes ﬂ ickered two years later when Rabin fell to an assassin’s bullet. Clinton and his second-term secretary of state, Madeleine Albright, spent the rest of the 1990s struggling in vain to broker the permanent settlement that continued to elude Israelis and Palestinians. Arafat died in 2004 with his dream of creating a Palestinian state still unrealized. In his ﬁ nal year as president, Clinton stepped up his efforts to leave a legacy as an international peacemaker. Along with his work in the Middle East, he sought to bring peace to Northern Ireland and the Korean peninsula, and he traveled to India and Pakistan in hopes of reducing the rivalry between the two nuclear powers of southern Asia. But the guiding principles of American foreign policy in the post–Cold War era remained ill-deﬁ ned and elusive

Scandal and Impeachment
 Scandal had dogged Bill Clinton from the beginning of his presidency. Critics brought charges of every thing from philandering to illegal ﬁ nancial transactions. Allegations of corruption stemming from a real estate deal called Whitewater while he was governor of Arkansas triggered an investigation by a special prosecutor, but no indictment ever materialized.



 All the previous scandals were overshadowed by the revelation in January 1998 that Clinton had engaged in a sexual affair with a young White House intern, Monica Lewinsky, and then blatantly lied about it when testifying under oath in another woman’s civil suit accusing him of sexual harassment. Caught in his bold lie, the president made a humiliating confession, but his political opponents smelled blood in the water. In September 1998 the special prosecutor investigating Whitewater, who had broad powers to investigate any evidence of presidential malfeasance, presented a stinging report, including lurid sexual details, to the Republican-controlled House of Representatives. That report presented eleven possible grounds for impeachment, all related to lying about the Lewinsky affair. The House quickly cranked up the rusty machinery of impeachment. As an acrid partisan at mosphere enveloped the Capitol, House Republicans in December 1998 passed two articles of impeachment against the president: perjury before a grand jury and obstruction of justice. Crying foul, the Democratic minority charged that, however deplorable Clinton’s personal misconduct, sexual transgressions did not rise to the level of “high crimes and misdemeanors” prescribed in the Constitution (see Art. II, Sec. IV in the Appendix). The House Republican managers (prosecutors) of impeachment for the Senate trial replied that perjury and obstruction were grave public issues and that nothing less than the “rule of law” was at stake. As cries of “honor the Constitution” and “sexual McCarthyism” ﬁ lled the air, the nation debated whether the president’s peccadilloes amounted to high crimes or low follies. Most Americans apparently leaned toward the latter view. In the 1998 midterm elections, voters reduced the House Republicans’ majority, causing ﬁery House speaker Newt Gingrich to resign his post. Although Americans held a low opinion of Clinton’s slipshod personal morals, most liked the president’s political and economic policies and wanted him to stay in ofﬁce. In early 1999, for the ﬁ rst time in 130 years, the nation witnessed an impeachment proceeding in the U.S. Senate. Dusting off ancient precedents from Andrew Johnson’s trial, the one hundred senators solemnly heard arguments and evidence in the case, with Chief Justice William Rehnquist presiding. With the facts widely known and the two parties’ political positions ﬁ rmly locked in, the trial’s outcome was a foregone conclusion. On the key obstruction of justice charge, ﬁve northeastern Republicans joined all fortyﬁve Democratic senators in voting not guilty. The ﬁ fty



Chapter 41 America Confronts the Post–Cold War Era, 1992–2009


The Legacy of Impeachment
 Time magazine’s cartoonist asked how future generations would judge the Clinton impeachment episode—and how it might be treated in history textbooks.

 Republican votes for conviction fell far short of the constitutionally required two-thirds majority. The vote on the perjury charge was forty-ﬁve guilty, ﬁ fty-ﬁve not guilty.

 Clinton’s Legacy and the 2000 Election Beyond the obvious stain of impeachment, Clinton’s legacy was mixed. His sound economic policies encouraged growth and trade in a rapidly globalizing

 post–Cold War world. Yet as a “New Democrat” and avowed centrist, Clinton did more to consolidate than to reverse the Reagan-Bush revolution against New Deal liberalism that had for half a century provided the compass for the Democratic party and the nation. Further, by setting such a low standard in his personal conduct, he replenished the sad reservoir of public cynicism about politics that Vietnam and Watergate had created a generation before. Nonetheless, as the end of the Clinton term and the beginning of the new millennium approached, the Democrats stayed on their political course and nom-

The Controversial Election of 2000




 Counting Chads With Bush and Gore neckand-neck in Florida’s presidential vote count, election ofﬁcials in Broward County examined by eye paper ballots disqualiﬁed by machine because the punched chads had not fully separated from the ballots. They hoped that close scrutiny would reveal the voters’ intentions.

 inated loyal vice president Albert Gore for president. Gore faced the tricky challenge of linking himself to Clinton-era peace and prosperity while at the same time distancing himself from his boss’s personal foibles. He chose as his running mate Connecticut senator Joseph Lieberman, an outspoken Clinton critic and the ﬁrst Jew nominated to a major national ticket. Their Republican challenger, George W. Bush, won the nomination on the strength of his father’s name and his years as governor of Texas. Bush surrounded himself with Washington insiders, including vice-presidential nominee Richard Cheney, and, in a clear jab at Clinton, promised to “restore dignity to the White House.” Rosy estimates that the federal budget would produce a surplus of some $2 trillion in the coming decade set the stage for the presidential contest. Echoing the Republican creed of smaller government, Bush argued for returning the budget surplus to “the people” through massive tax cuts and for promoting privatesector programs, such as school vouchers and a reliance on “faith-based” institutions to help the poor. Gore proposed smaller tax cuts, targeted at middleand lower-class people, and strengthening Social Security. In an era of peace, foreign policy ﬁgured hardly at all in the campaign, although Bush struck a moderate note when he urged that America should act like “a humble nation.” Pollsters predicted a close election, but none foresaw the epochal cliffhanger that the election would become. On election day the country split nearly evenly between the two candidates, and it was soon clear that Florida’s electoral votes would determine

 the winner. Television news programs announced that Bush had won the Sunshine State, and Al Gore called the Texas governor to concede defeat. Yet just an hour later, Gore’s camp decided that Florida was too close to call, and the vice president—in perhaps the most awkward phone call in modern politics—retracted his concession. What ensued was a ﬁve-week political standoff over how to count the votes in Florida. Democrats argued that some ballots were confusing or had been misread by machines and asked for recounts by hand in several counties. Republicans claimed that such recounts would amount to “changing the rules in the middle of the game” and thus thwart the rule of law. After weeks of legal bickering with the presidency in the balance, the Supreme Court ﬁ nally intervened. By a ﬁve-to-four vote along partisan lines, the Court reasoned that since neither Florida’s legislature nor its courts had established a uniform standard for evaluating disputed ballots, the hand counts amounted to an unconstitutional breach of the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection clause. That ruling gave Bush the White House but cast a dark shadow of illegitimacy over his presidency. Bush ofﬁcially won Florida by 537 votes out of 6 million cast, and he squeaked by in the Electoral College, 271 to 266 (see Maps 41.3 and 41.4). The national popular vote went decisively to Gore, 50,999,897 to 50,456,002. For the ﬁ rst time since 1888, a candidate won the White House with fewer popular votes than his opponent. Calls to abolish the Electoral College, however, were few and muted (see Art. V of the Constitution).



Chapter 41 America Confronts the Post–Cold War Era, 1992–2009


 Map 41.3 Presidential Election of 2000 (with electoral vote by state) Although Democrat Albert Gore won the popular election by half a million votes, George W. Bush’s contested 537-vote advantage in Florida gave him a slight lead in the Electoral College. The 2.7 million popular votes won by Green party candidate and consumer activist Ralph Nader almost surely deprived Gore of victory, casting Nader in the role of spoiler. Bush’s failure to win the popular vote inspired critics to protest at his inauguration with placards reading “Hail to the Thief.”

WA MT

 OR

 ID

 NV

 MN

 SD

 WY

 CO

 AZ

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 CA

 Map 41.4 America in Red and Blue This map showing the vote by county in the hotly contested 2000 presidential election vividly illustrates the geography of modern America’s political divisions. Democratic candidate Albert Gore won a popular majority by carrying just 676 mostly urban counties, heavily populated by union members, minorities, and prosperous, educated white-collar workers. Republican George W. Bush won the election by taking 2,477 mostly rural counties, where feelings about “social issues” such as abortion and gun control ran high and shaped solid conservative constituencies. (Source: Adapted from VNS Graphic by Stanford Kay-Newsweek.)

 ND

 IL

 KS

 NM

MI IN

 MO

 OK

 OH

 WV

 KY

 MS

 LA

 AL

VA NC

 TN

 AR

 TX

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 12 RI PA NJ CT 4 15 8

 GA

 SC

DE MD DC 2*

 FL

AK HI

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Bush (Republican)




50.4%


50,456,169


47.88%


Gore (Democrat)




49.4%


50,996,116


48.39%




0.0%


2,783,728


2.72%


Nader (Green)


Popular Vote


 * One elector from the District of Columbia abstained.

Interactive Map


 WASH.

ME. N. DAK.

MONT. ORE.

VT. N.H.

 MINN.

 IDAHO

N.Y.


WISC. S. DAK.

MASS. CONN.

 MICH.

WYO. IOWA

NEBR. NEV.

OHIO ILL.

UTAH COLO.

 CALIF.

 MD.

IND. W. VA.

 KANSAS

R.I.


 PA.

 MO.

 VA.

N.J.
 DEL.

D.C.


KY. N.C. TENN.

OKLA. ARIZ.

N. MEX.

 ARK.

S.C.
ALA. MISS.

 TEXAS

 GA.

LA. FLA.

 ALASKA*

Gore (Democrat)
Bush (Republican)
 HAWAI'I

Tie
 Results not available

 *Alaska does not have county boundaries. The boundaries shown are election areas.

Interactive Map


George W. Bush as President


Bush Begins
 As the son of the forty-ﬁ rst president, George W. Bush (“43”) became the ﬁ rst presidential offspring since John Quincy Adams to reach the White House. Raised largely in Texas, the younger Bush publicly distanced himself from his family’s privileged New Eng land heritage and affected the chummy manner of a selfmade good ol’ boy—though he held degrees from Yale and Harvard. (His adversaries sniped that he had been born on third base and claimed to have hit a triple.) He promised to bring to Washington the conciliatory skills he had honed as the Republican governor of Texas, where he had worked well with the Democratic majority in the state’s legislature. But as president, Bush soon proved to be more of a divider than a uniter, less a “compassionate conservative” than a crusading ideologue. Religious traditionalists cheered but liberals jeered when he withdrew American support from international health programs that sanctioned abortion, advocated federally ﬁ nanced faith-based social-welfare initiatives, and sharply limited government-sponsored research on embryonic stem cells, which many scientists believed held the key to conquering diseases such as Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s. He pleased corporate chief-

 tains but angered environmentalists by challenging scientiﬁc ﬁndings on groundwater contamination and global warming, repudiating the Kyoto Treaty limiting greenhouse gas emissions (negotiated by the Clinton administration but never ratiﬁed by the Senate), advocating new oil exploration in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge on Alaska’s ecologically fragile north coast, and allowing Vice President Cheney to hammer out his administration’s energy policy in behindclosed-doors meetings with representatives of several giant oil companies. Even many ﬁscal conser vatives thought him reckless when he pressed ahead with a whopping $1.3 trillion tax cut. Together with a softening economy and the increasing costs of war in Iraq, the tax cut turned the federal budget surpluses of the late 1990s into yawning deﬁcits, reaching more than $400 billion in 2004 (see Figure 41.1).

Terrorism Comes to America
 On September 11, 2001, the long era of America’s impregnable national security violently ended. On a balmy late-summer morning, suicidal terrorists slammed two hijacked airliners, loaded with passengers and jet fuel, into the twin towers of New York City’s World Trade Center. They ﬂew a third plane into the military

 Billions of dollars SURPLUSES –100 – 200

–$162
 DEFICITS

– 300


–$248


–$290
–$318


– 400


–$375
–$413


– 500


1993 1994 1995










1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007


 Figure 41.1 Deﬁcits into Surpluses and Back Again In 1998 the U.S. budget deﬁcit became a surplus for the ﬁrst time in decades. But by 2002 the government was back in deﬁcit, due to President Bush’s tax cuts, a weak economy, and mushrooming defense spending on the Iraq War. (Source: Ofﬁce of Management and Budget, Historical Table: Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 2008.)



Chapter 41 America Confronts the Post–Cold War Era, 1992–2009


 The Toll of Terror Grief overcame this exhausted ﬁreﬁghter during the search for survivors in the wreckage of New York City’s World Trade Center.

 nerve center of the Pentagon, near Washington, D.C., kill ing 189 people. Heroic passengers forced another hijacked aircraft to crash in rural Pennsylvania, killing all 44 aboard but depriving the terrorists of a fourth weapon of mass destruction. As the two giant New York skyscrapers thunderously collapsed, some three thousand innocent victims perished, including people of many races and faiths from more than sixty countries, as well as hundreds of New York’s policeand ﬁ re-department rescue workers. A stunned nation blossomed with ﬂags, as grieving and outraged Americans struggled to express their sorrow and solidarity in the face of the catastrophic terrorism of 9/11. President Bush responded with a sober and stirring address to Congress nine days later. His solemn demeanor and the gravity of the situation helped to dissipate the cloud of illegitimacy that had shadowed his presidency since the disputed election of 2000.

 While emphasizing his respect for the Islamic religion and Muslim people, he identiﬁed the principal enemy as Osama bin Laden, head of a shadowy terrorist network known as Al Qaeda (“the base” in Arabic). A wealthy extremist exiled from his native Saudi Arabia, bin Laden was associated with earlier attacks on American embassies in East Africa and on the USS Cole in Yemen. He had taken refuge in landlocked Afghanistan, ruled by Islamic fundamentalists called the Taliban. (Ironically, the United States had indirectly helped bring the Taliban to power by supporting religious rebels resisting the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in the 1980s.) Bin Laden was known to harbor venomous resentment toward the United States for its growing military presence in the Middle East (especially on the sacred soil of the Arabian Peninsula), and its unyielding support for Israel in the face of intensifying Palestinian nationalism. Bin Laden also fed on worldwide resentment of America’s enormous economic, military, and cultural power. Ironically, America’s most conspicuous strengths had made it a conspicuous target. When the Taliban refused to hand over bin Laden, Bush ordered a massive military campaign against Afghanistan. Within three months American and Afghan rebel forces had overthrown the Taliban but failed to ﬁ nd bin Laden, and Americans continued to live in fear of future attacks. Confronted with this unconventional, diffuse menace, antiterrorism experts called for new tactics of “asymmetrical warfare,” employing not just traditional military muscle but also innovative intelligence gathering, economic reprisals, inﬁ ltration of suspected orga ni zations, and even assassinations. The terrorists’ blows diabolically coincided with the onset of a recession. The already gathering economic downturn worsened as edgy Americans shunned air travel and the tourist industry withered. Then, while the rubble in New York was still smoldering, a handful of Americans died after receiving letters contaminated with the deadly respiratory disease anthrax. The perpetrators of the anthrax attacks remained unknown, but the gnawing fear spread that biological warfare might be the next threat facing the American people. In this anxious at mosphere, Congress in October 2001 rammed through the USA Patriot Act.* The act

 *The act’s ofﬁcial name is Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism.

Fighting Back Against Terrorism




The Attacks Seen Around
 the World The attacks of September 11, 2001, became events of international, not just American, signiﬁcance, as revealed in the newspapers on display in Soﬁa, Bulgaria.

 permitted extensive telephone and e-mail surveillance and authorized the detention and deportation of immigrants suspected of terrorism. Just over a year later, Congress created the new cabinet-level Department of Homeland Security to protect the nation’s borders and ferret out potential attackers. The Justice Department meanwhile rounded up hundreds of immigrants and held them without habeas corpus (formal charges in an open court). The Bush administration further called for trying suspected terrorists before military tribunals, where the usual rules of evidence and procedure did not apply. As hundreds of Taliban ﬁghters captured in Afghanistan languished in legal limbo and demoralizing isolation in the Guantánamo Detention Camp on the American military base at Guantánamo, Cuba, public-opinion polls showed Americans sharply divided on whether the terrorist threat fully warranted such drastic encroachments on America’s venerable tradition of protecting civil liberties. Catastrophic terrorism posed an unprecedented challenge to the United States. The events of that murderous September morning reanimated American patriotism, but they also brought a long chapter in American history to a dramatic climax. All but unique among modern peoples, Americans for nearly two centuries had been spared from foreign attack on their homeland. That unusual degree of virtually cost-free

 Liberty or Death Critics of the USA Patriot Act feared the extinction of cherished civil liberties, including the right to protest against the government’s policies.



Chapter 41 America Confronts the Post–Cold War Era, 1992–2009


 national security had undergirded the values of openness and individual freedom that deﬁ ned the distinctive character of American society. Now American security and American liberty alike were dangerously imperiled.

Bush Takes the Offensive
Against Iraq
 On only its second day in ofﬁce, the Bush administration warned that it would not tolerate Iraq’s continued deﬁance of United Nations weapons inspections, mandated after Iraq’s defeat in the 1991 Persian Gulf War. Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein had played hideand seek with the inspectors for years. In 1998 he had expelled both the U.N. Monitoring, Veriﬁcation, and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), inducing President Clinton, with congressional approval, to declare that Saddam’s removal (“regime change”) was an ofﬁcial goal of U.S. policy. But no sustained military action against Iraq had followed. Now, in the context of the new terrorist threat, the Bush administration focused on Iraq with a vengeance. In January 2002, just weeks after the September 11 attacks, Bush claimed that Iraq, along with Iran and North Korea, constituted an “axis of evil” that gravely menaced American security. Iran and North Korea were both known to be pursuing nuclear weapons programs, and Iran had long supported terrorist operations in the Middle East. But Iraqi tyrant Saddam Hussein, defeated but not destroyed by Bush’s father in 1991, became the principal object of the new president’s wrath. The elder Bush had carefully assembled a broad international coalition to ﬁght the 1991 Persian Gulf War. He had also spoken so often of “prudence” that late-night television comedians had mocked him for it. In contrast, his son was brashly determined to break with long-standing American traditions and wage a preemptive war against Iraq—and to go it alone if necessary. The younger Bush thus cast off his appeal for America to be a “humble nation” and stood revealed as a plunger, a daring risk-taker willing to embrace bold, dramatic policies, foreign as well as ﬁ scal. In that spirit Bush began laying plans for a war against Iraq, while somewhat halfheartedly pursuing diplomatic initiatives to avoid war. Itching for a ﬁght, and egged on by hawkish Vice President Cheney and other “neoconser vative” advis-

 ers, Bush accused the Iraqi regime of all manner of wrongdoing: oppressing its own people; frustrating the weapons inspectors; developing nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons of mass destruction referred to as “WMD”; and supporting terrorist orga ni zations like Al Qaeda. Perhaps most controversially, he also suggested that a liberated, democratized Iraq might provide a beacon of hope to the Islamic world and thereby begin to improve the political equation in the volatile Middle East. To skeptical observers, including America’s usually reliable European allies, the very multiplicity of Bush’s reasons for war cast doubt on his case, and his ambition to create a democracy in long-suffering Iraq seemed hopelessly utopian. Secretary of State Colin Powell urged caution, warning about the long-term consequences for the United States of invading and occupying an unstable, religiously and culturally divided nation of 25 million people. “You break it, you own it,” he told the president.

 In his 2002 state of the union address, President George W. Bush (b. 1946) declared:

“


 Iraq continues to ﬂaunt its hostility toward America and to support terror. The Iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax, and nerve gas, and nuclear weapons for over a decade. This is a regime that has already used poison gas to murder thousands of its own citizens—leaving the bodies of mothers huddled over their dead children. This is a regime that agreed to international inspections—then kicked out the inspectors. This is a regime that has something to hide from the civilized world. “States like these, and their terrorist allies, constitute an axis of evil, arming to threaten the peace of the world. By seeking weapons of mass destruction, these regimes pose a grave and growing danger. They could provide these arms to terrorists, giving them the means to match their hatred. They could attack our allies or attempt to blackmail the United States. In any of these cases, the price of indifference would be catastrophic.

”




The War in Iraq


40°E


45°E


 TURKEY

Shia Arab
Shia Arab/Sunni Arab
Sunni Arab
Sunni Arab/Sunni Kurd


Mosul


Sunni Kurd
Kirkuk


35°N


Tikrit


 SYRIA

 IRAN

Samarra
Haditha
Baquba
Ramadi
Fallujah


Baghdad
 igr is R .

T


Map 41.5 Iraq in Transition
Carved out of the old Ottoman
 Empire after World War I, Iraq has long been a combustible compound of rivalrous ethnic and religious groups. Saddam Hussein’s dictatorial regime imposed a brutal peace on the country for twenty-four years following his ascent to power in 1979, but after the American invasion in 2003, old feuds resumed, exacerbated by stinging resentment against the occupying forces.

 IRAQ

Kut


Karbala


 JORDAN

N


Najaf


Eup


SAUDI ARABIA

 hrates

Nasiriya
R.


Basra


 Path of U.S./Coalition forces, March–April 2003 Sunni Triangle Oil field Site of major clash with Iraqi insurgents

30°N






100 Km.


 KUWAIT

100 Mi.


Persian
Gulf


Interactive Map


 Heavy majorities in both houses of Congress nevertheless passed a resolution in October 2002 authorizing the president to employ armed force to defend against Iraqi threats to America’s national security and to enforce United Nations resolutions regarding Iraq. A month later the U.N. Security Council voted unanimously to give Iraq “a ﬁnal opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations.” There followed a months-long cat-and-mouse game. U.N. weapons inspectors returned to Iraq. Saddam once again harassed and blocked them. No weapons of mass destruction were found. The inspectors asked for more time. The United Nations declined to authorize the use of force to compel compliance. In this tense and confusing at mosphere, Bush, with Britain his only major ally, launched the longanticipated invasion of Iraq on March 19, 2003. Saddam Hussein’s vaunted military machine collapsed almost immediately. In less than a month, Baghdad had fallen and Saddam had been driven from power and hounded into hiding. (He was found and arrested

 Ethnic and religious groups by percent of total population (c. 25,000,000) Other 3%

Sunni Kurd
17%


Sunni Arab
20%


Shia Arab
60%


 some nine months later and executed in 2006.) From the deck of a U.S. aircraft carrier off the Cal i fornia coast, speaking beneath a banner declaring “Mission Accomplished,” Bush triumphantly announced on May 1, 2003, that “major combat operations in Iraq have ended” (see Map 41.5).



Chapter 41 America Confronts the Post–Cold War Era, 1992–2009


Owning Iraq
 President Bush’s words quickly came back to haunt him and America’s forces in Iraq. “Neoconser vative” pundits in Washington had predicted that American soldiers would be greeted as liberators and that Saddam’s ouster would lead to ﬂowering democracy across the Middle East. In reality post-Saddam Iraq quickly devolved into a seething cauldron of violence. The country’s largest ethnic groups, Sunni and Shia Muslims, clashed violently, especially in the capital city of Baghdad. Both groups attacked American forces, who after their leaders disbanded the Iraqi army, were left to secure the country single-handedly. A locally grown insurgency quickly spread, and occupying Iraq be-

 came ever more perilous for American troops. Hatred for Americans only worsened with revelations in April 2004 that Iraqi prisoners in Baghdad’s Abu Ghraib prison had been tortured and humiliated by their American captors. Amid this chaos, jihadist terrorists from around the region ﬂooded into Iraq and established strong positions there, often fueling the intraIraqi conﬂ icts to further their own radical Islamist vision. Although Al Qaeda had had no link to Iraq under Saddam, as Bush had falsely alleged, the organization certainly moved in afterward. These three battles— Shia-Sunni ethnic violence, counter-occupation insurgency, and jihadist terrorism—created a ceaseless cycle of bloodshed, in which American soldiers found themselves increasingly bogged down. By the end of 2006, more Americans had died in Iraq than in the at-

 On the Fiery Ground in Basra, Iraq, 2004 These British soldiers are running from a gasoline bomb detonated during a protest by Iraqi job seekers who claimed that they had been promised employment in the security services. The British, who had invaded Iraq alongside the United States, oversaw the southern Iraq city of Basra, a role that proved so unpopular with British voters that Prime Minister Tony Blair was eventually forced to resign.

A
Divided Nation 

 In his 1998 book, A World Transformed, former president George H. W. Bush (b. 1924) explained his rationale for not driving Saddam Hussein from power during the 1991 Persian Gulf War. His words made sobering reading in the context of his son’s subsequent invasion of Iraq:

“


 Trying to eliminate Saddam . . . would have incurred incalculable human and political costs. . . . The coalition would instantly have collapsed, the Arabs deserting it in anger and other allies pulling out as well. Under the circumstances, there was no viable ‘exit strategy’ we could see, violating another of our principles. Furthermore, we had been self-consciously trying to set a pattern for handling aggression in the post–Cold War world. Going in and occupying Iraq, thus unilaterally exceeding the United Nations’ mandate, would have destroyed the precedent of international response to aggression that we hoped to establish.

”


 tacks of September 11. (see “Thinking Globally: America Through Foreign Eyes: Hyperpower or Hapless Power?” pp. 1074–1075). The political situation in the war-torn country took shape unevenly on shaky ground. In the summer of 2004, the American military ceded political power and limited sovereignty to an interim Iraqi government. National elections followed in early 2005, and millions of Iraqis voted for a national assembly to draft a constitution. After a referendum vote on the constitution in October 2005, another round of elections chose parliamentary representatives, a prime minister, and a president. But under the seeming stability of Iraq’s new democratic government lay deep, violent tensions. Sunni Muslims, the minority that had held power under Saddam Hussein, one of their own, feared reprisals and repressions under a majority Shia government. Sunnis largely boycotted the ﬁ rst election and tried unsuccessfully to block the ratiﬁcation of the constitution. Unsuccessful at the ballot box, many Sunnis turned to bombings and political assassinations.



Reelecting George W. Bush
 Americans had rarely been as divided as they were in the ﬁ rst years of the twenty-ﬁ rst century. Civil libertarians worried that the government was trampling on personal freedoms in the name of ﬁghting terrorism. Revelations in 2002 about ﬂagrant corporate fraud at energy giant Enron, telecommunications titan WorldCom, and other prominent ﬁ rms fed rampant popular disillusion with the business community. Cultural tensions brewed over the rights of gay and lesbian Americans when leaders in San Francisco and Massachusetts permitted same-sex couples to marry in 2004. Afﬁ rmative action continued to spark sharp debate, as the Supreme Court permitted some preferential treatment in admitting minority undergraduate and law students to the University of Michigan in 2003. Amid this division George W. Bush positioned himself to run for reelection. He proclaimed that his tax cuts had spurred economic growth by giving citizens more control. Targeting what he called “the soft bigotry of low expectations,” he championed the No Child Left Behind Act of 2002, which mandated sanctions against schools that failed to meet federal performance standards. He played to cultural conser vatives in opposing stem cell research (see page 1067) and called for a constitutional amendment to ban gay marriage. But most of all, he promoted himself as a stalwart leader in wartime, warning the country not to “change horses midstream.” After a bruising round of primary elections, the embattled Democrats chose lanky and long-jawed Massachusetts senator John Kerry to represent their ticket. A more old-fashioned liberal than Clinton, Kerry pushed progressive visions of government and counted on his Vietnam War record to counter charges that he would be weak in the face of terrorism. But that plan backﬁ red as Kerry fell under attack for his very public opposition to Vietnam once he had returned from battle in the early 1970s. The Republicans also had success painting the senator as a “ﬂ ip-ﬂopper,” changing his policy positions to ﬁt opinion polls. In spite of increased public misgivings about the war in Iraq, Bush nailed down a decisive victory in November 2004. He received the ﬁ rst popular vote majority in more than a decade—60,639,281 to 57,355,978—and won clearly, if by only one state (this time Ohio), in the Electoral College, 286 to 252 (see Map 41.6). This time his mandate was clear, constitutional, and uncontested.

THINKING GLOBALLY

America Through Foreign Eyes: Hyperpower or
Hapless Power?


W


 hen the Soviet Union disintegrated in 1991, the Cold War concluded at last. So did an era in the history of American foreign policy, and in the history of the international order. For nearly half a century following World War II, the confrontation with the Soviets had deeply shaped Americans’ conception of themselves—their national identity—as well as their role and reputation in the wider world. In the long twilight struggle against Soviet communism, they had accumulated unprecedented economic, military, and cultural might, and had taken virtuous pride in themselves as the global champions of democracy, justice, and human rights. Now, as the sole surviving “superpower,” they faced no counterbalancing regime and, apparently, no check on their national ambitions. The United States seemed to wield all but limitless power to mold the international environment as it wished. Not since the days of ancient Rome did any people bestride the world so unopposed. Not everyone welcomed the emergence of this international colossus. Australians grumbled that the United States was a “tall poppy” that needed to be cut down to size. French foreign minister Hubert Védrine coined a new term when he described the United States in 1999 not merely as a superpower but as a “hyperpower,” one “that is

 dominant or predominant in all categories,” including not only the traditional domains of politics, economics, and the military, but even including “attitudes, concepts, languages, and modes of life.” He called upon Europeans to create an alternative to the American “steamroller,” to “work in favor of real multilateralism against unilateralism, for balanced multipolarism against unipolarism, for cultural diversity against uniformity.” In the parlance of international relations, Védrine was promoting a “balancing” strategy to cope with U.S. power, rather than the “bandwagon” strategy of simply submitting to American hegemony and making the most of it. Notably, he was not proposing outright opposition. As the last days of the twentieth century slipped through the hourglass, American power surely looked formidable. The United States was the world’s third most populous nation (after China and India), enjoyed the world’s largest economy (more than three times larger than second-ranked Japan), was the acknowledged global leader in high-tech information and biomedical innovations, and spent more on its armed forces than the rest of the world combined. Yet the realities of American power were somewhat less imposing. Uncle Sam struggled to ﬁnd solid footing in the post–Cold War international arena.

Torture at Abu Ghraib Prison,
Baghdad, 2003
 Revelations that American soldiers had brutally tortured Iraqi prisoners contributed to condemnation of the nation’s disregard for human rights and growing disquiet about America’s unilateral policing of the world.



 Washington in the 1990s badly botched a peacekeeping mission in lawless Somalia; stood by helplessly as genocidal militias murdered about a million Rwandans; dithered over how to stabilize chaotic Haiti; fumbled indecisively as nationalist and sectarian violence convulsed the former Balkan nation of Yugoslavia; found no effective response to terrorist attacks on New York City’s World Trade Center, the destroyer USS Cole, and American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania; and notoriously failed to bring any conclusion to the decades-old confrontation between Israelis and Palestinians, who erupted in a bloody intifada (rebellion) against the Jewish state in 2000. The barbarous Al Qaeda assault that ﬁnally toppled the twin towers of the World Trade Center on September 11, 2001, momentarily brought an outpouring of sympathy from an astonished and outraged world—and also brought a dramatic shift in American foreign policy. Even Le Monde, France’s leading newspaper, declared that in this dangerous hour “Nous sommes tous Américains” (We are all Americans). For the ﬁrst time in history, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) invoked the treaty’s Article Five, conﬁrming that an attack on one member was an attack on all members. But such sentiments proved short-lived. When President George W. Bush in 2002 asserted a new right of preemptive war and then proceeded to invade Iraq for what looked to many observers like the most dubious of reasons,

Table 41.1


 anti-American sentiment swelled the world over. In February 2002 some 10 million people in sixty countries demonstrated against the impending U.S. invasion of Iraq. Exacerbated by Washington’s rejection of the Kyoto Treaty dealing with global warming, and by several American states’ continuing embrace of the death penalty (which had largely disappeared in Europe and elsewhere), America’s standing deteriorated even among its traditional allies and sank to rock-bottom lows in Islamic countries. Simmering resentment over the detention of hundreds of captured Afghans at the U.S. military base in Guantánamo, Cuba; revelations about human rights abuses inﬂicted by American troops on Iraqi prisoners at Baghdad’s Abu Ghraib prison; and “rendition” by American agents of suspected terrorists to the notoriously cruel security ser vices of other countries further drained the depleted reservoirs of America’s moral and political capital. Once a moral beacon and political inspiration to a suffering world, the United States in the early twenty-ﬁrst century had come to be regarded by millions of people the world over as a moral scourge and a political and military danger (see Table 41.1). Recapturing its stature as a legitimate world leader, rebuilding its alliances, restructuring the myriad multilateral institutions it had worked so hard to build in the Cold War era, and recapturing a sense of itself as a just and humane society were tasks that urgently confronted the Republic as the century advanced.

World Public Opinion of the United States


 Question: Do you have a very favorable, somewhat favorable, somewhat unfavorable, or very unfavorable opinion of the United States? (percent favorable)

Great Britain
France
Germany
Spain
Russia
Indonesia
Pakistan
Jordan
Turkey
Nigeria
Japan
India
China






83%
—
—
—


75%
—
—
—


—
—
—








58%
—
—
—
—
—
—


55%
—
—


56%


 (Source: From Pew Global Attitudes Project, “No Global Warming Alarm in the U.S., China; America’s Image Slips, but Allies Share U.S. Concerns over Iran, Hamas,” 2006. Reprinted by permission of Pew Research Center.)





Chapter 41 America Confronts the Post–Cold War Era, 1992–2009


 Image not available due to copyright restrictions

 VT. 3

N.H.


 ME.

 MASS. 12

IDAHO MONT. 3 WYO. 3 NEV. UTAH

 CALIF.

 PA. 21

 ARIZ.

 ILL. 21

N.D. 3
S.D. 3


 NEBR. 5 COLO. 9

 IND.

KANS. MO. 11

 OHIO

 MD. 10

D.C. 3


 KY. 8 OKLA.

W. VA. 5


 ARK. 6

N.J.
 DEL. 3

 ORE.

 remove keyline before placing 1053641_m_41_06b IOWA

R.I.


 MICH.

MINN. WASH.

 CONN.

N.Y.


 WISC.

 VA. 13

 TENN. 11 N.C. 15

N.M.


MISS. TEXAS

 ALA.

S.C. 8
 GA. 15

 LA. 9

Bush (Republican)
Kerry (Democrat)
 FLA. 27 HAWAI'I ALASKA

 Each box represents one electoral vote in the 2004 election.

The Election of 2004


 Bush’s Second Term Reelection, George W. Bush announced, gave him “political capital,” which he intended to spend on an aggressive domestic agenda. The appointment of two new conser vative Supreme Court justices upon the retirement of Sandra Day O’Connor and the death of Chief Justice William Rehnquist seemed to bode well for his ambitions. But Bush overplayed his hand. Attacking the core of New Deal liberalism, Bush proposed a radical program to privatize much of Social Security, providing incentives for younger Americans to fund their own retirements through personal accounts. A massive outcry led by the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) and other liberal groups reminded Americans how much they loved Social Security, warts and all. Bush’s proposal faded away within six months of his reelection. The same fate befell a proposed constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage, which had been a major “values” issue in the 2004 campaign. The president also took aim at the contentious issue of immigration reform, where he parted company with the conser vative wing of his party. Bush opposed arresting and deporting the nearly 12 million undocumented people in the United States, as some nativists proposed. At the same time, he felt that simply nor-



 malizing their status would reward them for entering the country illegally. His compromise plan to establish a guest-worker program and a “path to citizenship” for the undocumented ended up pleasing no one. Congress rejected it in the summer of 2007, and the issue was dead for the rest of Bush’s term (see p. 1095). very second-term president since the 1960s had seen scandal mar his later years in ofﬁce. Nixon had Watergate, Reagan had Iran-contra, and Clinton had Lewinsky. The Bush White House was no exception, but this time the accusations were political, not personal. Bush’s critics claimed that the president’s ﬁerce loyalty to his staff prevented him from recognizing incompetence and that he had unlawfully expanded the power of the presidency under the guise of protecting America in the “War on Terror.” In the fall of 2005, Vice President Dick Cheney’s chief of staff was convicted of perjury in an investigation into the source of a leak that had exposed the identity of an undercover CIA agent as political retaliation against her antiwar husband. In December of that year, journalists discovered that the government was conducting illegal wiretap surveillance on American citizens inside the United States in violation of federal law. In 2007 scandal engulfed the Justice Department over the ﬁ ring, for political reasons, of eight U.S. attorneys. Perhaps the most tragic and avoidable of Bush’s missteps came in the botched response to the deadly Hurricane Katrina,

After the Levees Broke in
New Orleans, August 2005
 When ferocious Hurricane Katrina hammered the Gulf Coast, it overtaxed a deﬁcient levee system and unleashed ﬂoodwaters into New Orleans, submerging 80 percent of the city and destroying more than a quartermillion of its homes. Many families unable or unwilling to ﬂee the city sought refuge in the Superdome, where water, food, and other supplies were soon in very short supply. Experts predicted that it would be years before the city fully recovered, if ever.



Chapter 41 America Confronts the Post–Cold War Era, 1992–2009


The Democrats Win Back Control of
Congress, 2006 House Majority
Whip James Clyburn of South
 Carolina (left), Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi of California (center), and Majority Leader Steny Hoyer of Maryland (right) raise their hands in victory after being selected to lead the Democratic party in the House of Representatives. Their party also won a majority in the Senate in the 2006 midterm elections, the ﬁrst time since 1994 that the Democrats controlled both houses.

 which devastated New Orleans and much of the Gulf Coast in late August 2005, ﬂooding 80 percent of the historic city and causing over 1,300 deaths and $150 billion in damages.

Midterm Elections of 2006
 As charges of dictatorial power-grabbing, cronyism, and incompetence mounted during Bush’s second term, Democrats campaigned hard against the president and his party in the midterm elections of 2006. Republicans fell victim to the same anti-incumbency sentiment they had ridden to power twelve years earlier, as Democrats charged that a “culture of corruption” had taken hold in Washington. A series of highproﬁ le arrests and resignations over lobbying, graft, illegal campaign ﬁ nancing, and sexual misconduct among Republican legislators added fuel to the Democrats’ ﬁ re. Democrats narrowly regained control of both houses of Congress for the ﬁrst time since the Gingrich revolution of 1994 (see p. 1059). New Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi, the ﬁrst woman to hold that post, promised a new era of reform, openness, and a check on the Bush administration. The biggest factor in the Democratic sweep was the perceived mishandling of the war in Iraq. Public approval of the president’s management of the war had declined steadily since early 2005 as the American death toll continued to rise. Prewar claims about

 WMD and Iraq’s connections to Al Qaeda and 9/11 had all proved false. By late 2005 a majority of Americans believed that the war had been a mistake. Even more felt that the Bush administration, particularly the Defense Department under Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, had badly mismanaged events on the ground. Rumsfeld resigned after the Republicans’ “thumping” in the 2006 midterm elections. But the quagmire continued. The Bush administration attempted to bridge it in early 2007 by sending a “surge” of twenty thousand new troops to Iraq to battle insurgents. Though the surge appeared to bring a modest measure of stability to Iraq, as the 2008 election cycle got under way, public opinion solidiﬁed against the war. The major question was how the United States could extract itself while at the same time avoid leaving in its wake a genocidal civil war.

Election of 2008
 The election of 2008 was historic from the beginning. George W. Bush had twice selected Dick Cheney as his running mate for his experience and lack of political ambition after leaving the vice presidency. In his late sixties and with a history of heart problems, Cheney never had any intention of running for president himself. With neither the sitting president nor vice president running, the 2008 election was truly “open” for the ﬁ rst time in 80 years.

The Surge in Iraq


European Disapproval of the Iraq War, 2007


The Presidential Election
 of 2008 With President Bush’s popularity ratings dropping to historic lows, a large ﬁeld of Democratic candidates dove into the primary campaign of 2008 smelling Republican blood in the electoral waters. The Democratic race soon tightened into a ﬁercely fought contest between the 46-year-old, ﬁ rst-term Illinois Senator Barack Obama and the pre-campaign favorite, former First



Lady and New York Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton.
 The ensuing battle, destined to catapult either a black man or a woman into the general election as a major party nominee for the ﬁ rst time, split the party but drew millions of new voters into the Democratic primaries. Obama narrowly prevailed, surviving Clinton’s attacks on his inexperience. Son of a black Kenyan father and a white mother from Kansas, Obama appealed to both the crusading spirit of the civil rights era of old and the newer ethos of tolerance that came more easily to the young in twentieth-ﬁ rst century America. He also capitalized on an army of smartly managed volunteers, a record of early opposition to the war in Iraq, and an astonishing gift for eloquence that he used to advocate a “post-partisan” politics appealing to voters weary of the divisive partisanship of the Bush years. To strengthen his national security credentials, he picked foreign-policy savvy Delaware Senator Joseph Biden as his running mate. In keeping with the country’s anti-Bush mood, Republicans nominated longtime Arizona Senator John McCain, aged 72, a self-styled “maverick” with a record of supporting bipartisan legislation on such issues as normalizing relations with North Vietnam, campaign ﬁ nance, and immigration reform. He had launched his political career as a Vietnam War hero who had endured years of torture as a POW. To rally the conservative and Christian Evangelical wing of his party, quite

And Then There Were
Two, February 2008
 Eight candidates competed for the Democratic nomination in primaries and caucuses beginning in January 2008. By the time of this debate at the University of Texas at Austin in February, only Illinois senator Barack Obama and New York senator Hillary Clinton remained in the race.



Chapter 41 America Confronts the Post–Cold War Era, 1992–2009


 Barack Obama Riding the public’s discontent with President Bush’s Republican administration, Illinois Senator Barack Obama beat Arizona Senator John McCain in 2008 to become the ﬁrst African American to reach the White House.

 cool to his candidacy, McCain picked Sarah Palin as his running mate. The former beauty queen, small-town mayor, self-proclaimed “hockey-mom,” and staunch abortion rights opponent had served only twenty-one months as Alaska’s governor. As McCain hoped, she galvanized the right-wing Republican base. But when interview gaffes exposed her weak grasp of the issues, Palin became fodder for late-night television comedians and, polls showed, at least as much a liability as an asset to the Republican ticket. Armed with an unprecedented war chest of nearly 700 million dollars, mostly raised from small donors via the Internet, Obama seized the advantage in both the “air war” (television) and the “ground war” (his legions of volunteers). His strong performance in televised debates also lent him an aura of gravitas some voters had doubted he had. What appeared to bolster his chances most, however, was the worldwide economic meltdown in the ﬁ nal six weeks of the campaign. The American housing price bubble had begun to burst in 2006, which in turn led to a huge wave of mortgage defaults, housing foreclosures, and declines in a vast array of mortgage-backed securities held by banks around the globe. Financial institutions from Tokyo to New York to London found themselves with too much debt and too little capital to provide the everyday credit banks worldwide need to function. By early October the credit markets froze, stock values plummeted, and householders watched helplessly as their savings shrunk. Economists of every stripe spoke of the gravest ﬁ nancial crisis, since the Great Depression. In contrast to the 1929 crash, it took days, not years, for a terriﬁed Bush Administration to intervene on a gi-

 gantic scale. The Treasury Department and Federal Reserve System nationalized the countries’ two biggest mortgage companies, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and took over the world’s biggest insurance company, AIG. WA MT

 OR

 ID

NV CA

 ND

 WY

 CO

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 AZ

 MN

 SD

 IL

 KS

 IN

 MO

 OK

 NM

 MI

 KY

 LA

 MS

 AL

PA WV

VA NC

 TN

 AR

 TX

 OH

 GA

ME VT 3 NH MA NY 4 12 RI NJ CT 4 15 7 DE MD

 SC

 DC

 FL

AK HI

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Obama (Democrat)




68%


65,980,131


52.6%


 McCain (Republican)



32%


57,779,170


46.1%


 Note: Preliminary results as of Nov. 11, 2008

 Map 41.7 Presidential Election of 2008 A record voter turnout, swelled by millions of young new voters, African Americans, and Latinos, gave Senator Barack Obama an Electoral College landslide and the Democratic Party solid control of both houses of Congress. Obama redrew the electoral map by taking nine states won by George W. Bush in 2004. Interactive Map

The Surge in Iraq


 Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson then persuaded Congress to authorize a whopping 700 billion dollars to buy “toxic” mortgages and inject cash directly into the nation’s biggest banks. Suddenly even small-government Republicans spoke of the need to regulate the ﬁnancial sector. This crisis presented the presidential candidates with a challenge and an opportunity. Obama criticized McCain’s plan to extend, and even deepen, the Bush tax cuts, as evidence that the McCain presidency would be “a third Bush term.” McCain countered that Obama’s proposed tax hikes (on the wealthiest 5 percent of households) and plans for big public investments in alternative energy and infrastructure repair were tantamount to “socialism.”



 Huge voter turnouts delivered a historic victory to Barack Obama, who won 53 percent of the national popular vote. By overtaking his rival in such traditional Republican strongholds such as Virginia, Nevada, and Colorado, Obama prevailed in the Electoral College 364 to 175 (see Map 41.7). Democrats gained seats in the House and Senate to enlarge the Congressional majority they had won in 2006. Obama’s election opened a new chapter in the history of country’s race relations. It also presented the nation’s ﬁ rst African American president the daunting challenge of governing a country struggling with wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and entering its roughest economic waters since the 1930s.

 CHRONOLOGY

 Clinton defeats Bush and Perot for presidency



 NAFTA signed



 Republicans win majorities in both houses of Congress



 Welfare Reform Bill becomes law Clinton defeats Dole for presidency



 Clinton-Lewinsky scandal U.S. and Britain launch military strikes against Iraq House of Representatives impeaches Clinton



 Senate acquits Clinton on impeachment charges Kosovo crisis; NATO warfare with Serbia Protest in Seattle against World Trade Organization





 “Million Mom March” against guns in Washington, D.C. U.S. normalizes trade relations with China George W. Bush wins presidency in Electoral College; Albert Gore takes popular vote Terrorists attack New York City and Washington, D.C., on September 11 U.S. invades Afghanistan Congress passes USA Patriot Act Energy trader Enron collapses amid accounting scandals



 Congress passes No Child Left Behind Act Bush labels Iraq, Iran, and North Korea “axis of evil” Telecommunications giant WorldCom declares bankruptcy Congress authorizes use of force against Iraq U.N. Security Council demands that Iraq comply with weapons inspections Republicans regain Senate



 North Korea withdraws from Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty U.S. invades Iraq Bush signs drug prescription bill for seniors Saddam Hussein captured in Iraq Supreme Court narrowly approves afﬁ rmative action



 Gay marriage controversy erupts Iraqi interim government installed Bush defeats Kerry for presidency



 Iraq elects permanent government but quickly descends into sectarian conﬂ ict



 Saddam Hussein executed



 U.S. troop surge in Iraq



 Barack Obama elected 44th president of the United States



Chapter 41 America Confronts the Post–Cold War Era, 1992–2009


KEY TERMS
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) (1056) Democratic Leadership Council (1057) Oklahoma City bombing (1058) Contract with America (1059) Welfare Reform Bill (1060) North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) (1061) World Trade Organization (WTO) (1061) McCain-Feingold Act (1061) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Whitewater (1063) Lewinsky affair (1063) Kyoto Treaty (1067) 9/11 (1068) Al Qaeda (1068) USA Patriot Act (1068) Department of Homeland Security (1069) Guantánamo Detention Camp (1069) Abu Ghraib prison (1072) No Child Left Behind Act (1073) Hurricane Katrina (1077) 
William Jefferson
(“Bill”) Clinton
H.
Ross Perot Hillary Rodham Clinton
Newt Gingrich
Robert Dole
 John McCain Sara Palin

Monica Lewinsky
George W. Bush
Richard Cheney
John Kerry
Nancy Pelosi
Barack Obama
Joseph R. (“Joe”) Biden


For Further Reference
Alan Dershowitz, Supreme Injustice: How the High Court
Hijacked Election 2000 (2001)
Elizabeth Drew, Showdown: The Struggle Between the
Gingrich Congress and the Clinton White House (1997)
Joe Klein, The Natural (2002)
Richard Posner, An Affair of State: The Investigation,
Impeachment, and Trial of President Clinton (1999)
 Jack Rakove, The Unﬁnished Election of 2000 (2001) Thomas Ricks, Fiasco: The American Military Adventure in Iraq (2006)

James Stewart, Blood Sport (1996)
Bob Woodward, Bush at War (2002); Plan of Attack (2004);
State of Denial: Bush at War, Part III (2006)
———, The Choice (1996)
 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The American People
Face a New Century





 As our case is new, so we must think anew and act anew. We must disenthrall ourselves, and then we shall save our country.

W


 ell beyond its two-hundredth birthday as the twenty-ﬁ rst century began, the United States was both an old and a new nation. It boasted one of the longest uninterrupted traditions of democratic government of any country on earth. Indeed, it had pioneered the techniques of mass democracy and was, in that sense, the oldest modern polity. As one of the earliest countries to industrialize, America had also dwelt in the modern economic era longer than most nations. But the Republic was in many ways still youthful as well. Innovation, entrepreneurship, and risk-taking— all characteristics of youth—were honored national values. The twenty-ﬁ rst century began much like the twentieth, with American society continuing to be rejuvenated by fresh waves of immigrants, full of energy and ambition. The U.S. economy, despite problems, pulsated as a driv ing engine of world economic growth. American inventions—especially computer and communications technologies—were transforming the face of global society. Consumers from Lisbon to Tokyo seemed to worship the icons of American culture—

 downing soft drinks and donning blue jeans, watching Hollywood ﬁ lms, listening to rock or country music, even adopting indigenous American sports like baseball and basketball. In the realm of consumerism, American products appeared to have Coca-Colonized the globe. The history of American society also seemed to have increased global signiﬁcance as the third millennium of the Christian era opened. Americans were a pluralistic people who had struggled for centuries to provide opportunity and to achieve tolerance and justice for many different religious, ethnic, and racial groups. Their historical experience could offer valuable lessons to the rapidly internationalizing planetary society that was emerging at the dawn of the twenty-ﬁ rst century. Much history remained to be made as the country entered its third century of nationhood. The great social experiment of American democracy was far from completed as the United States faced its future. Astonishing breakthroughs in science and technology,

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





Chapter 42 The American People Face a New Century


 especially in genetics and computer applications, presented Americans with stunning opportunities as well as wrenching ethical choices. Ecological dangers made the responsible stewardship of a fragile planet more urgent than ever. Inequality and prejudice continued to challenge Americans to close the gap between their most hallowed values and the stark realities of modern life. And the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, violently heralded a new era of fear and anxiety. But men and women make history only within the framework bequeathed to them by earlier generations. For better or worse, they march forward along time’s path bearing the burdens of the past. Knowing when they have come to a truly new turn in the road, when they can lay part of their burden down and when they cannot, or should not—all this constitutes the sort of wisdom that only historical study can engender.

Economic Revolutions
 When the twentieth century opened, United States Steel Corporation was the ﬂagship business of America’s booming industrial revolution. A generation later, General Motors, annually producing millions of automobiles, became the characteristic American corporation, signaling the historic shift to a mass consumer

Outsourcing Jobs to India
 Sophisticated computer technology has allowed developing countries like India to attract Western employers seeking lower labor costs. India’s educated and Englishspeaking work force has made it particularly suitable for international call centers and computer programming.

 economy that began in the 1920s and ﬂowered fully in the 1950s. Following World War II, the rise of International Business Machines (IBM) symbolized yet another momentous transformation, to the fast-paced “information age,” when the storing, organizing, and processing of data became an industry in its own right. The pace of the information age soon accelerated. By century’s end the rapid emergence of Microsoft Corporation and the phenomenal growth of the Internet heralded an explosive communications revolution. Americans now rocketed down the “information superhighway” toward the uncharted terrain of an electronic global village, where traditional geographic, social, and political boundaries could be vaulted with the tap of a keypad. The communications revolution was full of both promise and peril. In the blink of an eye, ordinary cit izens could gain access to information once available only to privileged elites with vast libraries or expert staffs at their disposal. Businesspeople instantaneously girdled the planet with transactions of prodigious scope and serpentine complexity. Japa nese bankers might sell wheat contracts in Chicago and simultaneously direct the proﬁts to buying oil shipments from the Persian Gulf offered by a broker in Amsterdam. By the late 1990s, a “dot-com” explosion of new commercial ventures quickly expanded the mar-

The Economy and Technology




Index
5,000


4,500


4,000


3,500
3,000


2,500


2,000
1,500
1,000




















 ket (and the stock-market stakes) for entrepreneurs leading the way in making the Internet a twenty-ﬁrstcentury electronic mall, town square, library, and entertainment center rolled into one. But the very speed and efﬁciency of the new communications tools threatened to wipe out entire occupational categories. Postal carriers, travel agents, store clerks, bank tellers, stockbrokers, and all kinds of other workers whose business it was to mediate between product and client might ﬁ nd themselves roadkill on the information superhighway. White-collar jobs in ﬁ nancial ser vices and high-tech engineering, once thought securely anchored in places like Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York, could now be “outsourced” to countries such as Ireland and India, where employees could help keep a company’s global circuits ﬁ ring twenty-four hours a day. The high-tech economy also proved to be as prone to boom and bust as the old smokestack economy. In the spring of 2000, the stock market began its most precipitous slide since the Second World War. By the time the markets bottomed out in 2003, they had lost $6 trillion in value (see Figure 42.1). The boom of the late 1990s turned out to be, as one observer put it, the “Dot.con.” Investors had scooped up shares in ﬂedgling ﬁ rms that proved unable to turn a proﬁt, and stock prices imploded accordingly once the bubble burst. Millions of Americans watched aghast as their pension plans shrank by a third or more. Recent retir-











Figure 42.1 The Rise
 and Fall of the NASDAQ Composite Index, 1994– 2004 In March 2000 the NASDAQ Composite Index, replete with technology stocks, peaked at its alltime closing high of 5,048 before losing over 75 percent of its market value in the next three years. The same index had opened in February 1971 with a base valuation of 100 points. (Source: MSN Money.)

 ees scrambled back into the job market. The economic turbulence of the ﬁ rst years of the century stood as a sober reminder that even as the American economy generated extraordinary wealth and innovation by global standards, it was scarcely immune to the ageold vagaries of risk, error, scandal, and the business cycle. Increasingly, scientiﬁc research was the motor that propelled the economy, and new scientiﬁc knowledge raised new moral dilemmas and provoked new political arguments. When scientists ﬁ rst unlocked the secrets of molecular genetic structure in the 1950s, the road lay open to breeding new strains of high-yield, pest- and weather-resistant crops; to curing hereditary diseases; and also, unfortunately, to unleashing genetic mutations that might threaten the fragile balance of the wondrous biosphere in which humankind was delicately suspended. By the dawn of the new century, scientists stood at the threshold of a revolution in biological engineering. The Human Genome Project established the DNA sequencing of the thirty thousand human genes, pointing the way to radical new medical therapies—and to mouthwatering proﬁts for bioengineering ﬁ rms. Startling breakthroughs in the cloning of animals raised thorny questions about the legitimacy of applying cloning technology to human reproduction. Research into human stem cells held out the promise of cures for afﬂ ictions like Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s. But the Bush administration



Chapter 42 The American People Face a New Century


 shared the concern of certain religious groups that harvesting stem cells involved the destruction of human life in embryonic form. Bush therefore limited government funding for stem cell research, as Americans continued to struggle with the ethical implications of their vast new technological powers. Other unprecedented ethical questions clamored for resolution. What principles should govern the allocation of human organs for lifesaving transplants? Was it wise in the ﬁ rst place to spend money on such costly procedures rather than devote society’s resources to improved sanitation, maternal and infant care, and nutritional and health education? How, if at all, should society regulate the increasingly lengthy and often painful process of dying? (See “Makers of America: Scientists and Engineers,” pp. 1088–1089.)

 Afﬂuence and Inequality Americans were still an afﬂuent people at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁ rst century. Median household income declined somewhat in the early 1990s but reached $48,200 in 2006. Yet even those Americans with incomes below the government’s ofﬁcial poverty level (deﬁ ned in 2007 as $20,650 for a family of four) enjoyed a standard of living higher than that of twothirds of the rest of humankind.

 Americans were no longer the world’s wealthiest people, as they had been in the quarter-century after World War II. Citizens of several other countries enjoyed higher average per capita incomes, and many nations boasted more equitable distributions of wealth (see Map 42.1). In an unsettling reversal of long-term trends in American society, during the last two decades of the twentieth century, the rich got much richer, while the poor got an ever-shrinking share of the pie. The richest 20 percent of Americans in 2006 raked in over half the nation’s income, while the poorest 20 percent received a little over 3 percent (see Table 42.1). The gap between rich and poor began to widen in the 1980s and widened further thereafter. That trend was evident in many industrial societies, but it was most pronounced in the United States. Between 1968 and 2006, the share of the nation’s income that ﬂowed to the top 20 percent of its households swelled from 40 percent to 50.5 percent. Even more striking, in the same period the top 5 percent of income earners saw their share of the national income grow from about 15 percent to a remarkable 22.3 percent. The Welfare Reform Bill of 1996, restricting access to social ser vices and requiring able-bodied welfare recipients to ﬁnd work, weakened the ﬁ nancial footing of many impoverished families still further. Widening inequality could be mea sured in other ways as well. In the 1970s chief executives typically

 Two Nations? While decaying neighborhoods and legions of the homeless blighted American cities in the early twenty-ﬁ rst century, afﬂuent Americans lived the good life in booming suburbs and in the more suburbanized cities of the Sunbelt, such as this development of million-dollar homes around a country club in Las Vegas, Nevada.

Widening Inequality


Table 42.1 Widening Income Inequality
Share of Aggregate
Income










Lowest ﬁ fth
Second ﬁ fth
Third ﬁ fth
Fourth ﬁ fth
Highest ﬁ fth
Top 5%


4.2
10.2
16.8
24.7
44.1
16.5


3.8
9.6
15.9
24.0
46.6
18.5


3.6
8.9
14.8
23.0
49.8
22.1


3.4%
8.6
14.6
23.0
50.4
22.2


 During the last two decades of the twentieth century, the top ﬁ fth of the country’s households made signiﬁcant gains in income, while everyone else lost ground. (Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2008)

 earned forty-one times as much as the average worker in their corporations; by the early 2000s, they earned 245 times as much. In 2006, 47 million people had no medical insurance. At the same time, some 36.5 mil-

 lion people, 12.3 percent of all Americans (8.2 percent of whites, 24.3 percent of African Americans, 20.6 percent of Latinos, and 10.3 percent of Asians), remained mired in poverty—a depressing indictment of the inequities afﬂicting an afﬂuent and allegedly egalitarian republic. What caused the widening income gap? Some critics pointed to the tax and ﬁscal policies of the Reagan and both Bush (father and son) presidencies, which favored the wealthy (see Table 42.2). But deeperrunning historical currents probably played a more powerful role, as suggested by the similar experiences of other industrialized societies. Among the most conspicuous causes were intensifying global economic competition; the shrinkage in high-paying manufacturing jobs for semiskilled and unskilled workers; the greater economic rewards commanded by educated workers in high-tech industries; the decline of unions; the growth of part-time and temporary work; the rising tide of relatively low-skill immigrants; and the increasing tendency of educated men and women to

 DENMARK

 IRELAND

NORWAY UNITED KINGDOM
$1,406 billion 
 CANADA $677 billion

 NETHERLANDS

 SWEDEN

 FINLAND

 GERMANY $1,874 billion

 BELGIUM

RUSSIA POLAND

 FRANCE $1,303 billion

UNITED STATES
$10,171 billion 


CZECH REP. HUNGARY

SWITZER- AUSTRIA LAND

GREECE SPAIN PORTUGAL
$578 billion 
 MEXICO $618 billion

 ITALY $1,091 billion

 ALGERIA

 TURKEY

I
I R
RA I AN S Q R A S E AA L UR DA I B EGYPT I A

 PAKISTAN

 JAPAN $4,245 billion

 TAIWAN

BANGLADESH INDIA
$478 billion THAILAND 
SOUTH AFRICA

VENEZUELA COLOMBIA

REP. KOREA

 CHINA $1,159 billion

MALAYSIA SINGAPORE

PHILIPPINES INDONESIA

 BRAZIL $503 billion

 PERU

 AUSTRALIA

 CHILE

 Per capita income Over $20,000

 ARGENTINA

 One square represents $20 billion in GDP

$10,000–$19,999
$2,000–$9,999
Under $2,000


Map 42.1 Global Distribution of Wealth


NEW ZEALAND

 The top fifty countries are named; the GDP of the top twelve is listed.

Interactive Map


MAKERS OF

AMERICA
Scientists and The Great AfricanEngineers American Migration 
S


 ubatomic particles and space-bound satellites do not respect political boundaries. Disease-carrying viruses spread across the globe. Radio waves and Internet communications reach every corner of planet Earth. At ﬁ rst glance science, technology, and medicine appear to be quintessentially international phenomena. Scientists often pride themselves on the universal validity of scientiﬁc knowledge and the transnational character of scientiﬁc networks. In a world marked by political divisions, science evidently knows no bounds. But a closer look reveals that national context does inﬂuence the character of scientiﬁc enterprise. American scientists have repeatedly made signiﬁcant contributions to the life of the nation. They, in turn, have been shaped by its unique historical circumstances— especially America’s intensifying concerns about national security in the twentieth century. Once marginal players in global intellectual life, American scientists now stand at the forefront of scientiﬁc advancement. In many ways the rise of American science has kept pace with the arrival of the United States as a world power. Nowhere was this trend more evident than in the story of “Big Science.” The unusual demands of America’s national security state during World War II and the Cold War required vast scientiﬁc investments. The result was Big Science, or multidisciplinary research enterprises of unparalleled size, scope, and cost. Big Science and Big Technology meant big bucks, big machines, and big teams of scientists and engineers. The close link between government and science was not new—precedents stretched as far back as the founding of the National Academy of Sciences during the Civil War. But the depression-era Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) and the wartime Manhattan Project ushered in ventures of colossal scale and ambition. As the head of the TVA wrote in 1944, “There is almost nothing, however fantastic, that (given competent orga ni zation) a team of engineers, scientists, and administrators can not do today.” Cold War competition with the Soviets translated into huge government investments in physics, chemistry, and aerospace. The equation was simple: national security depended on technological superiority, which entailed costly facilities for scientiﬁc research and ambitious efforts to recruit and train scientists. In the 1950s defense projects employed two-thirds of



 Launching Apollo 11 NASA ﬂight directors monitor the launch of the Apollo 11 lunar landing mission from the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston, Texas, in July 1969.

 the nation’s scientists and engineers. Laboratories, reactors, accelerators, and observatories proliferated. After the Soviets launched the world’s ﬁ rst artiﬁcial satellite (Sputnik I) in 1957, the international space race became America’s top scientiﬁc priority. To land astronauts on the moon, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) spent a whopping $25.4 billion over eleven years on Project Apollo. Another massive aerospace mission, President Reagan’s controversial Strategic Defense Initiative (or “Star Wars”), consumed somewhere between $32 billion and $71 billion between 1984 and 1994. In America’s burgeoning “research universities,” the federal government found willing partners in the promotion of the scientiﬁc enterprise. University-employed scientists, largely paid by government grants, concentrated on basic research, accounting for over half of the estimated $50 billion spent on basic science in 2002. Meanwhile, private industry spent additional billions on applied research and product development. For consumers of air bags, silicon chips, and other high-tech gadgets, these investments yielded rich rewards as innovative technologies dramatically improved the quality of life. Over the course of the twentieth century, American corporations spearheaded a global revolution in communications and information technology. American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T) and Radio Corporation of America (RCA) attended the birth of telephones, radio, and television. Apple, International

 Business Machines (IBM), and Microsoft introduced personal computers. Government and industry scientists together invented the Internet. Twentieth-century advances in medical science and technology have also revolutionized American lives. Thanks to new drugs, devices, and methods of treatment, the average life expectancy in the United States leapt from 47.3 years in 1900 to 77.0 years in 2000. In the ﬁ rst half of the twentieth century, physicians discovered hormones and vitamins, introduced penicillin and other antibiotics, and experimented with insulin therapy for diabetes and radiation therapy for cancer. More recently, cutting-edge medical science has nurtured in vitro fertilization; developed respirators, artiﬁcial hearts, and other medical devices; and attacked (though with limited success) the AIDS epidemic. Much of the optimism for future medical breakthroughs centers on the $3 billion Human Genome Project, which completed its mapping and sequencing of all the genetic material in the human body in 2003. Deemed the “holy grail” of genomics research, the project promised countless beneﬁts, including new diagnoses for genetic defects, innovative therapies, and untold commercial applications. Coordinated by the Department of Energy and the National Institutes of Health, the project involved thousands of scientists in universities and laboratories across the nation and around the globe. To achieve such innovation, Big Science typically demands complex teams of scientists, engineers, and technicians. When traditional channels of recruitment

A
Scientist Working in Her Lab This medical school professor researching pancreatic regeneration was part of the surge of women pursuing scientiﬁc careers, particularly in the biological sciences. By 2004 as many women as men enrolled in medical schools, and minority enrollment climbed as well. In that year 7 percent of entering medical students were Latino, and 6.5 percent were African American. 
Percent












Female


Black


Latino


 Foreign-born

 Figure 42.2 Demographic Proﬁle of Women, Minorities, and the Foreign-born in Nonacademic Science and Engineering Occupations, 1980–2000 (Source: Science and Engineering Indicators, 2002, http://www.nsf.gov/ statistics/seind02/c3/ﬁg03-13.htm.)

 came up short, scientiﬁc institutions increasingly recruited foreigners, women, and minorities (see Figure 42.2). Immigrants and exiles played key roles in the development of the atomic bomb and Cold War weaponry. Long relegated to ju nior positions as assistants and technicians, women and minorities have recently made signiﬁcant gains in the “white man’s world” of science. In 2001 women represented 26 percent of employed doctoral scientists and engineers in the United States, the foreign-born 24 percent, and minorities 21 percent. Despite these stunning achievements, current evidence suggests that the United States might be losing its preeminence in science. After dominating the intellectual world from the 1960s through the 1990s, American scientists are now winning fewer prizes and patents and publishing fewer scientiﬁc papers than their peers in Europe and Asia. Experts predict that current schoolage Americans will not be able to meet the rising demand for scientiﬁc ex per tise. Moreover, fewer foreigners will arrive to ﬁ ll the gap, as international competition for their labor heats up in places like Japan, China, and India. For the United States to retain preeminence in science in the twenty-ﬁ rst century, it must continue to welcome all talent to the ﬁeld. That means attracting both foreign-born scientists and young American students whose brainpower has long helped make the nation a scientiﬁc power.



Chapter 42 The American People Face a New Century


Table 42.2 Who Pays Federal Income Taxes?
 (share of U.S. income tax, by income percentile) Income Group (base income shown as of 2006)





 Top 1% (above $328,049) Top 5% (above $137,056) Top 10% (above $99,112) Top 25% (above $60,041) Top 50% (above $30,122) Bottom 50% (below $30,122)

28.7%
47.4
59.1
79.5
95.2
4.8


36.9%
57.1
68.2
84.9
96.7
3.3


 Because the United States has long had a “progressive” income tax system, in which tax obligations are distributed according to ability to pay, widening income inequality was reﬂected in a redistribution of tax burdens. In the booming 1990s, the rich did indeed get richer—but they also paid an increasing fraction of the total federal tax take. These ﬁgures help explain why tax cuts beneﬁt the wealthy more than middle-income earners and the poor.

COUNTRY
United States 


United Kingdom




France




Germany




China




Japan




India




Russia
























Percentage


Figure 42.3 Women in the Work Force Globally,


 (Source: Internal Revenue Service data, Tax Foundation; http://www .taxfoundation.org/news/show/250.html)

 marry one another and both work, creating households with very high incomes. Educational opportunities also had a way of perpetuating inequality, starting with the underfunding of many schools in poor urban areas and the soaring cost of higher education. A 2004 study revealed that at the 146 most selective colleges, 74 percent of the students came from families with incomes in the top 25 percent, compared to 3 percent of the students from the bottom income quartile.

The Feminist Revolution
 All Americans were caught up in the great economic changes of the late twentieth century, but no group was more profoundly affected than women. When the century opened, women made up about 20 percent of all workers. Over the next ﬁve decades, they increased their presence in the labor force at a fairly steady rate, except for a temporary spurt during World War II. Then, beginning in the 1950s, women’s entry into the workplace accelerated dramatically. By the 1990s nearly half of all workers were women, and the majority of working-age women held jobs outside the home. Most astonishing was the upsurge in employment among mothers. In 1950 nearly 90 percent of mothers with children under the age of six did not work for pay. But half a century later, a majority of women with chil-

 dren as young as one year old were wage earners (see Table 42.3). Women now brought home the bacon and then cooked it, too. By 2004 American women participated in the work force in higher numbers than in almost all industrialized countries except Russia and China (see Figure 42.3). Beginning in the 1960s, many all-male strongholds, including Yale, Princeton, West Point, and even, belatedly, southern military academies like the Citadel and Virginia Military Institute, opened their doors to women. By the twenty-ﬁ rst century, women were piloting airliners, orbiting the earth, governing states and cities, and writing Supreme Court decisions.

Table 42.3 Percentage of Working Married
 Women with Children (husband present), 1950–2005 Year

Total
No Children
Percentage
Under 18
23.8%
30.5
40.8
50.1
60.6
60.2


30.3%
34.7
42.2
46.0
53.2
53.6


Children
6–17 Only


Children
Under 6


28.3%
39.0
49.2
61.7
76.0
75.0


 (Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, relevant years.)

11.9%
18.6
30.3
45.1
61.7
59.8


Women and Families




A
New World for Women By the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, revolutionary changes in the economy and in social values had opened new career possibilities to women, even while they still performed their traditional duties as mothers and homemakers. Commander Kathleen McGrath of the frigate USS Jarrett (bottom left) was the ﬁrst woman to take a warship to sea in 2000, and Drew Gilpin Faust (bottom right) became the ﬁrst woman to serve as president of Harvard University in 2007. Women athletes came into their own in the wake of the feminist revolution. Venus and Serena Williams (top right) enthralled the tennis world as individual champions and as a doubles team beginning in the late 1990s. 
 Yet despite these gains, many feminists remained frustrated. Women continued to receive lower wages— less than 81 cents on the dollar in 2006—compared with men doing the same full-time work. They also tended to concentrate in a few low-prestige, low-paying occupations (the “pink-collar ghetto”). Although they made up more than half the population, women in 2006 accounted for just 32 percent of lawyers and judges (up from 5 percent in 1970) and 32 percent of physicians (up from 10 percent in 1970). Overt sexual

 discrimination explained some of this occupational segregation, but most of it seemed attributable to the greater burdens of parenthood on women than on men. Women were far more likely than men to interrupt their careers to bear and raise children, and even to choose less demanding career paths to allow for fulﬁ lling those traditional roles. Discrimination and a focus on children also helped account for the persistence of a “gender gap” in voting behavior. Women continued to vote in greater numbers than men for



Chapter 42 The American People Face a New Century


 Democratic candidates, who were often perceived as being more willing to favor government support for health and child care, education, and job equality, as well as being more vigilant to protect abortion rights. As the revolution in women’s status rolled on in the 2000s, men’s lives changed as well. Some employers provided paternity leave in addition to maternity leave, in recognition of the shared obligations of the two-worker household. More men assumed traditional female responsibilities such as cooking, laundry, and child care. Recognizing the new realities of the modern American household, Congress passed a Family Leave Bill in 1993, mandating job protection for working fathers as well as mothers who needed to take time off from work for family-related reasons.

New Families and Old
 The traditional nuclear family, once prized as the foundation of society and the nursery of the Republic, suffered heavy blows in modern America. By the 1990s one out of every two marriages ended in divorce. Seven times more children were affected by divorce than at the beginning of the twentieth century. Kids who

The Modern Family Tree
 High divorce rates and the increasing number of “blended families” in modern American society could make for confusing “family trees.”

 commuted between separated parents were commonplace. The old ideal of a family with two parents, only one of whom worked, was now a virtually useless way to picture the typical American household. Traditional families were not only falling apart at an alarming rate but were also increasingly slow to form in the ﬁ rst place. The proportion of adults living alone tripled in the four decades after 1950, and by the 1990s nearly one-third of women aged twenty-ﬁve to twenty-nine had never married. In the 1960s, 5 percent of all births were to unmarried women, but three decades later one out of four white babies, one out of three Latino babies, and two out of three African American babies were born to single mothers. Every fourth child in America was growing up in a household that lacked two parents. The collapse of the traditional family contributed heavily to the pauperization of many women and children, as single parents (usually mothers) struggled to keep their households economically aﬂoat. Single parenthood outstripped race and ethnicity as the most telling predictor of poverty in America. Child-rearing, the family’s foremost function, was being increasingly assigned to “parent-substitutes” at day-care centers or schools—or to television, the mod-

The Elderly and Social Security




 ern age’s “electronic baby-sitter.” Estimates were that the average child by age sixteen had watched up to ﬁ fteen thousand hours of TV—more time than was spent in the classroom. Parental anxieties multiplied with the advent of the Internet—an electronic cornucopia where youngsters could “surf” through poetry and problem sets as well as pornography. But if the traditional family was increasingly rare, the family itself remained a bedrock of American society in the early twenty-ﬁ rst century, as viable families now assumed a variety of forms. Children in households led by a single parent, stepparent, or grandparent, as well as children with gay or lesbian parents, encountered a degree of acceptance that would have been unimaginable a generation earlier. Even the notion of gay marriage, which emerged as a major public controversy when the Massachusetts Supreme Court ruled it legal in 2003, signaled that the idea of marriage retained its luster. Teenage pregnancy, a key source of single parenthood, was also on the decline after the mid-1990s. Even divorce rates appeared to ebb a bit, with 4 divorces per thousand people in 2007, down from 5.3 per thousand in 1981. The family was not evaporating, but evolving into multiple forms.

The Aging of America
 Old age was more and more likely to be a lengthy experience for Americans, who were living longer than ever before. A person born at the dawn of the century could expect to survive less than ﬁ fty years, whereas someone born in 2000 could anticipate a life span of seventy-seven years. (The ﬁgures were slightly lower for nonwhites, reﬂecting differences in living standards, especially diet and health care.) The census of 1950 recorded that women for the ﬁ rst time made up a majority of Americans, thanks largely to greater female longevity. Miraculous medical advances lengthened and strengthened lives. Noteworthy were the development of antibiotics after 1940 and Dr. Jonas Salk’s discovery in 1953 of a vaccine against a dreaded crippler, polio. Longer lives spelled more older people. One American in eight was over sixty-ﬁve years of age in 2005, and projections were that one of every ﬁve people would be in the “sunset years” by 2050, as the median age rose toward forty. This aging of the population raised a host of political, social, and economic questions. Elderly people formed a potent electoral bloc that aggressively lobbied for government favors and

 Senior Power Living longer and living healthier, older Americans coalesced into one of America’s most politically powerful interest groups in the early twentyﬁrst century.

 achieved real gains for senior citizens. The share of GNP spent on health care for people over sixty-ﬁve more than doubled in the three decades after the enactment of Medicare in 1965. This growth in medical payments for the old far outstripped the growth of educational expenditures for the young, with corresponding consequences for the social and economic status of both populations. As late as the 1960s, nearly a quarter of Americans over the age of sixty-ﬁve lived in poverty; three decades later only about one in ten did. The ﬁgures for young people moved in the reverse direction: whereas 15 percent of children were living in poverty in the 1970s, nearly 17 percent were poor in 2002. These triumphs for senior citizens also brought ﬁscal strains, especially on the Social Security system, established in 1935 to provide income for retired workers. Before Social Security began, most workers continued to toil after age sixty-ﬁve. By century’s end only a small minority did (about 15 percent of men



Chapter 42 The American People Face a New Century


 and 8 percent of women), and a majority of the elderly population relied primarily on Social Security checks for their living expenses. Contrary to popular mythology, Social Security payments to retirees did not represent reimbursement for contributions that the elderly had made during their working lives. In fact, the payments of current workers into the Social Security system funded the beneﬁts to the current generation of retirees. By the time the new century opened, those

 Billions of dollars 1,400 1,300 1,200 1,100 1,000 1930 ’35 ’40 ’45 ’50 ’55 ’60 ’65 ’70 ’75 ’80 ’85 ’90 ’95 2000 ’05

Figure 42.4 Government Expenditures for Social
 Welfare, 1930–2005 “Social welfare” includes unemployment and old-age insurance, health care, and veterans’ beneﬁts. The skyrocketing costs from the mid-1960s onward reﬂect new commitments made through Great Society programs and the increasing size (and political clout) of the elderly population, who were the main beneﬁciaries of expensive programs like Medicare. The steep rise after 1970 is also explained by the galloping inﬂation of the 1970s. (Sources: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2003; Ofﬁce of Management and Budget, 2005 and 2006, http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/ budget/fy2005/ tables.html.)

 beneﬁts had risen so high, and the ratio of active workers to retirees had dropped so low, that drastic adjustments were necessary. The problem intensiﬁed as elders found that health-care costs, especially prescription drugs and long-term nursing care, were rising at a far faster clip than their retirement beneﬁts were designed to cover. At the beginning of the new century, as the huge wave of post–World War II baby boomers approached retirement age, it seemed that the “unfunded liability”—the difference between what the government had promised to pay to the elderly and the taxes it expected to take in—might rise above $7 trillion, a sum that threatened to bankrupt the Republic unless drastic reforms were adopted. Yet because of the electoral power of older Americans, Social Security and Medicare reform remained the “third rail” of American politics, which politicians touched only at their peril (see Figure 42.4). Pressures mounted nonetheless to cut beneﬁts, persuade older Americans to work longer, or take even more drastic action. In 2005 freshly reelected President George W. Bush made Social Security reform the centerpiece of his domestic agenda and proposed partially privatizing the system. Bush’s plan would have given younger workers the option to invest some of their payroll taxes in individual retirement funds. But the electoral power of older Americans and the country’s ultimate loyalty to a public social safety net brought the Bush plan to a stunningly quick halt that spring. Plans to reshape the Social Security system lay dormant for the rest of the Bush years, even as some analysts claimed that payments to the nonworking elderly threatened to soak up fully half of the working population’s income by about 2040.

The New Immigration
 Newcomers continued to ﬂow into modern America. They washed ashore in waves that numbered nearly 1 million persons per year from the 1980s into the early twenty-ﬁ rst century—the largest inﬂow of immigrants in America’s experience. In striking contrast to the historic pattern of immigration, Europe contributed far fewer people than did Asia and Latin America (see Figure 42.5). And unlike their predecessors, many of the new immigrants settled not only in traditional ethnic enclaves in cities and towns but also in the sprawling suburbs of places like Los Angeles, Dallas, and Atlanta, where many of the new jobs were to be found.

Immigration and Assimilation




 In thousands 4,000 1961–1970 3,500

1971–1980
1981–1990


3,000


1991–2000
2001–2006


2,500


2,000


1,500


1,000




Europe


Asia


Africa


Mexico,
Caribbean,
Central America


South
America


Figure 42.5
Recent Legal Immigration by Area of Origin, 1961–2006
(Source: Yearbook of Immigration Statistics, 2002 and 2006, Department of Homeland Security.)


 What prompted this new migration to America? The truth is that the newest immigrants came for many of the same reasons as the old. They typically left countries where populations were growing rapidly and where agricultural and industrial revolutions were shaking people loose from old habits of life— conditions almost identical to those in nineteenthcentury Europe. And they came to America, as previous immigrants had done, in search of jobs and economic opportunity. Some came with skills and even professional degrees, from India or Taiwan or the former Soviet Union, and they found their way into middle-class jobs. But most came with fewer skills and less education, seeking work as janitors, nannies, farm laborers, lawn cutters, or restaurant workers. The Southwest, from Texas to Cal i fornia, felt the immigrant impact especially sharply, as Mexican migrants—by far the largest contingent of modern immigrants—concentrated heavily in that region. By the turn of the century, Latinos made up nearly one-third of the population in Texas, Arizona, and Cal i fornia and 40 percent in New Mexico—amounting to a demo-

 graphic reconquista of the lands lost by Mexico in the war of 1846–1848. (see “Makers of America: The Latinos,” pp. 1098–1099). The size and geographic concentration of the Latino population in the Southwest had few precedents in the history of American immigration. Most previous groups had been so thinly scattered across the land that they had little choice but to learn Eng lish and make their way in the larger American society, however much they might have longed to preserve their native language and customs. But it seemed possible that Mexican Americans might succeed in creating a truly bicultural zone in the booming southwestern states, especially since their mother culture lay accessible just next door. Some old-stock Americans worried about the capacity of the modern United States to absorb these new immigrants. The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 attempted to choke off illegal entry by penalizing employers of undocumented aliens and by granting amnesty to many of those already here.



Chapter 42 The American People Face a New Century


 Changing Colors A second-grade bilingual class recites the Pledge of Allegiance (in both Spanish and English) in Austin, Texas. By the end of the twentyﬁrst century, Americans who will be able to trace their ancestry directly to Europe might well be a minority in the United States.

 Yet the fact was that foreign-born people accounted for only about 12.1 percent of the American population in 2005, a far smaller proportion than the historical high point of nearly 15 percent recorded in the census of 1910, but evidence nonetheless that American society continued to welcome—and need— newcomers. Somewhat inconsistently, critics charged both that immigrants robbed citizens of jobs and that they dumped themselves on the welfare rolls at the taxpayers’ expense. But studies showed that immigrants took jobs scorned by Americans and that they paid more dollars in federal taxes (withholding and Social Security taxes, as well as excise taxes) than they claimed for welfare payments. The story was different at the state level, where expenditures for immigrant education and health care often exceeded the net tax contribution of the immigrants themselves. Yet the infusion of young immigrants and their offspring was just what the country needed when faced with the challenges of an aging population. A more urgent worry was that unscrupulous employers might take cruel advantage of alien workers, who often had scant knowledge of their legal rights. Debates over immigration were complicated by the problem of illegal immigrants. The intensity mounted in 2006, when xenophobic pundits and politicians fanned the old ﬂames of anxiety that millions of undocumented workers were usurping American tax dollars and privileges. Immigrant sympathizers argued that unlawful

 aliens had to be legalized so that they could receive the same protections as other workers. Amid this chaos President George W. Bush and a bi-partisan group of legislators proposed a law to establish a guest-worker program for undocumented workers and create a path to citizenship, albeit after paying a ﬁne. Anti-immigrant forces condemned the plan as “amnesty.” Business interests protested that it put too great a burden on employers to verify the right to work. And immigrant rights advocates claimed that it would create “second-class citizens.” In the end, the compromise bill pleased no one and fell into the dustbin. But the debate’s legacy was large. The anti-immigrant venom spewed by many Republican politicians undercut hopes that the GOP might continue to attract Latino voters as it had in the 2004 presidential election, when many of them embraced the party’s conser vative positions on social values.

Beyond the Melting Pot
 Thanks both to continued immigration and to their own high birthrate, Latinos were becoming an increasingly important minority. The United States by 2006 was home to about 44 million of them. They included some 26 million Chicanos, or Mexican Americans, mostly in the Southwest, as well as 3 million Puerto Ricans, chieﬂy in the Northeast, and more than 1 million Cubans in Florida (where it was jokingly

A
Multicultural Society 



The Oldest Americans
Members of the Cheyenne
 River Sioux Tribe celebrate the opening of the Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of the American Indian in Washington, D.C., 2004.

 said that Miami had become the most “Anglo” city in Latin America). Flexing their political muscles, Latinos elected mayors of Miami, Denver, San Antonio, and Los Angeles. After years of struggle, the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee (UFWOC), headed by the softspoken and charismatic César Chávez, succeeded in improving working conditions for the mostly Chicano “stoop laborers” who followed the cycle of planting and harvesting across the American West. Latino inﬂuence seemed likely to grow, as suggested by the increasing presence of Spanish-language ballots and television broadcasts. Latinos, newly conﬁdent and orga nized, became the nation’s largest ethnic minority, outnumbering even African Americans, in 2003. Indeed by the early twenty-ﬁ rst century, the Chicano population of America’s largest state, Cal i fornia, led the Anglo population, making the state a patchwork of minorities with no single ethnic majority. In 2003 most newborns in Cal i fornia were Latino, a powerful harbinger of the state’s demographic future. Asian Americans also made great strides. By the 1980s they were America’s fastest-growing minority, and their numbers reached nearly 12 million by 2002. Once feared and hated as the “yellow peril” and consigned to the most menial and degrading jobs, citi-

 zens of Asian ancestry were now counted among the most prosperous Americans. Indians, the original Americans, numbered some 2.4 million in the 2000 census. Half of them had left their reservations to live in cities. Meanwhile, unemployment and alcoholism had blighted reservation life. Many tribes took advantage of their special legal status as independent nations to open bingo halls and gambling casinos for the general public on reservation lands, but the cycle of discrimination and poverty proved hard to break.

Cities and Suburbs
 America’s “alabaster cities” of song and story grew more sooty and less safe in the closing decades of the twentieth century. Crime was the great scourge of urban life. The rate of violent crimes committed in cities reached an all-time high in the drug-infested 1980s and then leveled off in the early 1990s. The number of violent crimes even began to decline substantially in many areas after 1995. Nevertheless, murders, robberies, and rapes remained shockingly common not only in cities but also in suburbs and rural areas. America imprisoned a larger fraction of its citizens than

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Latinos American Migration 
T


 oday Mexican food is handed through fast-food drive-up windows in all ﬁ fty states, Spanishlanguage broadcasts ﬁ ll the airwaves, and the Latino community has its own telephone book, the Spanish Yellow Pages. Latinos send representatives to Congress and mayors to city hall, record hit songs, paint murals, and teach history. Latinos, among the fastest-growing segments of the U.S. population, include Puerto Ricans, frequent voyagers between their native island and northeastern cities; Cubans, many of them refugees from the communist dictatorship of Fidel Castro, concentrated in Miami and southern Florida; and Central Americans, ﬂeeing the ravages of civil war in Nicaragua and El Salvador. But the most populous group of Latinos derives from Mexico (see Figure 42.6). The ﬁ rst signiﬁcant numbers of Mexicans began heading for El Norte (“the North”) around 1910, when the upheavals of the Mexican Revolution stirred and shufﬂed the Mexican population into more or less constant ﬂux. Their northward passage was brieﬂy interrupted during the Great Depression, when thousands of Mexican nationals were deported. But immigration resumed during

Demonstrating for Immigrant
Rights, Los Angeles, 2007
 Latinos march in downtown Los Angeles in support of legalizing undocumented parents who have children born in the United States. U.S. law gives the right of citizenship to anyone born on American soil (“jus soli”), but not necessarily to the parents of that child.



 World War II, and since then a steady ﬂow of legal immigrants has passed through border checkpoints, joined by countless millions of their undocumented countrymen and countrywomen stealing across the frontier on moonless nights. For the most part, these Mexicans came to work in the ﬁelds, following the ripening crops northward to Canada through the summer and autumn months. In winter many headed back to Mexico, but some gathered instead in the cities of the Southwest—El Paso, Los Angeles, Houston, and San Bernardino. There they found regular work, even if lack of skills and racial discrimination often conﬁ ned them to manual labor. City jobs might pay less than farm labor, but the work was steady and offered the prospect of a stable home. Houses may have been shabby in the barrios, but these Mexican neighborhoods provided a sense of togetherness, a place to raise a family, and the chance to join a mutual aid society. Such societies, or mutualistas, sponsored baseball leagues, helped the sick and disabled, and defended their members against discrimination.

Puerto Rican
9.6%
 (3.4 million)

Cuban
3.5%
 (1.2 million)

Central or
South American and
Other Latino
28.4%
 (10.1 million)

Mexican
58.5%
 (20.6 million)

Figure 42.6 Sources of Latino Population in the United
States, 2000 (Source: Statistical Abstract of the United
States, 2003.)
Mexican American Farmworkers Pitting Apricots in
 Fruit Groves near Los Angeles, 1924

 Mexican immigrants lived so close to the border that their native country acted like a powerful magnet, drawing them back time and time again. Mexicans frequently returned to see relatives or visit the homes of their youth, and relatively few became U.S. citizens. Indeed, in many Mexican American communities, it was a badge of dishonor to apply for U.S. citizenship. The Mexican government, likewise inﬂuenced by the proximity of the two countries, intervened in the daily lives of its nationals in America, sometimes dis-

 couraging them from becoming citizens of their adopted country. As Anglo reformers attempted to Americanize the immigrants in the 1910s and 1920s, the Mexican consulate in Los Angeles launched a Mex icanization program. The consulate sponsored pa rades on Cinco de Mayo (“Fifth of May”), celebrating Mexico’s defeat of a French army at the Battle of Puebla in 1862, and opened special Spanish-language schools for children. Since World War II, the American-born generation has carried on the ﬁght for political representation, economic opportunity, and cultural preservation. Fresh arrivals from Mexico and from the other Latin American nations daily swell Latino communities across America. The census of 2000 revealed that Latinos are now the largest minority group in the United States, surpassing African Americans. As the United States moves through the twenty-ﬁ rst century, it is taking on a pronounced Spanish accent, and increasingly Latinos are making themselves a force to be reckoned with in American politics.

Young Latina Activists in East Boston,
 2004 Latinos have become increasingly inﬂuential voters, courted by Democratic and Republican candidates alike.



Chapter 42 The American People Face a New Century
Percent
Suburbs


 Central cities

74.8


77.5


80.3


69.0


63.3


56.1
47.8




30.9


44.6


Figure 42.7 Percent of
Total Population Living in
Metropolitan Areas and in
Their Central Cities and
Suburbs, 1910–2000


34.0


44.8


46.2


50.0


23.3
15.3


9.2


7.1


U.S.
Census Bureau, Decennial Census of Population, 1910 to  2000, compiled in Demographic Trends in the 20th Century, no. 2002.)

28.4


13.8


37.6


21.2


24.8


30.8


32.5


32.8


32.3


31.4


30.0


31.3


30.3






















 al most any other country in the world, and some desperate citizens resorted to armed vigilante tactics to protect themselves. The migration from cities to the suburbs was so swift and massive that by the mid-1990s a majority of Americans were suburban dwellers (see Figure 42.7). Jobs, too, became suburbanized. The nation’s rather brief “urban age” lasted little more than seven decades after 1920, and with its passing many observers saw a new fragmentation and isolation in American life. Some afﬂuent suburban neighborhoods walled themselves off behind elaborate security systems in “gated communities,” making it harder, perhaps, to sustain a sense of a larger and inclusive national community. By the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century, the suburban rings around big cities such as New York, Chicago, Houston, and Washington, D.C., were becoming more racially and ethnically diverse, though individual schools and towns were often homogeneous. Suburbs grew fastest in the West and Southwest. In the outer orbits of Los Angeles, San Diego, Las Vegas, and Phoenix, builders of roads, water mains, and schools could barely keep up with the new towns sprouting across the hardscrabble landscapes. Newcomers came not only from nearby cities but from other regions of the United States as well. A momentous shift of the American population was under way,

 as inhabitants from the Northeast and the Rustbelt Midwest moved southward and westward to job opportunities and the sun. The Great Plains, where 60 percent of all counties were losing population as the twentieth century ended, faced the sharpest decline, hollowing out the traditional American heartland. By the early twenty-ﬁ rst century, the Great Plains contained fewer people than the Los Angeles basin, despite being ﬁve times the size of the entire state of Cal i fornia. Some major cities exhibited signs of renewal. Commercial redevelopment gained ground in cities such as New York, Boston, Chicago, San Francisco, and even the classic “city without a center,” Los Angeles. Wellto-do residents reclaimed once-fashionable neighborhoods and sent real estate values soaring. But these latter-day urban homesteaders struggled to make their cities genuine centers of residential integration. Cities stubbornly remained as divided by wealth and race as the suburban social landscape surrounding them.

Minority America
 Racial and ethnic tensions also exacerbated the problems of American cities. These stresses were especially evident in Los Angeles, which, like New York a cen-

Frustrations for African Americans


 tury earlier, was a magnet for minorities, especially immigrants from Asia and Latin America. When in 1992 a mostly white jury exonerated white Los Angeles police ofﬁcers who had been videotaped ferociously beating a black suspect, the minority neighborhoods of South Central Los Angeles erupted in rage. Arson and looting laid waste entire city blocks, and scores of people were killed. In a sobering demonstration of the complexity of modern American racial rivalries, many black rioters vented their anger at the white police and the judicial system by attacking Asian shopkeepers, who in turn formed armed patrols to protect their property. A decade later many a burnedout lot remained abandoned and weed-choked in neighborhoods still plagued by gang violence and the demoralizing effects of grinding poverty. The Los Angeles riots vividly testiﬁed to black skepticism about the American system of justice. Just three years later, again in Los Angeles, the televised spectacle of former football star O. J. Simpson’s murder trial fed white disillusionment with the state of race relations. After months of testimony that seemed to point to Simpson’s guilt, the jury acquitted him, presumably because certain Los Angeles police ofﬁcers involved in the case had been shown to harbor racist sentiments. In a later civil trial, another jury unanimously found Simpson liable for the “wrongful deaths” of his former wife and another victim. The reaction to the Simpson verdicts revealed the yawning chasm that separated white and black America, as most whites continued to believe Simpson guilty, while a majority of African Americans told pollsters that the original not-guilty verdict was justiﬁed. Similarly, complaints by African Americans that they had been unlawfully kept from the polls during the 2000 presidential election in Florida reﬂected the conviction of many blacks that they were still facing a Jim Crow South of systematic racial disfranchisement. American cities have always held an astonishing variety of ethnic and racial groups, but by the late twentieth century, minorities made up a majority of the population of many American cities, as whites ﬂed to the suburbs. In 2002, 52 percent of all blacks lived in central cities within metropolitan areas, compared with only 21 percent of whites. The most desperate black ghettos, housing a hapless “underclass” in the inner core of the old industrial cities, were especially problematic. Successful blacks who had beneﬁted from the civil rights revolution of the 1950s and 1960s followed whites to the suburbs, leaving a residue of the poorest poor in the old ghettos. Without a middle class



 to sustain community institutions like schools and small businesses, the inner cities, plagued by unemployment and drug addiction, seemed bereft of leadership, cohesion, resources, and hope. Single women headed about 45 percent of black families in 2002, more than three times the rate for whites. Many African American women, husbandless and jobless, necessarily depended on welfare to feed

 Still Fighting to Vote An African American father and daughter participate in a rally in downtown Miami several weeks after the November 2000 election to demand a recount of dismissed presidential election ballots. Many Florida blacks complained that election ofﬁcials had disproportionately disqualiﬁed their votes and unfairly turned them away from the polls, resurrecting the kind of obstacles that long had kept blacks from voting in the South.



Chapter 42 The American People Face a New Century


 their children. As social scientists increasingly emphasized the importance of the home environment for success in school, it became clear that many fatherless, impoverished African American children seemed consigned to suffer from educational handicaps that were difﬁcult to overcome. Some segments of the African American community did prosper in the wake of the civil rights gains of the 1950s and 1960s, although they still had a long hill to climb before reaching full equality. By 2006, 43 percent of all black families (compared to 61 percent of all white families) had incomes of at least $50,000, qualifying them (barely) as middle-class. Blacks continued to make headway in political life. The number of black elected ofﬁcials had risen above the nine thousand mark, including more than three dozen members of Congress and the mayors of several large cities. Voting tallies demonstrated that successful black politicians were moving beyond isolated racial constituencies and into the political mainstream by appealing to a wide variety of voters. In 1989 Virginians, only 15 percent of whom were black, chose L. Douglas Wilder as the ﬁ rst African American elected to serve as a state governor. In 1994 voters in Illinois made Carol Moseley-Braun the ﬁ rst African American woman elected to the U.S. Senate. In 2001 President George W. Bush appointed Colin Powell and Condoleezza Rice to top cabinet-level posts in his administration, as secretary of state and national security adviser, respectively. (Rice succeeded Powell as secretary of state in the second Bush administration.) And in the 2008 election, Senator Barack Obama, whose father was Kenyan, mounted the most successful campaign for president of any black American to date. Record turnouts gave him a decisive victory. By the early twenty-ﬁ rst century, blacks had also dramatically advanced into higher education, though the educational gap between blacks and whites stubbornly persisted. In 2006, 12.6 percent of blacks over age twenty-ﬁve had a bachelor’s degree, compared to 18.6 percent of whites (or 20.2 percent of non-Hispanic whites). The political assault against afﬁ rmative action in Cal i fornia and elsewhere in the 1990s only compounded the obstacles to advanced training for many young African Americans. But defenders of afﬁ rmative action chalked up a major victory in 2003 when the Supreme Court in a key case involving the University of Michigan afﬁ rmed that achieving racial diversity on college campuses was a legitimate means to secure a more equitable society. The Court preserved afﬁ rmative action in university admissions as long as

 schools avoided using quotas, point systems, or other mechanistic ways of diversifying their student bodies, though it remained uneasy about letting such programs endure indeﬁnitely. Justice Sandra Day O’Connor said, “We expect that 25 years from now, the use of racial preferences will no longer be necessary.”

E
Pluribus Plures  Controversial issues of color and culture also pervaded the realm of ideas in the late twentieth century. Echoing early-twentieth-century “cultural pluralists” like Horace Kallen and Randolph Bourne, many intellectuals after 1970 embraced the creed of “multiculturalism.” The new mantra stressed the need to preserve and promote, rather than squash, a variety of distinct ethnic and racial cultures in the United States. The nation’s classrooms became battlegrounds for the debate over America’s commitment to pluralism. Multiculturalists attacked the traditional curriculum as “Eurocentric” and advocated greater focus on the achievements of African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, and Native Americans. In response, critics charged that too much stress on ethnic difference would come at the expense of national cohesion and an appreciation of common American values. The Census Bureau further enlivened the debate when in 2000 it allowed respondents to identify themselves with more than one of the six standard racial categories (black, white, Latino, American Indian, Asian, and Native Hawaiian or other Paciﬁc Islander). Signifying a mounting revolution in attitudes toward race, nearly 7 million Americans chose to describe them-

 In 1990 the African American intellectual Shelby Steele (b. 1946) declared in his provocative book, The Content of Our Character,

“


 What is needed now is a new spirit of pragmatism in racial matters where blacks are seen simply as American citizens who deserve complete fairness and in some cases developmental assistance, but in no case special entitlements based on color. We need deracinated social policies that attack poverty rather than black poverty and that instill those values that make for self-reliance.

”


Literary Currents


 selves as biracial or multiracial. As recently as the 1960s, interracial marriage was still illegal in sixteen states. But by the early twenty-ﬁrst century, many Americans, including such celebrities as golfer Tiger Woods, actress Rosario Dawson, and Senator Barack Obama, were proclaiming their mixed heritage as a point of pride.

The Life of the Mind
 Despite the mind-sapping chatter of the “boob tube,” Americans in the early twenty-ﬁ rst century read more, listened to more music, and were better educated than ever before. Colleges awarded some 2.5 million degrees annually, and more than one person in ﬁve in the twenty-ﬁve-to-thirty-four-year-old age group boasted a college bachelor’s degree in 2006. (Nearly one in three had an associate’s degree.) This expanding mass of educated people lifted the economy to more advanced levels while creating consumers of “high culture.” Each year Americans made millions of visits to museums and patronized thousands of opera companies and symphony orchestras—as well as countless popular music groups. What Americans read said much about the state of American society in the new century. Among the



 most striking development in American letters was the rise of authors from ethnic groups now coming into their own. African American authors and artists also increasingly made their mark. Playwright August Wilson retold the history of black Americans in the twentieth century, with special emphasis on the psychic costs of the northward migration (Fences, 1985; Joe Turner’s Come and Gone, 1988; Jitney, 1998). Alice Walker gave ﬁctional voice to the experiences of black women in her hugely popular The Color Purple (1982). Toni Morrison wove a bewitching portrait of maternal affection in Beloved (1987) and in 1993 became the ﬁ rst African American woman to win the Nobel Prize for literature. Edward P. Jones inventively rendered the life of a slaveowning black family in his Pulitzer Prize–winning The Known World (2003). Native Americans, too, achieved literary recognition. Kiowa author N. Scott Momaday won a Pulitzer Prize for his portrayal of Indian life in House Made of Dawn (1968). James Welch wrote movingly about his Blackfoot ancestors in Fools Crow (1986). Asian American authors also ﬂourished, among them playwright David Hwang, novelist Amy Tan, and essayist Maxine Hong Kingston, whose Woman Warrior (1976) and China Men (1980) imaginatively reconstructed the obscure lives of the earliest Chinese immigrants. In Mona in the Promised Land (1996), Gish

Pulitzer Prize-Winning
Authors Edward P. Jones
 (left) and Jhumpa Lahiri



Chapter 42 The American People Face a New Century


 Jen guided her readers into the poignant comedy of suburban family relationships that was not uncommon for second-generation Asian Americans. Jhumpa Lahiri’s Interpreter of Maladies (1999) explored the sometimes painful relationship between immigrant Indian parents and their American-born children. Latino writers made their mark as well. Sandra Cisneros drew on her own life as a Mexican American child to evoke Latino life in working-class Chicago in The House on Mango Street (1984). Women writers and women’s themes forged to the ﬁctional forefront as the feminist movement advanced. Jane Smiley modeled her touching narrative of a midwestern farm family, A Thousand Acres (1991), on Shakespeare’s King Lear and followed up with a hilarious spoof of university life in Moo (1995). E. Annie Proulx won widespread acclaim with her comical yet tender portrayal of a struggling family in The Shipping News (1993), as well as with her moving tale of homoerotic love between two cowboys in Brokeback Mountain (1997). The rising interest in feminist and African American themes revived the popularity of a 1930s writer, Zora Neale Hurston, especially her naturalistic novel Their Eyes Were Watching God, ﬁ rst published in 1937. New York became the art capital of the world after World War II, as well-heeled Americans supported a

 In her touching novel The Joy Luck Club, Amy Tan (b. 1952) explored the complex dilemmas of growing up as a Chinese American:

“


 ‘A girl is like a young tree,’ [my mother] said. ‘You must stand tall and listen to your mother standing next to you. That is the only way to grow strong and straight. But if you bend to listen to other people, you will grow crooked and weak. . . .’ Over the years I learned to choose from the best opinions. Chinese people had Chinese opinions. American people had American opinions. And in almost every case, the American version was much better. It was only later that I discovered there was a serious ﬂaw with the American version. There were too many choices, so it was easy to get confused and pick the wrong thing.

”


 large number of painters and sculptors. The open and tradition-free American environment seemed especially congenial to the experimental mood of much modern art. Jackson Pollock pioneered abstract expressionism in the 1940s and 1950s, ﬂ inging paint on huge ﬂats stretched on his studio ﬂoor. Realistic representation went out the window, as artists like Pollock and Willem de Kooning strove to create “action paintings” that expressed the painter’s individuality and made the viewer a creative participant in deﬁning the painting’s meaning. Pop artists in the 1960s, notably Andy Warhol, canonized on canvas everyday items of consumer culture, such as soup cans. Claes Oldenburg tried to stun viewers into a new visual awareness with unfamiliar versions of familiar objects, such as giant plastic sculptures of pillow-soft telephones. On the stage, playwright David Mamet analyzed the barbarity of American capitalism in plays like Glengarry Glen Ross and American Buffalo, in which he crafted a kind of poetry from the sludge of American slang. Eve Ensler took a feminist commitment into new territory that blended comic intimacy and searing social commentary with her Vagina Monologues. The AIDS epidemic inspired Tony Kushner’s sensationally inventive Angels in America, a broad-ranging commentary, alternately hilarious and touching, about the condition of American life at the twentieth century’s end. Cuban American Nilo Cruz won a Pulitzer Prize in 2003 for Anna in the Tropics, his evocative play about immigrant cigar makers in 1930 Tampa. Film, the most characteristic American art form, continued to ﬂourish, especially as a wave of younger ﬁ lmmakers like George Lucas, Steven Spielberg, Spike Lee, Quentin Tarantino, and the Coen brothers, as well as the innovative documentary artist Ken Burns, made their inﬂuence felt. Architecture also beneﬁted from the building boom of the postwar era. Old master Frank Lloyd Wright produced strikingly original designs, as in the roundwalled Guggenheim Museum in New York. Louis Kahn employed stark geometric forms and basic building materials like brick and concrete to make beautiful, simple buildings. Eero Saarinen, the son of a Finnish immigrant, contributed a number of imaginative structures, including two Yale University residential colleges that evoked the at mosphere of an Italian hill town. Chinese-born I. M. Pei designed numerous graceful buildings on several college campuses, as well as the John F. Kennedy Library in Boston. “Postmodernists” such as Robert Venturi and Michael Graves, inspired by the decorative details of earlier historical

Artistic Achievements




MECHA
Mural, by Student Artists Directed by Sergio O’Cadiz, 1974 People have scribbled on walls since time immemorial, but in the 1960s and 1970s, mural painting emerged as a new form of American folk art. Drab buildings and bare fences, often in minority inner-city neighborhoods, were turned into huge canvases. This mural incorporates many Mexican American and Mexican themes, including the United Farm Workers’ bird symbol and a skeleton, a frequent motif in Mexican art. 
 styles, rejected the spare functionalism that had dominated modern architecture for much of the century. The ﬂ ight from stark modernism took fanciful forms in Frank Gehry’s use of luminous, undulating sheets of metallic skin in the widely hailed Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain, and the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles.

The New Media
 By the early twenty-ﬁ rst century, the Internet had dramatically transformed daily life for most Americans. First created by the government for Cold War intelligence sharing, the World Wide Web spread like wildﬁ re through American homes, schools, and ofﬁces during the mid-1990s. The percentage of households with Internet access skyrocketed from 18 percent in

 1997 to over 70 percent in 2007. In rapidly increasing numbers, Americans turned to the Internet to communicate, shop, and even work. The “dot-com” explosion drove the tremendous economic boom of the late 1990s. (“Dot-com” refers to the uniform resource locater, or URL, sufﬁ x used for commercial Web sites.) Even as the “dot-com bubble” began to deﬂate, the Internet demonstrated its staying power. Many online start-up companies failed, but those that survived often became giants in retail (Amazon.com), information gathering (Google), and even ﬁ nance (E*Trade). The Internet reshaped the traditional corporate world as well. By the end of the 1990s, almost every business, group, or organization—from used-car dealers to sports teams to college arts groups—had its own Web site. Fulﬁ lling the promises of its early boosters, the Internet seemed to have a democratizing effect, spreading power and information among more and more



Chapter 42 The American People Face a New Century


 Americans. Young people in particular ﬂocked to social-networking sites like MySpace and Facebook to make connections, often with people in foreign countries. YouTube allowed everyday users to post home videos online for the whole world to see. And millions of people around the globe started a media revolution with their “Weblogs,” or “blogs.” “Bloggers” lent their voices to issues from foreign policy to college life, offering their beliefs and opinions without fear (and often without research). As the “blogosphere” grew, it posed a major challenge to the traditional media that had shaped Americans’ understanding of the news for hundreds of years. Supporters argued that this “new Media” added fresh voices and new per-

 spectives, but opponents questioned bloggers’ ex pertise and accused them of spreading misinformation. Blogs were not the only threat the Internet posed to the “mainstream media.” Americans became ever less willing to read the morning paper or watch the evening network news shows when they could access a welter of information on their computer screens. Cable news had challenged the old system since the 1980s, but the spread of the Internet made the twentyfour-hour news cycle a reality. Consumer demand pushed daily newspapers to offer their reporting online, often for free. Subscription rates plummeted, and ad sales—the engine that drives print journalism—fell off markedly. As with railroads and the telegraph in the nineteenth century, and radio and television in the twentieth century, computers and the Internet drove major readjustments in modern American economic, social, and cultural life.

The American Prospect


The Internet: Democratizing or Fragmenting?
 Time magazine named the users of the World Wide Web, MySpace, Facebook, YouTube, and other Internet attractions its “Person of the Year” in 2006 in recognition of the expanding ability to communicate with peers throughout the world. Critics worried, however, that the decline of older, integrative institutions like city newspapers and national network television would leave Americans with fewer forms of communication that united diverse populations.

 The American spirit pulsed with vitality in the early twenty-ﬁ rst century, but grave problems continued to plague the Republic. Women still fell short of ﬁ rst-class economic citizenship, and American society groped for ways to adapt the traditional family to the new realities of women’s work outside the home. A generation after the civil rights triumphs of the 1960s, full equality remained an elusive dream for countless Americans of color. Powerful foreign competitors challenged America’s premier economic status. As job opportunities shrank in some of the nation’s regions and expanded in others, as jobs shifted to cheaper labor markets abroad, and as giant corporations like Enron and WorldCom collapsed through corporate scandal, many Americans began to fear their economy as a treacherous landscape, even as it offered some of them astounding prosperity. The alarmingly unequal distribution of wealth and income threatened to turn America into a society of haves and have-nots, mocking the ideals of democracy and breeding seething resentments along the economic frontier that divided rich from poor. Environmental worries clouded the country’s future. Coal-ﬁ red electrical-generating plants helped form acid rain and probably contributed to the greenhouse effect, an ominous warming in the planet’s temperature. The unsolved problem of radioactive waste disposal hampered the development of nuclear power plants. The planet was being drained of oil, and disastrous accidents like the grounding and subsequent oil spill of the giant tanker Exxon Valdez in 1989

Future Challenges


 in Alaska’s pristine Prince William Sound demonstrated the ecological risks of oil exploration and transpor tation at sea. By the early twenty-ﬁ rst century, the once-lonely cries for alternative fuel sources had given way to mainstream public fascination with solar power and windmills, methane fuel, electric “hybrid” cars, and the pursuit of an affordable hydrogen fuel cell. Energy conservation remained another crucial but elusive strategy—much-heralded at the politician’s rostrum, but too rarely embodied in public policy, as witnessed in the Bush administration’s rejection of the Kyoto Treaty on global warming in 2001. A sudden spike in crude oil prices beginning in the spring of 2008, due to exploding demand in developing countries such as India and China, instability in the Middle East, and oil futures speculation, ﬁ nally galvanized public ofﬁcials, automakers, and consumers to pursue alternative sources of energy—for the sake of their own economic survival if not the planet’s. As the human family grew at an alarming rate on a shrinking globe, new challenges still faced America and its historical beliefs. The task of cleansing the earth of its abundant pollutants—including nuclear weapons—was one urgent mission confronting the American people in the new century. Another was seeking ways to resolve the ethnic and cultural conﬂ icts that erupted with renewed virulence around the globe in the wake of the Cold War’s end. At the same time, new opportunities beckoned in outer space and on inner-city streets, at the artist’s easel and in the concert hall, at the inventor’s bench and in the scientist’s laboratory, and in the unending quest for social justice, individual fulﬁ llment, and international peace. The terrorist attack on America on September 11, 2001, posed yet another challenge to the United States. Shielded for over two centuries against assaults on its soil, it would now have to preserve its security in a world made smaller by global communication and transportation, without altering its fundamental democratic values and way of life. The great danger posed by terrorism was not that Al Qaeda or other foreign groups would seize control of the country or any portion of its territory. It was, rather, that in ﬁghting terrorism, Americans would so compromise their freedoms at home and so isolate the country internationally that it would lose touch with its own guiding principles. Wars in Afghanistan and Iraq made these difﬁculties clear. The challenge was to enhance national security without eroding democratic liberties, to protect the country’s borders without preventing the arrival of



 desirable immigrants, and to use military force wisely without undermining America’s standing in the world. In facing those challenges, the world’s oldest republic had an extraordinary tradition of resilience and resourcefulness to draw on. Born as a revolutionary force in a world of conservatism, the United States stood in the twenty-ﬁ rst century as a conser vative force in a world of revolution. It had long held aloft the banner of liberal democracy in a world racked by revolutions of the right and left, including fascism, Nazism, and communism. Yet through it all, much that was truly revolutionary also remained a part of America’s liberal democratic heritage, as its people pioneered in revolutions against colonialism, racism, sexism, ignorance, and poverty. The dream of “making the world safe for democracy,” articulated nearly a century earlier by Woodrow Wilson at the end of the First World War, gained a new poignancy after September 11, when Americans expressed a yearning for greater equality, opportunity, and democracy in the Middle East—all in the hope of diminishing the root causes of international terrorism. The capacity to nurture progress abroad, however, depended on the ability of Americans to improve their own country, and to do so in the midst of new threats to their own security. As Wilson wrote in 1893, long before he became president, “Democratic institutions are never done; they are like living tissue, always a-making. It is a strenuous thing, this of living the life of a free people.”

To Learn More
 Nancy Altman, The Battle for Social Security: From FDR’s Vision to Bush’s Gamble (2005) William Chafe, The Paradox of Change: American Women in the 20th Century (1991) David Dent, In Search of Black America: Discovering the African-American Dream (2000) Barbara Ehrenreich, Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in America (2001) Bill Ong Hing, Deﬁning America Through Immigration Policy (2004) Paul Krugman, The Great Unraveling: Losing Our Way in the New Century (2003) Katherine Newman, A Different Shade of Gray: Midlife and Beyond in the Inner City (2003) George Sanchez, Becoming Mexican American (1989) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

